LAHONTAN'S 
NEW VOYAGES TO NORTH-AMERICA 

EDITED BY 
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES, LL.D. 

Volume II 



tirl . II . Ol tie %/ \ 




NEW VOYAGES 

TO 

NORTH-AMERICA 

BY THE 

bAron de lahontan 



Reprinted from the English edition of 1703, with facsimiles of 

original title-pages, maps, and illustrations, and the 

addition of Introduction, Notes, and Index 

By Reuben Gold Thwaites, LL.D. 

Editor of "The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents " Hennepin's 
"New Discovery," etc. 



In Ctoo Volumes 
Volume II 



CHICAGO 

A. C. McCLURG & CO. 

1905 



Copyright 

A. C. McCLURG & CO. 
1905 

Published February 25, 1905 



Composition by The Dial Pres*, Chicago. 
Pressivork by The University Press, Cambridge, 



CONTENTS — VOLUME II 

PAGE 

Lahontan's "New Voyages to North- America " — 
Volume II. 
Title-page (facsimile of original) .... 409 
Discourses — 

Of the Habit, Houfes, Complexion and Tempera- 
ment of the Savages of North-America . .411 
Of the Humours and Cuftoms of the Savages . 420 
The Belief of the Savages, and the Obftacles of 

their Converfion 434 

The way of Worfhip, ufed by the Savages . . 446 
Of the Amours and Marriages of the Savages . 451 
Of the Difeafes and Remedies of the Savages . 465 
The Diverfions of Hunting and Shooting ufual 

among the Savages 476 

The Military Art of the Savages .... 495 
A View of the Heraldry, or the Coats of Arms of , 

the Savages 510 

An Explication of the Savage Hieroglyphicks .512 
A Conference or Dialogue between the Author and 
Adario, a Noted Man among the Savages, Con- 
taining a Circumftantial View of the Cuftoms and 
Humours of that People 517 

139573 



vi Contents 

PAGE 

An Appendix, Containing fome New Voyages to 
Portugal and Denmark ; after the Author's Retire- 
ment from Canada : 

Letters I (Lisbon, April 20, 1694) -VII (Sara- 
goza, October 8, 1695) .... 619 
A Short Dictionary of the moft Univerfal Language 

of the Savages 732 

Index — The Editor 751 



ILLUSTRATIONS— VOLUME II 



(facsimiles of originals) 

Figure of Indian in an Oval . 

" A Village of the Savages of Canada " ; with 

figures of men and children • 
Diagram showing " The way of Worfhip " 
Sketches illustrating "Amours and Marriages " 
Sketches illustrating remedies, death, and burial 
"A Beaver Pool, ,, and methods of hunting beavers 
A beaver hunt . 
" The Military Art " (a) . 
"The Military Art" (b) . 
" Coats of Arms " . 
" Hieroglyphick Symbols" 



PAGE 

Frontispiece 



Fac 



ing 430 
464 
492 

5 2 4 
556 
588 
622 
654 
686 
720 



NEW 

VOYAGES 

TO 

North-America. 

Giving a full Account of the Cuftoms, 
Commerce," Religion, and ftrange C* 
pinions of the Savages of that Country. 

with 

Political Remarks upon the Courts 
of Portugal and Denmark^ and the Prefent 
State of the Commerce of thofe Countries. 



Never Printed before. 



WRITTEN 

By the Baron L a h o n t a n , Lord 
Lieutenant of the French Colony at 
Placentia'm Newfoundland: Now in 
England. 



vol. is. 



LONDON: 

Primed (otH.BtHwickc in St. Part's Church-yard; r. Gndmn 
M. Wtttm, B. Tttlu in FUttfirett-i and 5. Manfliip in Cwnhli 
1703. 



[i] A 

DISCOURSE 

OF THE 

Habit, Houfes, Complexion and 
Temperament 

OF THE 

SAVAGES 

OF 

NORTH-AMERICA. 



THE Grecian Chronologers who divided the courfe of 
Time into three Periods, namely the aSiyAov, or that 
which is wrapt up in Obfcurity, the pvOixov, alias rj&ixov, or 
that which was the feafon of Fidtion and Fables, and the 
isoaxov which affords us true and creditable A6Hons : Thefe 
Chronologers, I fay, might have fav'd themfelves the trouble 
of writing a Thoufand idle Stories relating to the Original 
of the Inhabitants of the Earth; for the invention of 
Writing being unknown to them before the Siege of Troy y 
they had no other Standard to confult [2] but the Fabulous 
Manufcripts of the Egyptians and Chaldeans^ who were a 
Phanatick Superftitious fort of People. But fuppofing the 



412 Some New Voyages 

Egyptians and Chaldeans to have invented the Art of Writing, 
what Credit can we give to the accounts of things that are 
faid to have happen'd before the date of that Invention ? In 
all probability they knew no more of the matter than the 
Americans, and upon that fcore 'twas very hard for them to 
give a faithful Narrative of the Adventures and Exploits of 
their Anceftors. I am now fully convinc'd that Tradition is 
fo inconftant, obfcure, uncertain and fallacious, that we cann't 
pretend to rely upon it. And this Notion I owe to the Sav- 
ages of Canada, who being at a lofs to trace the truth of what 
has been tranfa&ed in their own Country but 200 Years ago, 
gave me occafion to call in Queftion the Purity and Truth of 
Tradition. Upon this lay you may eafily apprehend, that 
thefe poor People are as little acquainted with their own 
Hiftory and Origin, as the Greeks and Chaldeans were with 
theirs. Let us therefore content our felves, my good Friend, in 
believing that they are defcended of honeft old Adam, as well 
as you and I. 

I have read fome Hiftories of Canada, which were writ at 
feveral times by the Monks, and muft own that they have 
given fome plain and exadl Defcriptions of fuch Countries as 
they knew ; but at the fame time they are widely miftaken in 
their Accounts of the Manners and Cuftoms of the Savages. 1 



1 The "monkish histories" of Canada which Lahontan had probably seen, 
were : Jesuit Relations, of which forty volumes had been published yearly in Paris 
from 1632-73 ; Du Creux, Historia Canadensis seu Nova-Francia (Paris, 1664) , 
largely composed from the Relations ; and Thevenot, Receuil des Voyages Curieux 
(Paris, 1681), containing Marquette's account of his discoveries. The Recollect 
historians were Sagard-Theodat, Histoire du Canada et voyages que les freres 



to North- America. 413 

The Recollets brand the Savages for ftupid, grofs and ruftick 
Perfons, uncapable of Thought or Refle&ion : But the Jefuits 
give them other fort of Language, for they intitle them to 
good Senfe, to a tenacious Memory, and to a quick Appre- 
henfion feafon'd [3] with a folid Judgment. The former 
allege that 'tis to no purpofe to preach the Gofpel to a fort of 
People that have lefs Knowledge than the Brutes. 1 On the 
other hand the latter (I mean the Jefuits) give it out, that 
thefe Savages take Pleafure in hearing the Word of God, and 
readily apprehend the meaning of the Scriptures. In the 
mean time, 'tis no difficult matter to point to the Reafons 
that influence the one and the other to fuch Allegations ; the 
Myftery is eafily unravell'd by thofe who know that thefe two 
Orders cannot fet their Horfes together in Canada? 

I have feen fo many impertinent Accounts of this Coun- 
try, and thofe written by Authors that pafs'd for Saints ; that 
I now begin to believe, that all Hiftory is one continued 



mineurs Recollets y ont faicts (1636) ; Le Clercq, Premier itablissement de la foy 
dans la Nowvelle France (Paris, 1691); Hennepin, Description de la Louisiane 
(Paris, 1683); New Discovery (London, 1698). — Ed. 

1 See Thwaites (ed.) , Hennepin y s New Discovery, p. 466, for an example of this 
allegation of the Recollects. — Ed. 

2 The rivalry between the two orders was nearly co-extensive with the history of 
New France, where the Recollects were first upon the field, but after 1632 were sup- 
planted by the Jesuits. Talon re-introduced the Recollects to Canada in 1670, that 
they might act as a foil to the Jesuits. The former were supported by Frontenac and 
the governor's party in the colony, and accompanied La Salle upon his explorations. 
Lahontan means to intimate that the difference in the attitude of the two orders 
towards the savages, rested upon the varying success of their respective missions — 
those of the Jesuits being large and flourishing, of the Recollects few and languish- 
ing. —Ed. 



4i 4 Some New Voyages 

Series of Pyrrhonifm. 1 Had I been unacquainted with the 
Language of the Savages, I might have credited all that was 
faid of them ; but the opportunity I had of Converfing with 
that People, ferv'd to undeceive me, and gave me to under- 
ftand, that the Recollets and the Jefuits content themfelves 
with glancing at things, without taking notice of the (almoft) 
invincible Averfion of the Savages to the Truths of Chrif- 
tianity. Both the one and the other had good reafon to be 
cautious of touching upon that String. In the mean time 
fuffer me to acquaint you, that upon this Head I only fpeak 
of the Savages of Canada, excluding thofe that live beyond 
the River of Miflifipi, of whofe Manners and Cuftoms I could 
not acquire a perfect Scheme, by reafon that I was unac- 
quainted with their Languages, not to mention that I had not 
time to make any long ftay in their Country. In the Journal 
of my Voyage upon the long River, I acquainted you that 
they are a very polite People, which you [4] will likewife infer 
from the Circumftances mention'd in that Difcourfe. 

(TThofe who have reprefented the Savages to be as rough as 
Bears, never had the opportunity of feeing them ; for they 
have neither Beard nor Hair in any part of their Body, not fo 
much as under their Arm-pits.j) This is true of both Sexes, 
if I may credit thofe who ought to know better than I. 



1 Pyrrho was a Greek philosopher, founder of the school of absolute skepti- 
cism. — Ed. 

2 The Indians are not altogether beardless ; but, disliking the custom of wearing 
hair upon the face, pluck it out by the roots. See Jesuit Relations, i, p. 281 ; ii, 
p. 23, where Membertou, the Acadian chief, is spoken of as being bearded like a 
Frenchman. — Ed. 



to North- America. 415 

Generally they are proper well made Perfons, and fitter Com- 
panions to American than to European Women. The Iroquefe 
are of a larger Stature, and withal more Valiant and Cunning 
than the other Nations ; but at the fame time they are neither 
fo Nimble nor fo Dexterous at the Exercifes of War or 
Hunting, which they never go about but in great Numbers. 
The Illinefe, the Oumamis, and the Outagamins ; with fome 
other adjacent Nations, are of an indifferent fize, and run like 
Greyhounds, if the Comparifon be allowable. The Outaouas, 
and moft of the other Savages to the Northward, (excepting 
the Sauteurs and the Cliftinos) are cowardly, ugly, and ungainly 
Fellows; but the Hurons are a brave, adlive and daring 
People, refembling the Iroquefe in their Stature and Counte- 
nance. 

All the Savages are of a Sanguine Conftitution, inclining 
to an Olive Colour, and generally fpeaking they have good 
Faces and proper Perfons. ('Tis a great rarity to find any 
among them that are Lame, Hunch-back'd, One-ey'd, Blind, 
or Dumb. 1 Their Eyes are large and black as well as their 
Hair ; their Teeth are White like Ivory, and the Breath that 
fprings from their Mouth in expiration is as pure as the Air 
that they fuck in in Infpiration]) notwithftanding they eat no 
Bread ; which Ihews that we are miftaken in Europe, in fancy- 
ing that the eating of Meat [5] without Bread makes one's 
breath ftink. They are neither fo ftrong nor fo vigorous as 
moft of the French are in railing of Weights with their Arms, 

1 On immunity from disease and deformity, consult Jes. Rel. } iii, p. 75. — Ed. 



4i 6 Some New Voyages 

or carrying of Burdens on their Backs; but to make amends 
for that, they are indefatigable and inur'd to Hardfhips, info- 
much that (the Inconveniences of Cold or Heat have no im- 
preflion upon them} their whole time being fpent in the way 
of Exercife, whether in running up and down at Hunting and 
Fifhing, or in Dancing and playing at Foot-ball, or fuch Games 
as require the Motion of the Legs. 

fThe Women are of an indifferent Stature, and as handfom 
in the Face as you can well imagine ; but then they are fo fat, 
unwieldy and ill-built, that they'l fcarce tempt any but Savages. 
Their Hair is rolled up behind with a fort of Ribband, and 
that Roller hangs down to their Girdle ; they never offer to 
cut their Hair during the whole Courfe of their Lives, whereas 
the Men cut theirs every Month^ Twere to be wifhed, that 
the fame good luck which led them to the obfervation of this, 
had thrown them upon the other Advices of St. Paul. They 
are covered from the Neck to under the Knee, and always put 
their Legs a crofs when they fit. The Girls do the fame from 
their Cradle ; if the Word be not improper, for there is no 
fuch thing as a Cradle among the Savages. The Mothers 
make ufe of certain little Boards fluffed with Cotton, upon 
which the Children lye as if their Backs were glued to them, 
being fwaddled in Linnen, and kept on with Swathbands run 
through the fides of the Boards. To thefe Boards they tye 

1 On the various fashions of hair-dressing among the Indians, see Jes. Rel., 
xliv, pp. 285, 287. A woman's hair was sometimes cut as a punishment for adul- 
tery. —Ed. 



to North- America. 417 

Strings, by which they hang their Children upon the Branches 
of Trees, when they are about any thing in the Woods. 1 

[6] The old and the married Men have a piece of Stuff 
which covers them behind, and reaches half way down their 
Thighs before ; whereas the young Men are ftark naked all 
over. They alledge that Nakednefs is no infraction upon the 
Meafures of Decency, any otherwife than as it is contrary to 
the Cuftom of the Europeans, and condemn'd by the Notion 
that they have of it. However, both the young and the old 
hang upon their Backs in a carelefs way a Covering of Hide 
or of Scarlet, when they go abroad to Walk or to make Vifits. 
They have likewife a fort of Cloaks or Coats calculated for 
the Seafon, when they go a Hunting or upon Warlike Expe- 
ditions, in order to guard off the Cold in Winter, and the 
Flies in Summer. Upon fuch occafions they make ufe of a 
fort of Caps made in the form of a Hat, and Shooes of Elk 
or Hart Skins, which reach up to their mid-Leg. 2 

Their Villages are Fortified with double Paliffadoes of very 
hard Wood, which are as thick as one's Thigh, and fifteen 
Foot high, with little Squares about the middle of the 
Courtines. Commonly their Huts or Cottages are Eighty 
Foot long, Twenty five or Thirty Foot deep, and Twenty 
Foot high. They are cover'd with the Bark of young Elms ; 



1 For a good description of these Indian cradles, see Thwaites (ed.), Early 
Western Travels, ii, pp. 97, 98; Masson, Bourgeois de la Compagnie du Nord- 
Ouest (Quebec, 1890), ii, pp. 322, 323. — Ed. 

2 Le Jeune gives in Jes. Rel. } vii, pp. 7-19, a good description of the various 
kinds of dress among the Canadian Indians at different seasons of the year. — Ed. 
27 



4i 8 Some New Voyages 

and have two Alcoves, one on the right Hand and the other 
on the left, being a Foot high and nine Foot broad, between 
which they make their Fires, there being vents made in the 
Roof for the Smoak. Upon the fides of the two Alcoves 
there are little Clofets or Apartments in which the young 
Women or married Perfons lye upon little Beds rais'd about 
a Foot from the Ground. To Conclude, one Hut contains 
three or four Families. 1 

[7] The Savages are very Healthy, and unacquainted with 
an infinity of Difeafes, that plague the Europeans, fuch as 
the Palfey, the Dropfey, the Gout, the Phthifick, the Afthtna, the 
Gravel, and the Stone : But at the fame time they are liable 
to the Small-Pox, and to Pleurijies. If a Man dies at the Age 
of Sixty Years, they think he dies young, for they commonly 
live to Eighty or an Hundred ; nay, I met with two that were 
turn'd of an Hundred feveral Years. 2 But there are fome 
among them that do not live fo long, becaufe they voluntarily 
(horten their Lives by poyfoning themfelves, as I fhall fhew 



1 The domestic architecture of the American aborigines varied with the tribe and 
their habitat. Lahontan had ranged from Newfoundland to Mackinac, if not farther, 
and it is a question which of the many classes of huts he had seen he is now describ- 
ing. Probably he refers to those of the Huron, who then lived in settled villages both 
in the Mackinac district and near the French fort on Lake St. Clair. See Parkman, 
Jesuits in North America, pp. xxvi-xxviii. Upon the entire subject of Indian dwell- 
ings, consult Morgan, " Houses and House-Life of American Aborigines/ ' United 
States Geological Survey, Contributions to Ethnology, 1881. — Ed. 

2 Early travellers obtained a mistaken notion of Indian longevity. Older chiefs, 
like many old men among the whites, took pride in their length of years and 
delighted in enlarging upon the facts. Modern observation proves that savages are 
the victims of their unsanitary life, and are subject to peculiar hardships and vicissi- 
tudes, hence die rather younger than white men. — Ed. 



to North- America. 419 

you elfewhere. In this Point they feem to join iffue with Zeno 
and the Stoicks, who vindicate Self-Murther; and from thence 
I conclude, that the Americans are as great Fools as thefe 
great Philofophers. 



420 Some New Voyages 



A fhort View of the Humors and Cuftoms of the 
SAVAGES. 

THE Savages are utter Strangers to diftin&ions of Prop- 
erty, for what belongs to one is equally anothers. If 
any one of them be in danger at the Beaver Hunting the reft 
fly to his Afliftance without being fo much as ask'd. If his 
Fufee burfts they are ready to offer him their own. If any of 
his Children be kill'd or taken by the Enemy, he is prefently 
furnifh'd with as many Slaves as he hath occafion for. Money 
is in ufe with none of them but thofe that are Chriftians, who 
live in the Suburbs of our Towns. The others will not touch 
or fo much as look upon Silver, but give it the odious Name 
of the French Serpent. They'l tell you that amongft [8] us 
the People Murther, Plunder, Defame, and betray one 
another, for Money, that the Husbands make Merchandize 
of their Wives, and the Mothers of their Daughters, for 
the Lucre of that Metal, 'They think it unaccountable that 
one Man fhould have more than another, and that the Rich 
ftiould have more Refped: than the Poor)" In fhort, they 
fay, the name of Savages which we beftow upon them would 
fit our felves better, fince there is nothing in our Adlions that 
bears an appearance of Wifdom. Such as have been in France 
were continually teazing us with the Faults and Diforders 



to North- America. 421 

they obferv'd in our Towns, as being occafion'd by Money. 
'Tis in vain to remonftrate to them how ufeful the Diftin&ion 
of Property is for the fupport of a Society: They make a Jeft 
of what's to be faid on that Head. In fine, (they neither 
Quarrel nor Fight, nor Slander one another) They feoff at 
Arts and Sciences, and laugh at the difference of Degrees 
which is obferv'd with us. They brand us for Slaves, and call 
us miferable Souls, whofe Life is not worth having, alledging, 
That we degrade our felves in fubjedting our felves to one 
Man who poffeffes the whole Power, and is bound by no Law 
but his own Will ; That we have continual Jars among our 
felves ; that our Children rebel againft their Parents ; that we 
Imprifon one another, and publickly promote our own De- 
ftru6lion.|( Befides, they value themfelves above any thing that 
you can imagine, and this is the reafon they always give 
for't, That one's as much M after as another, and fince Men are all 
made of the fame Clay there fhould be no Diftinftion or Superiority 
among them.) They pretend that their contented way of 
Living far furpaffes our Riches ; That all our Siences are not 
fo valuable as the Art of leading a peaceful calm Life ; [9] 
That a Man is not a Man with us any farther than Riches 
will make him; but among them the true Qualifications of a 
Man are, to run well, to hunt, to bend the Bow and manage 
the Fuzee, to work a Cannoo, to underftand War, to know 
Forrefts, to fubfift upon a little, to build Cottages, to fell 
Trees, and to be able to travel an hundred Leagues in a 
Wood without any Guide, or other Provifion than his Bow 
and Arrows. They fay, we are great Cheats in felling them 



422 Some New Voyages 

bad Wares four times dearer than they are worth, by way of 
Exchange for their Beaver-skins : That our Fuzees are con- 
tinually burfting and laming them, after they have paid fuffi- 
cient Prices for them. I wifh I had time to recount the 
innumerable Abfurdities they are guilty of relating to our 
Cuftoms, but to be particular upon that Head would be a 
Work of Ten or Twelve Days. 

Their Victuals are either Boild or roafted, and they lap 
great quantities of the Broath, both of Meat and of Fifti: 
They cannot bear the tafte of Salt or Spices, and wonder that 
we are able to live fo long as thirty Years, confidering our 
Wines, our Spices, and our Immoderate Ufe of Women. 
They dine generally Forty or Fifty in a Company, and fom- 
times above Three Hundred : Two Hours before they begin 
they employ themfelves in Dancing, and each Man fings his 
Exploits, and thofe of his Anceftors ; they dance but one at 
a time, while the reft are fet on the Ground, and mark the 
Cadence with an odd Tone, He, He, He, He; after which 
every one rifes and dances in his turn. 

The Warners attempt nothing without the Advice of 
the Council, which is compofed of the Old Men of the 
Nation ; that is to fay, fuch as are above Sixty : Before they 
are affembled a [10] Cryer gives notice of it through all the 
Streets in the Village : Then thefe old Old Men run to a cer- 
tain Cottage defign'd for that purpofe, where they feat them- 
felves in a Square Figure ; and after they have weigh'd what is 
propos'd for the benefit of the Nation, the Speaker goes out 
of the Cottage, and the Young Men get about him, and liften 



to iV(?r^-America. 423 

with great attention to the Refolves of the Old ones, crying 

out at the end of every Sentence That's Good. 1 

They have feveral forts of .„ , „ _ 

. All thefe Dances may be compared 

Dances. The principal is that tQ Minerva > s p yrrh iche. For while 

of the Calumet ; the reft are the Savages dance with a Singular 

the Chiefs or Commanders Gravity, they humour the Cadences 

Dance, the Warriers Dance, °{"? ain S ™* s > whic * Achilles ' x r 

. Malitia called Hyperchematica. / 

the Marriage Dance, and the am af a hfi tQ inform you whether 

Dance of the Sacrifice. They the Savages had thefe Songs from the 

differ from one another both Grecians, or the Grecians from the 

in the Cadence and in the ava S es - 

Leaps ; but 'tis impoflible to defcribe them, for that they have 

fo little refemblance to ours. That of the Calumet is the moft 

grave and handfome ; but they don't perform that but upon 

certain Occafions, viz. When Strangers pafs through their 

Country, or when their Enemies fend Ambaffadors to treat 

of a Peace. If they approach to a Village by Land, when 

they're ready to enter, they depute one of this Number, who 

advances, and proclaims, that he brings the Calumet of Peace ; 

the reft ftopping in the mean time, till he calls to them to 

come: Then fome of the Young Men march out of the 



1 The council is the most important institution of tribal life, and of indigenous 
growth. For a good description of forms of procedure, and the ceremonies connected 
therewith, seejes. /te/.,x, pp. 251-263. — Ed. 

2 It is needless to say that there was no historical connection between Greek and 
North American dances and their accompanying songs, save as the development in 
these lines has a certain similarity among all primitive peoples. The pyrricha was a 
war dance of Doric origin, performed by men in armor ; while the hyporcheme (hyper- 
chematica), allied to the paean, was one variety of the song or cadence that accom- 
panied the early Greek dances. — Ed. 



424 Sorfte New Voyages 

Village, at the Gate of which they form an Oval Figure, and 
when the Strangers are come up to them, they dance all 
at a time, forming a Second Oval round him that bears the 
Calumet: This [n] Dance continues half an Hour. Then 
they receive the Travellers with fome Ceremony, and conduft 
them to a Feaft. The Ceremonies are the fame to thofe that 
come by Water, with this difference, that they fend a Canoo 
to the Foot of the Village, with the Calumet of Peace^ upon its 
Prow, in the fhape of a Maft, and one comes from the Village 
to meet 'em. 1 The Dance of War is done in a Circle, during 
which the Savages are feated on the Ground. He that dances 
moves from the Right Hand to the Left, finging in the mean 
time the Exploits of himfelf and his Anceftors. At the end 
of every Memorable A&ion, he gives a great Stroke with a 
Club upon a Stake plac'd in the middle of the Circle, near 
certain Players, who beat Time upon a fort of a Kettle-Drum ; 
Every one rifes in his turn to fing his Song : And this is com- 
monly pradtis'd when they go to War, or are come from it. 

The greateft Paflion of the Savages confifts in the Implac- 
able Hatred they bear to their Enemies ; that is, all Nations 
with whom they are at Open War: They value themfelves 
mightily upon their Valour ; infomuch that they have fcarce 
any regard to any thing elfe. One may fay, That they are 
wholly govern'd by Temperament, and their Society is perfedt 
Mechanifm. They have neither Laws, Judges, nor Priefts ; 
they are naturally inclin'd to Gravity, which makes them very 



1 The classic description of the calumet dance is that of Marquette ; see Jes. 
Rel. t lix, pp. 129-137. — Ed. 



to North-America. 425 

circumfpedt in their Words and Adtions. They obferve a 
certain Medium between Gayety and Melancholy. The 
French Air they could not away with ; and there was none but 
the younger fort of them that approv'd of our Fafhions. 

I have feen Savages when they've come a great way, make 
no other Compliment to the Family than, / am arriv'd, I wifh 
all of you a great deal of [12] Honour. Then they take their 
Pipe quietly without asking any Queftions : When that's 
done, they'l fay, Heark'e Friend, I am come from fucb a Place, I 
faw fuch a thing, &c. When you ask a Queftion, their Anfwer 
is exceeding concife, unlefs they are Members of the Council; 
otherwife you'll hear 'em fay, That's Good ; That fignifies 
nought; That's admirable; That has Reafon in it; That's 
valiant. 

If you tell a Father of a Family that his Children have 
fignaliz'd themfelves againft the Enemy, and have took 
feveral Slaves, his Anfwer is fhort, That's Good, without any 
farther Enquiry. If you tell him his Children are flain, he'll 
fay immediately, That fignifies nought, without asking how 
it happen'd ? When a Jefuit preaches to them the Truth of 
the Chriftian Religion, the Prophecies, Miracles, &c. they 
return you, a That's wonderful, and no more. When the 
French tell them of the Laws of a Kingdom ; the Juftice, 
Manners and Cuftoms of the Europeans, they'll repeat you a 
hundred times, That's reafonable. If you difcourfe them upon 
an Enterprife of great importance, or that's difficult to exe- 
cute, or which requires much thought, they'll fay, That's 
Valiant, without explaining themfelves, and will liften to the 



426 v Some New Voyages 

end of your Difcourfe with great attention : Yet 'tis to be 
obferved, when they're with their Friends in private, they'll 
argue with as much boldnefs as thofe of the Council. 'Tis 
very ftrange, that having no advantage of Education, but 
being directed only by the Pure Light of Nature, they fhould 
be able to furnifh Matter for a Conference which often lafts 
above three Hours, and which turns upon all manner of 
Things ; and fhould acquit themfelves of it fo well, that I 
never repented the time I fpent with thefe truly Natural 
Philofophers. 

[13] When a Vifit is paid to a Savage, at going in you muft 
fay, / am come tofeefuch an one : Then Fathers, Mothers, Wives, 
Children go out, or withdraw themfelves to an Apartment at 
one end of the Cottage, and be who you will, come not near 
you to interrupt your Converfation. The Fafhion is for him 
that is vifited, to offer you to eat, drink and fmoak ; and one 
may ufe an entire freedom with them, for they don't much 
mind Compliments. If one means to vifit a Woman, the Cer- 
emony's the fame; / am come to fee fuch an one; then every 
Body withdraws, and you tarry alone with her you come to 
fee ; but you muft not mention any thing Amorous in the Day 
time, as I fhall inform you elfe where. 

Nothing furpriz'd me more than to obferve the Quarrels 
between their Children at play : A little after they are warm'd, 
they'll tell one another, You have no Soul, You're wicked, You're 
treacherous : In the mean time their Companions who make a 
Ring about them, hear all quietly, without taking one fide or 
t'other till they fall to play again : If by chance they come to 



to iVflr^-America. 427 

Blows, the reft divide themfelves into two Companies, and 
carry the Quarrellers home. 

They are as ignorant of Geography as of other Sciences, and 
yet they draw the moft exadt Maps imaginable of the Coun- 
tries they're acquainted with, for there's nothing wanting in 
them but the Longitude and Latitude of Places : They fet 
down the True North according to the Pole Star ; The Ports, 
Harbours, Rivers, Creeks and Coafts, of the Lakes ; the 
Roads, Mountains, Woods, Marfhes, Meadows, &c. counting 
the diftances by Journeys and Half-journeys of the Warriers, 
and allowing to every Journey Five Leagues. Thefe Choro- 
graphical Maps are drawn upon the Rind of your Birch Tree ; 
and when the Old Men hold a Council [14] about War or 
Hunting, they're always fure to confult them. 1 

The Year of the Outaouas, the Outagamis, the Hurons, the 
Sauteurs, the Ilinois, the Oumamis, and feveral other Savages, 
confifts of Twelve-Synodical Lunar-Months, with this differ- 
ence, when Thirty Moons are fpent, they add one fupernu- 
merary Month to make it up, which they call the Loft Moon , 
and from thence begin their Account again, after the former 
Method. All thefe Months have very fuitable Names; for 
Inftance ; What we name March, they call the Worm-Moon, 
for then the Worms quit the Hollow Chops of the Trees 
where they fhelter'd themfelves in the Winter. April is call'd 
the Month of Plants ; May of Flowers and fo of the others. I 



1 For a reproduction of an Indian map drawn by the savage Ochagach see 
Thwaites, Rocky Mountain Exploration (New York, 1904), p. 28. Several others 
are in the atlas (vol. viii) to Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition 
(New York, 1904). — Ed. 



428 Some New Voyages 

fay, at the end of thefe Thirty Months, the next that follows 
is fupernumerary, and not counted ; for Example ; We'll fup- 
pofe the Month of March to be the Thirtieth Lunar-Month, 
and confequently, the Laft of the Epocba. Next that fhould 
be counted the Month of April ; whereas the Loft Moon takes 
place of it, and muft be over before they begin their Account 
again ; and this Month with the others, makes about a Year 
and an half. Becaufe they have no Weeks, they reckon from 
the Firft till the Twenty Sixth of thefe fort of Months, and 
that contains juft that fpace of time which is between the firft 
appearance of the Moon at Night, till having finifh'd its 
Courfe, it becomes almoft invisible in the Morning; and this 
they call the Illumination-Month. For Inftance; A Savage 
will fay, J went away the firft of the Month of Sturgeons (that's 
Auguft), and returned the Twenty-ninth of the Month of Indian- 
Corn (the fame with our September); and next day, (which is 
the laft) / refted my felf. As for the remaining three Days 
and a half of the Dead-Moon, during which 'tis [15] impof- 
fible to be difcern'd, they give them the Name of the Naked 
Days. They make as little ufe of Hours as Weeks, having 
never got the way of making Clocks or Watches; by the 
help of which little Inftruments, they might divide the Natural 
Day into equal parts. 1 For this Reafon, They are forc'd to 
reckon the Natural Day as well as the Night, by Quarters, 
Half, and Three-quarters, the Rifing and the Setting-Sun, the 

1 This is a good account of the calendar of the primitive Indians, usually com- 
posed of thirteen lunar months. The aborigines of Central America, Mayas and 
Aztecs, had a more elaborate system. See Thomas, " Maya Calendar," in U. S. 
Bureau of Ethnology, Bulletin No. 18. — Ed. 



to North-America. 429 

Fore-noon and the Evening. As they have a wonderful Idea 
of any thing that depends upon the Attention of the Mind, and 
attain to an Exadt Knowledge of many Things by Long Expe- 
rience : To crofs a Forefl: (for Inftance) of a Hundred Leagues 
in a ftrait Line, without ftraying either to the Right or Left ; 
to follow the Trad: of a Man or Beaft upon the Grafs or 
Leaves : So they know the Hour of the Day and Night exactly, 
even when it is fo cloudy, that neither Sun nor Stars appear. 
I impute this Talent to a fteddy command of Mind, which is 
not natural to any but thofe whofe Thoughts are as little dif- 
tradled as thefe Mens are. 

They are more furpriz'd to fee fome little Problemes of 
Geometry put in Pra&ice, than we would be to fee Water 
turn'd into Wine. They took my Graphometer for fomewhat 
Divine, being unable to guefs how we could know the diftance 
of Places without meafuring them by Cords or Rods, without 
there were fome Supernatural Affiftance. Longimetry pleas'd 
them far more than Altimetry^ becaufe they thought it more 
neceffary to know the breadth of a River, than height of a 
Tree, &c. I remember one Day in a Village of the Outaouas 
at Miffilima'kinac a Slave brought into the Cottage where I 
was, a fort of Veffel made of a thick piece of foft Wood, 
which he had borrowed on purpofe, in which [16] he pre- 
tended to preferve Mapletree- Water. All the Savages which 
faw this Veffel, fell to arguing how much it would hold, and 
with that view call'd for a Pot, and for Water to determine 
the matter by Meafuring. The humor took me to lay with 
them a Wager of a Treat, that I could tell the Quantity of 



430 Some New Voyages 

Water that would fill it better than they. So that finding by 
my Computation, that it held about 248 Pots, or thereabouts, 
I went to make the Tryal, and made them not a little wonder 
that it fail'd but one or two Pots ; upon which I perfwaded 
them, that the Pots that were wanting were fuck'd up by the 
new Wood. 1 But what was mod pleafant they were contin- 
ually begging me to teach them Stereometry, that they might 
make ufe of it upon occafion : 'Twas to no purpofe to tell 
them 'twas impoflible they fhould underftand it, tho' there 
were Reafons for't that might convince any body but Savages. 
They prefs'd me fo much to't that I could not be quiet till I 
was forc'd to tell them, that no body could do it to Perfection 
but the Jefuits. 

The Savages prefer your little Convex Glaffes of two 
Inches Diemeter to any others, becaufe they give but a faint 
Reprefentation of the Pimples and Bloches upon their Faces. 
I remember that while I was at Miffilimakinac, one of the Ped- 
lers call'd Coureurs de Bois, brought a Convex Glafs that was 
pretty large, and confequently reprefented the Face with fome 
Deformity. All the Savages that faw this Piece of Catoptricks, 
thought it no lefs Miraculous than the awaker of a Clock, or 
a Magical Lanthern, or the Spring of a Machine. But what 
was moft Comical, there was among the reft of the Spectators 
a Huronefe Girl who told the Pedlar in a jocofe way, That 
if the Glafs had the Vertue of Magnifying [17] the Objects really, as 
it did in appearance, all her {lie Companions would give him in Ex- 
change as many Beaver Skins as would make his Fortune. 

1 The pot i9 a French liquid measure equal to 3.29 English pints. — Ed. 



to North- America. 431 

The Savages have the moft happy Memory in the World. 
They can carry their Memory fo far back, that when our 
Governors or their Deputies treated with them about War, 
Peace or Trade, and propofed things contrary to what was 
offer'd Thirty or Forty Years ago; They reply, That the 
French are falfe, and change their Opinion every Hour, that 
'tis fo many Years fince they faid fo and fo ; and to confirm it 
bring you the Porcelain Colter that was given them at that 
time. You remember I acquainted you in my Seventh Letter, 
that the Colters are the Symbols of Contracts, without which 
they conclude no Bufinefs of Moment. 1 

They pay an infinite Deverence to Old Age. The Son that 
Laughs at his Father's Advice fhall tremble before his Grand- 
father. In a Word, they take the Ancient Men for Oracles, 
and follow their Counfel accordingly. If a Man tell his Son 
'tis time he ftiould Marry, or go to the War, or the Hunting, 
or Shooting ! he fhall anfwer carelefsly, That's Valiant, I thought 
fo. But if his Grandfather tell him fo, the Anfwer is, That's 
good. It /hall be done. If by chance they kill a Partrige, a 
Goofe, or Duck, or catch any delicate Fifh, they never fail to 
prefent it to their oldeft Relations. 2 

( The Savages are wholly free from Care ; they do nothing 
but Eat, Drink, Sleep, and ramble about in the Night when 



1 See p. 76, ante. — Ed. 

2 The evidence upon the deference paid by Indians to old age, is conflicting. 
The opinions of an elderly chief had especial weight in council ; but on the other 
hand aged people, when infirm, were frequently abandoned or put to death as a use- 
less burden. See Jes. Re I., xx, p. 239 ; also Original Journals of the Lewis and 
Clark Expedition , index. — Ed. 



432 Some New Voyages 

they are at their Villages. Having no fet Hours for Meals, 
they Eat when they're hungry ; and commonly do it in a large 
Company, Feafting here and there by turns) The Women 
and Girls do the fame among themfelves, and don't admit 
any Men into [18] their Company at that time. The Women 
Slaves are employed to Sow and Reap the Indian-Corn ; and 
the Men Slaves have for their Bufinefs the Hunting and 
Shooting where there is any Fatigue, tho' their Mafters will 
very often help them. They have three forts of Games. 
Their Game of Counters is purely Numerical, and he that 
can Add, Subftra6t, Multiply and Divide beft by thefe 
Counters is the Winner. This depends purely upon the 
Mind. Another Game which is Hazard and Chance, is per- 
form'd with eight little Stones, which are Black on one fide 
and White on the other. They're put on a Plate which they 
lay on the Ground, throwing the little Stones up in the Air, 
and if they fall fo as to turn up the Black fide 'tis good 
luck. The odd number wins, and eight Whites or Blacks 
wins double, but that happens but feldom. They have a third 
Play with a Ball not unlike our Tennis, but the Balls are very 
large, and the Rackets refemble ours, fave that the Handle is 
at leaft three Foot long. The Savages, who commonly play 
at it in large Companies of three or four Hundred at a time, 
fix two Sticks at five or fix Hundred Paces diftance from each 
other; They divide into two equal Parties, and tofs up the 
Ball about half way between the two Sticks. Each Party 
endeavour to tofs the Ball to their fide ; fome run to the Ball, 
and the reft keep at a little diftance on both fides to aflift on 



to North- America. 433 

all Quarters. In fine this Game is fo violent that they tear 
their Skins, and break their Legs very often in ftriving to 
raife the Ball. All thefe Games are made only for Feafts or 
other trifling Entertainments ; for 'tis to be obferv'd, that as 
they hate Money, fo they never put it in the Ballance, and one 
may fay, Interefl is never the occafion of Debates among them} 

[19] 'Tis not to be denied but the Savages are a very 
fenfible People, and are perfectly well acquainted with the 
Interefl: of their Nations. They are great Moralifts, efpecially 
when they Criticife on the Manners of the Europeans^ and are 
mightily upon their Guard in our Company, unlefs it be with 
fuch as they are intimately acquainted with. In other Matters 
they are Incredulous and Obftinate to the laft degree, and are 
not able to diftinguifli between a Chimerical Suppofition and 
an undoubted Truth, or between a fair and a falfe Confe- 
quence, as you'l fee in the infuing Chapter, which treats of 
their Belief, and in which I affure you you'l meet with very 
odd Notions. 



1 Lahontan appears to intimate that the Indians do not gamble for gain ; never- 
theless, it is well-known that this is one of their strongest passions. The game of ball 
here described is that known as lacrosse, a modification of which is the present Cana- 
dian national game. For description see Thwaites (ed,)> "J. Long's Voyages,' ' 
in Early Western Travels, ii, pp, 89, 90. — Ed. 



28 



434 Some New Voyages 



"The Belief of the Savages, and the Obftacles of their 
Converfion. 

ALL the Savages are convinced that there muft be a God, 
becaufe they fee nothing among Material Beings that 
fubfifts neceffarily and by its own Nature. They prove the 
Exiftence of a Deity by the Frame of the Univerfe, which 
naturally leads us to a higher and Omnipotent Being, from 
whence it follows, fay they, that Man was not made by 
chance, and that he's the Work of a Being fuperior in Wif- 
dom and Knowledge, which they call the Great Spirit, or the 
Mafter of Life, and which they Adore in the moft abftrafted 
and fpiritual manner. They deliver their Thoughts of him 
thus, without any fatisfadlory Definition. The Exiftence of 
God being infeparable from his Effence, it contains every 
thing, it appears in every thing, ads in every thing, and 
gives motion [20] to every thing. In fine, all that you fee, 
all that you can conceive, is this Divinity which fubfifts with- 
out Bounds or Limits, and without Body ; and ought not to 
be reprefented under the Figure of an old Man, nor of any 
other thing, let it be never fo fine or extenfive. For this 
Reafon they Adore him in every thing they fee. When they 
fee any thing that's fine or curious, efpecially when they look 
upon the Sun or Stars, they cry out, Great Spirit, we difcern 



to North- America. 435 

thee in every thing. And in like manner when they reflect upon 
the meaneft Trifles they acknowledge a Creator under the 
Name of the Great Spirit or M after of Life} 

I forgot to tell you that the Savages liften to all the 
Jefuits Preach to them without the leaft Contradiction. They 
content themfelves to rail among one another at the Sermons 
the Fathers make at Church, and if a Savage talks freely to a 
French-man he muft be fully affur'd of his Difcretion and 
Friendfhip. I have been frequently much puzzled to anfwer 
their impertinent Objections, (for they can make no others in 
relation to Religion) but I ftill brought my felf off by entreat- 
ing them to give Ear to the Jefuits. To prefent you with a 
view of their Opinion relating to the Immortality of the Soul : 
They all believe it ; but not upon the plea that 'tis one fimple 
fubftance, and that the Deftrudtion of any Natural Being is 
accomplifh'd by the feparation of its Parts ; they're Strangers 
to that Argument. All they urge, is, that if the Soul were 
Mortal, all Men would be equally Happy in this Life ; for 
God being all Perfection and Wifdom, 'twould be inconfiftent 



1 The religious beliefs and mythologic development of the North American Indian 
have been much discussed, and but little determined. The evidence of Lahontan is 
valuable because the Indians with whom he associated were but slightly changed by 
contact with the European missionaries, and because his own materialistic, skeptical 
bent of mind divested him of certain preconceptions, and rendered his observation 
more accurate. His account of the spiritism of the Algonquians corresponds with 
the latest scientific conclusions as to the mythologic stage attained by the aborigines — 
that it was neither monotheistic nor pantheistic, but recognized all manifestations of 
the unseen, yet without sense of personal unity. See Powell, " Mythology of North 
American Indians," in U. S. Bur. of Eth. Report, 1879-80, pp. 17-56; Brinton, 
Myths of the New World (3d ed., Phila., 1896) ; Dorman, Origin of Primitive 
Superstitions among the Aborigines of America (Phila. , 1881) . — Ed. 



436 Some New Voyages 

with his Nature to create fome to be Happy and others to be 
Miferable. So they prove the Immortality of the Soul by the 
Hardfhips of Life to which moft Men are [21] expos'd, efpe- 
cially the beft of People, when they are Kill'd, Tortur'd, made 
Prifoners, &c. For they pretend, that by a Condu6l fomewhat 
ftrange to our Apprehenfion, the Almighty orders a certain 
number of Creatures to fuffer in this World, that they may be 
fav'd in the next ; and upon that fcore they cannot endure to 
hear the Chriftians fay, Such a one has had the misfortune to 
be Kill'd, Wounded or made a Slave ; and look upon what we 
call a Misfortune to be only fuch in Fancy and Idea, fince 
nothing comes to pafs but by the Decrees of that infinitely 
perfecft Being, whofe Condud cannot be Fantaftical or Capri- 
cious, as they falfely pretend we Chriftians think it to be. On 
the contrary they think thofe Perfons have very good Fortune 
who are Kill'd., Burnt or taken Prifoners. 'Tis the great un- 
happinefs of thefe Poor, Blind People, that they will not fuffer 
themfelves to be inftru6led : For their Opinions are not in all 
refpedls contrary to the Light of the Gofpel. They believe 
that God for Reafons above our reach makes ufe of the Suf- 
ferings of good People to difplay his Juftice ; and in this Point 
we cannot oppofe them, for 'tis one of the Principles of our 
own Religion : But when they alledge that we look upon the 
Divinity as a whimfical fantaftick Being, are they not under 
the greateft miftake? The firft and fupreme caufe muft be 
fuppos'd to make the wifeft choice of means conducing to an 
end. If then 'tis true, as 'tis a Point of our Belief, that God 
does permit the Sufferings of the Innocent, 'tis our part to 



to North-PimQV\Q2L. 437 

Adore his Wifdom, and not be fo arrogant as to Cenfure it. 
One of the Savages that argued the Point with me, alledg'd 
that we reprefented the Divinity like a Man that had but a little 
Arm of the Sea to crofs, and rather chofe to take a [22] turn 
of five or fix Hundred Leagues about. This Quibble puzzled 
me a little : For why, fays htyfince God can bring Men to Eternal 
Happinefs by rewarding Vertue and Merit, why does not he go that 
fhorteft way to Work ? Why does he condutt a jujl Man to the 
Eternal Beatitude by the path of Sufferings ? Thus 'tis that thefe 
poor Savages contradict themfelves, and from hence it appears, 
that Jefus Chrift, our Lord and Matter, is the only Author of 
fuch Truths as fupport themfelves, and contain not the leaft 
fhadow of Contradiction. In a Word, the Angular madnefs 
of this unfortunate People confifts in denying their Affent to 
any thing but what's vifible and probable. This is the {land- 
ing and true Principle of their Religion, when you confider it 
abftradtedly : But if you ask them in particular why they Adore 
God in the Sun, rather than in a Tree or a Mountain; their 
Anfwer is, That they choofe to admire the Deity in publick by 
pointing to the moft glorious thing that Nature affords. 1 

The Jefuits ufe their utmoft Efforts to make them fenfible 
of the Importance of Salvation. They explain to them the 
Holy Scriptures, and fet forth the manner by which the Law 
of Chrift Jefus took place in the World, and the change that it 
wrought. They lay before them the Prophecies, Revelations 



1 This is in accord with modern conclusions, that the North Americans did not 
worship the sun, save as a symbol. The fashion of a decade or more ago, to explain 
most myths as solar in origin, is not to-day held sufficient. — Ed. 



438 Some New Voyages 

and Miracles, by which our Religion is inforc'd. But the 
poor Wretches are fuch obftinate Infidels, that all the Char- 
acters of Truth, Sincerity and Divinity that (bine throughout 
the Scriptures, have no impreffion upon them. The greateft 
length that the good Fathers can bring them to, is to acqui- 
efce after a Savage manner, contrary to what they think. For 
Inftance, when the Jefuits Preach up the Incarnation of Jefus 
Chrift, they'l answer, That's Wonderful: When the Queftion is 
[23] put to them, whether they'l turn Chriftians, they reply, 
that they'l confider of it. If the fecular Europeans follicit them to 
come to Church to hear the Word of God, they reply, } Tis 
reafonable; the meaning of which is, that they'l come; but at 
the bottom they have no other defign in approaching to the 
place of Worfhip, than to fnatch away a Pipe of Tobacco, 
or to Ridicule the good Fathers, as I intimated above : For 
they have fuch happy Memories, that I knew ten of my own 
Acquaintance that had all the Holy Scriptures by Heart. 

'Twill be worth your while to hear the thoughts of Reafon 
that come from thofe People who pafs for Beafts among us. 
They maintain, That a Man ought never to ftrip himfelf of 
the Privileges of Reafon, that being the nobleft Faculty with 
which God hath enrich'd him ; and That forafmuch as the 
Religion of the Chriftians is not put to the teft of their Rea- 
fon, it cannot be but that God ridicul'd them in enjoyning 
them to confult their Reafon in order to diftinguifh Good from 
Evil. Upon this fcore they affirm that Reafon ought not to 
be controul'd by any Law, or put under a neceffity of approv- 
ing what it doth not comprehend ; and in fine, that what we 



to North-Pimzncz. 439 

call an Article of Faith is an intoxicating Potion to make 
Reafon reel and dagger out of its way ; forfomuch as the pre- 
tended Faith may fupport Lies as well as the Truth, if we 
understand by it a readinefs to believe without diving to the 
bottom of things. They pretend that if they had a mind to 
talk in the Language of the Chriftians, they might with equal 
right reje6t the Arguments propos'd by the Chriftians againft 
their Opinions, and plead that their Opinions are Incompre- 
henfible Myfteries, and that we muft not pretend to fathom 
the Secrets [24] of the Almighty, which are plac'd fo far 
above our weak reach. 

'Tis in vain to remonftrate to them, That Reafon gives 
only a faint and dazzling Light which leades thofe to a Preci- 
pice that truft to its Direction and Conduit : That 'tis a flave 
to Faith and ought to obey it blindly without difputing, juft 
as an Iroquefe Captive does his Mafter. 'Tis needlefs to repre- 
fent to them, that the Holy Scriptures can contain nothing 
that's diredtly repugnant to right Reafon. They make a jeft 
of all fuch Remonftrances, for they imagine fo great a Contra- 
diction between the Scripture and Reafon, that they think it 
impoflible for the Advocates of the former to avoid the receiv- 
ing of very dubious Opinions for certain and evident Truths. 
Their Prejudice proceeds from this, that they can't be con- 
vinc'd, that the Infallibility of the Scripture is to be made out 
by the Light of Reafon. The Word Faith is enough to choak 
them ; they make a Jeft of it, and alledge that the Writings 
of paft Ages are falfe, fuppofititious and alter'd, upon the 
Plea that the Hiftories of our own times are juftly liable to the 



44° Some New Voyages 

fame Cenfure. They plead, That a Man muft be a Fool who 
believes that an Omnipotent Being, continued from all Eter- 
nity, in a ftate of Inactivity, and did not think of giving being 
to Creatures till within thefe five or fix Thoufand Years ; or 
that at that time God Created Adam on purpofe to have him 
tempted by an evil Spirit to eat of an Apple, and that he 
occafion'd all the Mifery of his Pofterity by the pretended 
tranfmiflion of his Sin. They ridicule the Dialogue between 
Eve and the Serpent, alledging that we affront God in fuppof- 
ing that he wrought the Miracle of giving this Animal the 
ufe of Speech, with intent to deftroy all the Humane Race. 
[25] To continue their wild Remonftrances they fay, 4 'Tis 

* a thing unheard of, that for the expiation of Adam\ Sin God 
4 fhould put God to Death to fatisfie himfelf ; That the Peace 

* of the World fhould be brought about by the Incarnation 
4 of God and his fhameful Death; That his Difciples fhould 
4 be ignorant Men that fear'd to dye. This, they fay, is ftill 

* the more unaccountable, that the Sin of the firft Father hath 
4 done more harm than the Death of the latter hath done 
4 good, the Apple having intail'd Death on all Men, whereas 
4 the Blood of Jefus hath not fav'd one half of them. They 
argue, 4 That upon the Humanity of this God the Chriftians 
4 build a Religion without a Foundation, which is fubjecft to 
4 the Changes and Viciflitudes of Humane Affairs. That this 
4 Religion being divided and fubdivided into fo many Se&s, 
4 as thofe of the French, the Englijh, £srV. it can be no other 
4 than an Human Artifice : For had God been the Author of 
4 it, his Providence had prevented fuch diverfity of Sentiments 



to North- America. 441 

* by unambiguous Decifions. That if the Evangelical Law 
4 had defcended from Heaven it had not contain'd thofe 

* obfcure Sayings that give rife to the Chriftian Diffenfions ; 

* for that God who forefees what is in the Womb of Futurity 
c would have deliver'd his Precepts in fuch clear and precife 

* terms as would leave no room for Difputes. 

1 But fuppofing (continue they) that this Law defcended 

* from Heaven, which of the Chriftian Seds muft we join with ? 
c For we underftand from an infinite number of Chriftians, that 
4 in fome Communions we run the rifque of Damnation.' 
The great Article that they ftickle moft at is the Incarnation 
of God. They exclaim againft the fuppofition that the Divine 
[26] Word was fhut up for nine Months in the Bowels of a 
Woman, and that the fame God came to take up an Earthly 
Body in this World, and carry'd it up to his Seat of Blifs. 
Nay, they carry the thing farther, for they rally upon the 
unevennefs and inconftancy of Chrift's Will. Tho' he came 
into the World to dye, fay they, yet it appears that he had no 
mind to it, and that he was affraid to Die. If the Divinity 
and Humanity had made but one Perfon, he would not have 
needed to pray or ask for any thing ; nay, fuppofing that his 
Divine Nature had not the Afcendant within him, yet he ought 
not to have fear'd Death, in regard that the lofs of a Tem- 
poral Life is nothing to one that is affur'd of reviving for 
ever ; he knew for certain where he was a going, and confe- 
quently ought to have embrac'd Death more chearfully than 
we do, when we Poyfon our felves in order to accompany our 
Relations to the Country of Souls. 



442 Some New Voyages 

They brand St. Paul for a Phantaftical Man, alledging that 
he contradicts himfelf every Foot, and Reafons very forrily. 
They Ridicule the Credulity of the Primitive Chriftians, whom 
they look upon as fimple and fuperftitious Creatures ; and 
upon that Head take occafion to fay, That the Apoftle Paul 
would have found a great deal of difficulty in perfwading the People 
of Canada that he was raviftid up to the third Heaven. There's 
one pla.ce of Scripture above all other that they can't digeft, 
viz. Many are called, but few chosen. Their Comment upon it 
is this, God hath faid, that many are calVd but few chofen, and 
what God fays muft needs be true. Now, if of three Men only one 
be sav } d, and the other two damn'd, then the Condition of a Stag is 
preferable to that of a Man ; Nay, put it upon an even lay, and let 
there be but one Man damn 1 d for one fav'd, even then the Stag hath 
the better of [27] it. This Objection was once put to me by 
the Rat, or the General of the Savages, when I was a Hunting 
with him. I reply'd, that we ought to indeavour to be in the 
number of the Chofen by following the Law and the Precepts 
of Jefus Chrift. But my Anfwer did not fatisfie him, for he 
ftill ran upon the great rifque of two Men damn'd for one 
fav'd, and that by an immutable Decree. Upon that I refer'd 
him to the Jefuits, for I durft not tell him, That 'twas in his 
own Power to procure his Election : If I had, he had given 
me lefs Quarter than he did to St. Paul; for in Religious 
Matters they always ftick to Probability. This General was 
not fo void of good Senfe, but that he could think juftly and 
make true Reflections upon Religious Matters ; but he was fo 
prepoffefs'd with an Opinion, that the Chriftian Faith was 



to North- America. 443 

contrary to Reafon, that all the Attempts I made could not 
convince him of the contrary. When I laid before him the 
Revelations of Mofes and the Prophets, the univerfal Confent 
of almoft all Nations in owning and acknowledging Jefus 
Chrifl, the Martyrdom of his Difciples and of the Primitive 
Chriftians, the perpetual Succeflion of our Sacred Oracles, the 
entire Deftru&ion of the Jewish Republick, and the Deftruc- 
tion of Jerufalem foretold by our Saviour ; he ask'd me if my 
Father or my Grandfather had feen all thefe Events, and 
whether I was fo credulous as to take our Scriptures for 
Truth, fince the Hiftories of Countries writ but t'other Day 
are found to be Fabulous. He added, That the Faith which 
the Jefuits beat their Brains about imported no more than to 
be perfwaded of a thing either by feeing it with their Eyes, or 
by finding it recommended by clear and folid Proofs ; That 
thefe Fathers and I were fo far from convincing them of the 
truth of our [28] Myfteries, that we only cover'd their 
Thoughts with Obfcurity and Darknefs. 

Such, Sir, is the Obftinacy and prepoffeffion of this People. 
I flatter my felf that this fhort view of their Notions may 
divert you without Offence. I know that you are too well 
confirm'd and rivetted in our moft Holy Faith, to receive any 
dangerous Impreflion from their impious Advances. I affure 
my felf that you will joyn with me in bemoaning the deplor- 
able ftate of thefe ignorant Wretches. Let us jointly admire 
the depth of the Divine Providence, which permits thofe 
Nations to entertain fuch an Averfion to our Divine Truths ; 
and in the mean time let us make the beft ufe of the unde- 



444 Some New Voyages 

ferv'd Advantage we have over them. Give me leave to 
acquaint you with the Reflections that thefe fame Savages 
make upon our Condudt when they confine themfelves to the 
Subject of Morality. The Chriftians, say they, contemn the 
Precepts of the Son of God, they make a Jeft of his Prohibitions, and 
doubt of the Sincerity of his Expreffions ; for they counteract his 
Orders without intermiffion, and rob him of the Worfhip which he 
claims as his due, by paying it to Silver, to Beavers, and to their 
own Intereft. They murmur againft Heaven and him when things 
go crofs with them; they go about their ufual Bufinefs on fuch Days 
as are fet apart for Works of Piety and Devotion, and fpend both 
that and the other parts of their time in Gaming, Drinking to 
excefs, Fighting and Scolding. Inftead of Comforting their Parents 
they leave them for a Sacrifice to Hunger and Mifery, and not only 
deride their Counfel, but wijh impatiently for their Death. In the 
Night time, all of them, barring the Jefuits, roll from Houfe to 
Houfe to debauch the Women Savages. They Murther one another 
every Day upon the Plea of Theft or Affronts, or upon the fcore 
of Women ; they Pillage and Rob one another without [29] any 
regard to the tyes of Blood or Friend/hip, as often as they meet with 
an opportunity of doing it with impunity. They befpatter and de- 
fame one another with outragious Calumnies ; and make no fcruple 
to lye when they find } twill ferve their Intereft. They are not fatif 
fied with the Company of fingle Women, but debauch other Mens 
Wives; and thefe Adulterous Women bring forth in the abfcence of 
their Husbands a fpurious Off-fpring, that are at a lofs to know 
their Fathers. In fine, (continue they) though the Chriftians are 
fo docile as to believe the Humanity of God, which is the moft unrea- 



to North-America. 445 

finable Article that can be ; yet they feem to doubt of bis Precepts, 
and incejfantly tranfgrefs them, notwithftanding they are very pure 
and reafonable. I ftiould never come to an end, if I enter'd 
into the Particulars of their Savage way of Reafoning ; and 
for that reafon 'twill be more proper to take leave of this 
Subjedl, and pafs dire&ly to the manner of Worfhip which 
they offer to their great Spirit or God, calPd Kitcbi Manitou. 
A view of that will be more agreeable than the tedious Series 
of this fort of Philofophy, which at the bottom is but too 
true, and affords matter of Grief to all good Souls that are 
perfwaded of the Truth of Chriftianity. 



446 Some New Voyages 



The way of Worfhip, ufed by the Savages. 

BEFORE we launch out into the particulars of their Wor- 
fhip, 'twill be proper to remark that the Savages give 
the name of Genius or Spirit to all that furpaffes their Under- 
ftanding, and proceeds from a caufe that they cannot trace. 
Some of thefe Spirits they take to be Good, and fome Bad ; 
of the former fort are the Spirit of [30] Dreams, the Michi- 
bichi mentioned in my lift of Animals, a Solar Quadrant, an 
Alarm Watch, and an infinity of other things that feem to 
them to be inconceivable. Of the latter fort are Thunder, 
Hail falling upon their Corn, a great Storm, and in a word every 
thing that tends to their Prejudice, and proceeds from a caufe 
that they are ignorant of. If a Fufee burft either through the 
fault of the Metal, or by being over Loaded, and Maims a 
Man, they'll tell you there was an Evil Spirit lodg'd within it. 
If by chance the Branch of a Tree put out a Mans Eye, the 
effe6l is owing to an Evil Spirit ; If a fudden guft of Wind 
furprifes 'em in a Canow about the middle of their Paffage 
acrofs the Lakes, 'tis an Evil Spirit that difturbs the Air ; if 
the dregs of any Violent Diftemper robs a Man of his Reafon, 
'tis an Evil Spirit that Torments him. Thefe Evil Spirits they 
call Matchi Manitous, and Gold and Silver they lift into that 



to iVflr^-America. 447 

number. 1 However, 'tis to be obferv'd that they talk of thefe 
Spirits in a Bantering way, or much after the fame manner 
that our fhrewd Europeans rally upon Magicians and Sorcerers. 
Here I cannot forbear to repeat once more that the His- 
torical Accounts of Canada, are as fcarce as the Geographical 
Maps of that Country ; for I never met with a true one but 
once, and that in the hands of a Quebec Gentleman, the Im- 
preffion of which was afterwards Prohibited at Paris, but for 
what reafon I know not. I mention this with regard to their 
opinion of the Devil ; for it is alledg'd that the Savages are 
acquainted with the Devil. I have read a thoufand Ridiculous 
Stories Writ by our Clergymen, who maintain that the Savages 
have conferences with him, and not only confult him, but pay 
him a fort of Homage. Now all thefe advances are ridicu- 
lous ; for in earneft, the Devil never appear'd to thefe Amer- 
icans. [31] I ask'd an infinity of Savages whether the Devil 
was ever feen among 'em in the fhape of a Man or any other 
Animal ; I likewife confulted upon this head the ingenioufeft 
of their Mountebanks or Jugglers, who are a very Comical 
fort of Fellows (as you fhall hear anon ;) and it may be rea- 
fonably prefum'd that if ever the Devil appear'd to 'em, they 
had been fure to have told me of it. In fine, after ufing all 
poflible means for a perfedt knowledg of this matter ; I con- 
cluded that thefe Ecclefiafticks did not underftand the true 



1 Brinton considers that the idea of dualism of spirits, so far as ethical qualities 
were concerned, was borrowed from Europeans; the Indians believed in benevolent 
and mischievous spirits, not because of a moral nature, but because of the effect upon 
their own lives. — Ed. 



448 Some New Voyages 

importance of that great word Matchi Manitou, (which figni- 
fies an Evil Spirit, Matchi being the word for Evil and Manitou 
for Spirit ;) For by the Devil they underftand fuch things as 
are offenfive to 'em, which in our Language comes near to the 
fignification of Misfortune, Fate, Unfavourable Deftiny, &c. 
So that in fpeaking of the Devil they do not mean that Evil 
Spirit that in Europe is reprefented under the figure of a Man, 
with a long Tail and great Horns and Claws. 1 

The Savages never Offer Sacrifices of Living Creatures to 
the Kitchi Manitou; for their common Sacrifices upon that 
occafion are the Goods that they take from the French in ex- 
change for Beavers. Several perfons of good Credit have 
inform'd me, that in one day they Burnt at MiJJilimakinac, 
Fifty Thoufand Crowns worth of fuch Goods. I never faw 
fo Expenfive a Ceremony, my felf : But let that be as it will, 
the particular circumftances of the Sacrifice are thefe. The 
Air muft be Clear and Serene, the Weather Fair and Calm ; 
and then every one brings his Offering and laies it upon the 
Wood-Pile : When the Sun mounts higher the Children make 
a Ring round the Pile, with pieces of Bark Lighted, in order 
to fet it on Fire; and the Warriours Dance and [32] Sing 
round 'em till the whole is Burnt and Confumed, while the 
Old Men make their Harangues addrefs'd to the Kitchi Man- 

1 Lahontan's skeptical instincts revolted against the prevalent idea that all the 
gods of the savages were some manifestation of the devil — a conception that vitiates 
many of the recorded observations of Indian myths in the Jesuit Relations. On this 
subject see Brinton, Myths of the New World, pp. 75-82. The Moravian mission- 
aries asserted that the aborigines ' * seem to have had no idea of the Devil, as the Prince 
of Darkness, before the Europeans came into the country ; " — Loskiel, History of the 
Mission of the United Brethren (London, 1794), i, p. 34. — Ed. 



to North-America. 449 

itoU) and prefent him from time to time with Pipes of Tobacco 
Lighted at the Sun. Thefe Dances, Songs and Harangues 
laft till Sun fet, only they allow themfelves fome intervals of 
Reft, in which they fit down and Smoak at their Eafe. 

It remains only (before I make an end of this Chapter) to 
repeat the very Words of their Harangues pronounc'd by 
the Old Fellows, and of the Songs fung by the Warriors: 
4 Great Spirit, Mafter of our Lives ; Great Spirit, Mafter of 
4 all Things both Vifible and Invifible ; Great Spirit, Mafter 
* of other Spirits, whether good or Evil ; command the Good 
'Spirits to favour thy Children, the Outaonas^ &c. Command 
4 the Evil Spirits to keep at a diftance from 'em. O Great 
4 Spirit, keep up the Strength and Courage of our Warriors, 
4 that they may be able to ftem the fury of our Enemies : Pre- 
4 ferve the Old Perfons, whofe Bodies are not quite wafted, 
4 that they may give Counfel to the Young. Preferve our 
4 Children, enlarge their Number, deliver 'em from Evil 
4 Spirits, to the end that in our old Age they may prove our 
4 Support and Comfort ; preferve our Harveft and our Beafts, 
4 if thou mean'ft that we ftiould not die for Hunger : Take 
4 care of our Villages, and guard our Huntfmen in their Hunt- 
4 ing Adventures. Deliver us from all Fatal Surprizes, when 
4 thou ceafeft to vouchfafe us the Light of the Sun, which 
4 fpeaks thy Grandeur and Power. Acquaint us by the Spirit 
4 of Dreams, with what thy Pleafure requires of us, or pro- 
4 hibits us to do. When it pleafes thee to put a Period to 
4 our Lives, fend us to the great Countrey of Souls, where we 
4 may meet with thofe of our Fathers, our Mothers, our 

29 



450 Some New Voyages 

4 Wives, [33] our Children, and our other Relations. O 
4 Great Spirit, Great Spirit, hear the Voice of the Nation, give 
4 ear to all thy Children, and remember them at all times. 

As for the Songs which the Warriors fing till Sun fet, they 
are to this purpofe : 4 Take heart, the Great Spirit vouchfafes 
4 fuch a Glorious Sun ; Cheer up my Brethren : How great 
4 are his Works ! How fine is the Day ! this Great Spirit is 
4 all Goodnefs ; 'tis he that fets all the Springs in motion ; 
4 he ruleth over all : He is pleas'd to hear us ; Let us cheer up 
4 my Brethren, we fhall fubdue our Enemies : Our Fields fhall 
4 bear Corn ; our Hunting fhall fucceed well ; we fhall all of 
4 us keep our Health; the Old Perfons fhall rejoice, the Chil- 
4 dren fhall increafe, and the Nation fhall profper. But now 
4 the Great Spirit leaves us, his Sun withdraws, he has feen the 
4 OutaouaS) &c. 'Tis done, ay, 'tis done ; the Great Spirit is 
4 fatisfied ; my Brethren let us pluck up a good heart. 

We muft remark, that the Women likewife make Addreffes 
to him, and that commonly when the Sun rifes ; upon which 
Occafion they prefent and hold up their Children to that Lu- 
minary. When the Sun is almoft down, the Warriors march 
out of the Village, to dance the Dance of the Great Spirit. 
But after all, there is no Day or Time fix'd for thefe Sacrifices, 
no more than for the Particular Dances. 1 



1 The method and manner of sacrifice among fhe more barbarous North American 
Indians is a study strewn with difficulties. There are traces of human sacrifice among 
nearly all the tribes (see Dorman, Primitive Superstitions, pp. 208-213 ; Jes. Rel. y 
x, 159-167), but Lahontan is doubtless correct in asserting that it was not usual. 
Dogs were frequently sacrificed to the dead or departing spirits ; but the more ordinary 
offerings were food and tobacco, and there does not appear to have been any fixed 
time for or form of sacrificial ceremonial. — Ed. 



to North- America. 451 



[34] An Account of the Amours and Marriages of the 

Savages. 

I COULD recount a thoufand Curious Things relating to 
the Courtfhip, and the way of Marrying among the Sava- 
ges ; but the Relation of fo many Particulars, would be too 
tedious ; for which Reafon I fhall only confine my felf to what 
is moft effential to that Subject. 

It may be juftly faid, That the Men are as cold and indif- 
ferent as the Girls are paffionate and warm. The former love 
nothing but War and Hunting, and their utmoft Ambition 
reaches no farther. When they are at home, and have noth- 
ing to do, they run with the Match ; that is, they are Night- 
walkers. The Young Men do not marry till they are Thirty 
Years of Age, for they pretend that the Enjoyment of Women 
does fo enervate 'em, that they have not the fame meafur of 
Strength to undergo great Fatigues, and that their Hams are 
too weak for long Marches, or quick Purfuits : In purfuance 
of this Thought, 'tis alledged, That thofe who have married, 
or ftroled in the Nights too often, are taken by the Iroquefe, 
by reafon of the Weaknefs of their Limbs, and the decay of 
their Vigour. But after all, we muft not imagine that they 
live chafte till that Age ; for they pretend that Exceffive Con- 
tinence occafions Vapours, Diforders of the Kidneys, and a 



452 Some New Voyages 

Suppreflion of Urine ; fo that 'tis neceffary for their Health 
to have a Run once a Week. 

If the Savages were capable of being fubje&ed to the 
Empire of Love, they muft needs have an Extraordinary Com- 
mand of themfelves to difguife [35] the Juft Jealoufie they 
might have of their Miftreffes, and at the fame time to carry 
it fair with their Rivals. I know the Humour of the Savages 
better than a great many French People that have liv'd among 
'em all their Life-time ; for I ftudy'd their Cuftoms fo nar- 
rowly and exadtly, that all their Condu6t of Life is as per- 
fectly well known to me, as if I had been among 'em all my 
Life-time : And 'tis this Exa6l Knowledge that prompts me to 
fay, That they are altogether Strangers to that Blind Fury 
which we call Love. They content themfelves with a Tender 
Friendfhip, that is not liable to all the Extravagancies that the 
Paflion of Love raifes in fuch Breafts as harbour it : In a 
word, they live with fuch Tranquility, that one may call their 
Love Simple Goodwill, and their Difcretion upon that Head 
is unimaginable. Their Friendfhip is firm, but free of Tranf- 
port ; for they are very careful in preferving the Liberty and 
Freedom of their Heart, which they look upon as the moft 
valuable Treafure upon Earth : From whence I conclude that 
they are not altogether fo favage as we are. 

^The Savages never quarrel among themfelves, neither do 
they reproach or affront one another ; One man among them 
is as good as another, for all are upon the fame LevelJ) They 
have no Diforders occafion'd by a Girl or a Wife, for the 
Women are Wife, and fo are their Husbands : The Girls 



to iVtfr^-America. 453 

indeed are a little foolifh, and the Young Men play the fool 
with them not unfrequently: But then you muft confider that 
a Young Woman is allow'd to do what lhe pleafes ; let her 
Conduit be what it will, neither Father nor Mother, Brother 
nor Sifter can pretend to controul her. A Young Woman, 
fay they, is Matter of her own Body, and by her Natural 
Right of Liberty is free to do what lhe pleafes. But on the 
other [36] hand the Married Women being allow'd the Priv- 
iledge of quitting their Husbands when they pleafe, had as 
good be dead as be guilty of Adultery. In like manner, the 
Husbands being entituled to the fame Priviledge, would look 
upon themfelves as infamous, if they were faithlefs to their 
Wives. 

^ Nothing of Intrigue or Courtfhip muft be mention'd to 
the Savage Ladies in the Day time, for they will not hear it ; 
they'll tell you the Night-time is the moft proper feafon for 
thatj) infomuch that if a Youth fhould by chance accoaft a 
Girl in the Day-time, after this manner, / love thee more than 
the Light of the Sun (fuch is their Phrafe) liften to what I say, 
&c. fhe would give him fome Affront, and withdraw. This is 
a general Rule, that whoever defigns to win the Affedtion of 
a Girl, muft fpeak to her in the Day-time, of things that lie 
remote from the Intrigues of Love. One may converfe with 
them privately as long as he will, and talk of a thoufand 
Adventures that happen every minute, upon which they make 
their Replies very pleafantly ; for you cannot imagine what a 
Gay and Jovial Temper they are of; they are very apt to 
laugh, and that with a very engaging Air. 'Tis at thefe Pri- 



454 Some New Voyages 

vate Interviews that the Savages fmell out the Young Womens 
Thoughts ; for though the Subje6l of their Difcourfe is of an 
Indifferent Strain, yet they talk over nicer Subjects in the 
Language of their Eyes. After a Young Man has paid two 
or three Vifits to his Miftrefs, and fancies that fhe has look'd 
upon him with a favourable Eye, he takes the following 
Courfe to know the Truth of the Matter. 

You muft take notice, that forafmuch as the Savages are 
Strangers to Menm and Tiium, to Superiority and Subordina- 
tion ; and live in a State of [37] Equality purfuant to the 
Principles of Nature ; they are under no apprehenfion of 
Robbers or Secret Enemies, fo that their Huts are open 
Night and Day. You muft know farther, that Two Hours 
after Sun-fet, the Old Superannuated Perfons, or the Slaves 
(who never lie in their Mafters Huts) take care to cover up 
the Fire before they go. 'Tis then that the Young Savage 
comes well wrapt up to his Miftrefs's Hut, and lights a fort 
of a Match at the Fire ; after which he opens the Door of his 
Miftreffes Apartment, and makes up to her Bed : If fhe blows 
out the Light, he lies down by her ; but if fhe pulls her Cover- 
ing over her Face, he retires ; that being a Sign that fhe will 
not receive him. The Young Women drink the Juice of cer- 
tain Roots, which prevents their Conception, or kills the Fruit 
of the Womb ; for if a Girl proves with Child, fhe'll never get 
a Husband. They'll fuffer any body to fit upon the Foot of 
their Bed, only to have a little Chat ; and if another comes an 
hour after, that they like, they do not ftand to grant him their 
laft Favours. As to this Cuftom, which indeed is fingular, 



to North-PimtricvL. 455 

the moft fenfible Savages gave this Reafon for it, That they 
will not depend upon their Lovers, but remove all ground of 
Sufpicion both from the one and the other, that fo they may 
adt as they pleafe. 

The Savage Women like the French better than their own 
Countreymen, by reafon that the former are more prodigal of 
their Vigour, and mind a Woman's Bufinefs more clofely. In 
the mean time the Jefuits ufe all Efforts to prevent their keep- 
ing Company with the French: They have Superannuated 
Fellows placed in all the Huts, who, like Faithful Spies, give 
an Account of all that they fee or hear. The French who have 
the Misfortune to be difcover'd, are publickly nam'd [38] 
in the Pulpit, complain'd of to the Bifhop and the Gov- 
ernor General, excommunicated, and treated as Tranfgreffors 
of the Law : But after all the Artifices and Opposition of the 
Good Fathers, a great many Intrigues are carried on in the 
Villages, that they know nothing of. The Jefuits never offer 
to check the Young Savages for keeping company with Girls ; 
for if they offer'd to cenfure their Conduct, and ufe 'em with 
the fame liberty as they do the French, they would tell 'em 
roundly, that they're forry the Fathers have a mind to their 
Miftreffes. This was the Anfwer that a Young Huron fpoke 
aloud one day in the Church, when a Jefuit addrefling himfelf 
to him, was preaching down the Night-Rambles of the Sav- 
ages with an Apoftolical Freedom. 

This People cannot conceive that the Europeans, who value 
themfelves upon their Senfe and Knowledge, fhould be fo 
blind and fo ignorant as not to know that Marriage in their 



456 Some New Voyages 

way is a fource of Trouble and Uneafinefs. To be ingag'd 
for one's Life time, to them is matter of Wonder and Sur- 
prife. They look upon it as a monftrous thing to be tied one 
to another without any hopes of being able to untie or break 
the Knot. In fine, in fpite of all the Reafons and Arguments 
that that Subject affords, they lay down this for a firm and 
unmoveable Truth, that we Eropeans are born in Slavery, and 
deferve no other Condition than that of Servitude. 

In our Country, their ftate of Marriage would be juftly 
look'd upon as a Criminal way of Converfation. A Savage 
(for Inftance) that has fignalis'd himfelf feveral times in the 
Field, and acquired the Reputation of a brave Warrior, hath a 
mind to Marry by the means of a Contract, or rather a Leafe 
of Thirty Years, with the hopes of feeing in his old Age a 
Family defcended [39] of himfelf, that lhall provide for him. 
This Hero looks out for an agreeable Girle, and after he and 
fhe have fettled the matter, they reveal their Defign to their 
Relations, who at the fame time cannot oppofe it, but are 
oblig'd to confent, and to afiift at the Ceremony. They meet 
together in the Hut of the ancienteft Relation or Parent, 
where a Feaft is prepar'd on a Day fix'd for that purpofe. 
Upon fuch Occafions the Company is very numerous, and 
the Table is cover'd with all manner of Dainties in a very pro- 
digal manner ; and thofe who affift at the Feftival, Dance and 
Sing, and perform the other Diverfions of the Country. 
After the Feafting and Merry-making is over, all the Rela- 
tions of the Bridegroom retire, excepting four of the oldeft, 
after which the Bride, accompany'd with four of her ancient- 



to North- America. 457 

eft Female Relations, appears at one of the Doors of the Hut, 
and is receiv'd by the moft decrepit Man of the Bridegroom's 
Company, who conduces her to the Bridegroom at a certain 
place, where the two Parties ftand upright upon a fine Mat, 
holding a Rod between them, while the old Men pronounce 
fome ftiort Harangues. In this Pofture do the two married 
Perfons Harangue one after another, and Dance together, 
Tinging all the while, and holding the Rod in their Hands, 
which they afterwards break into as many pieces as there are 
Witneffes to the Ceremony, in order to be diftributed among 
them. This done, the Bride is reconducted out of the Hut, 
where the young Women ftay for her to accompany her to her 
Father's Apartment, and the Bridegroom or married Man is 
oblig'd to go there to find her when he has a mind to her 
Company, till fuch time as {he brings forth a Child ; then, 
indeed, the conveys her Cloaths [40] to her Husbands Apart- 
ment, and continues with him till the Marriage is diffolv'd. 1 

'Tis allowable both for the Man and the Woman to part 
when they pleafe. Commonly they give one another eight 
Days Warning ; fometimes they offer Reafons to juftifie their 
Condudt, but for the moft part the ufual Plea is, that they are 
fick and out of order, and that Repofe is more proper for 
them than the fatigue of a married Life. Then the little 



1 Lahontan's account of courtship, and the ceremony of marriage, is more 
extended than those of other early travellers ; he does not, however, mention a prom- 
inent feature of the transaction, the presents given to the father of the bride, consti- 
tuting a sort of wife-purchase. See Jes. Ret., iii, p. 99 ; Ixviii, pp. 141-145. Long 
and Grant, early English traders among the Chippewa, give interesting details of 
courtship and marriage in that tribe. See Thwaites, Early Western Travels, ii, pp, 
I 73~i75 >* Masson, Bourgeois } ii, pp. 319-321. — Ed. 



458 Some New Voyages 

pieces of the Rod that were diftributed among the Relations 
of the married Perfons, are brought into that Hut in which 
the Marriage was Solemniz'd, and burnt in their Prefence. 
You muft obferve that this Separation is accomplifh'd without 
any Difpute or Quarrel. Both the Men and the Women 
thus unmarried may be marry'd again to whom they pleafe : 
But commonly they lie bye three or fix Months before they 
confummate their fecond Marriage. When this Separation 
happens the Children are divided equally between them, for 
the Children are the Treafure of the Savages. If their num- 
ber be odd the Woman hath the better half. 

Though they are at their liberty to change, yet there are 
feveral Savages that live all their Life time with one Woman. 
I gave you to know above, that during the whole courfe of 
their married State they maintain an inviolable Fidelity to one 
another: But, which is yet more Edifying, as foon as the 
Woman is declar'd to be with Child, both fhe and her Bedfel- 
low abftain from Enjoyment, and obferve an exa6t courfe of 
Continence from thence to the thirtieth Day after her Child- 
birth. When a Woman is ready to lye in, fhe withdraws to a 
certain Hut allotted for that ufe, being attended by her fhe 
Slaves, who ferve and affift her as far as they can. In [41] 
fine, the Female Sex in this Country deliver themfelves with- 
out the afliftance of Midwives ; for they bring forth their 
Children with a facility that the European Women can fcarce 
have any Notion of, and they never lye in above two or three 
Days. They obferve a fort of Purification for thirty Days if 
the Child be a Boy, and for forty if it be a Girle, and till that 



to iVflr^-America. 459 

time is expir'd they do not return to their Husband's Apart- 
ment. 

As foon as their Children come into the World they dip 
them in warm Water up to the Chin, after which they fwathe 
them down upon little Boards or Planks fluffed with Cotton, 
where they lye upon their Backs, as I infinuated under the 
Head of the Habit, Houfes, &c. of the Savages. They never 
make ufe of Nurfes unlefs it be when the Mothers are out of 
order, and they never wean their Children, but fuckle them fo 
long as they have Milk, with which indeed they are very plen- 
tifully provided. 

The Women have no opportunity of Marriage after the 
Fiftieth Year of their Age ; for the Men of the like Age 
alledge, that fince they cannot then bear Children, 'twould be 
a piece of Folly to meddle with them ; and the young Sparks 
affirm, that their wither'd Beauty has not force enough to 
Charm them, at a time when there is no fcarcity of Buxfome 
young Girles. In this Diftrefs, when the young Men will not 
ufe them as Miftreffes, and Men of riper Years refufe them 
for Wives, if their Complexion be any thing Amorous, they 
are forc'd to adopt fome Prifoner of War that is prefented 
them, in order to anfwer their prefling Neceffities. 

When the Husband or Wife comes to dye, the Widow- 
hood does not laft above fix Months ; and if in that fpace of 
time the Widow or Widower [42] dreams of their deceas'd 
Bedfellow, they Poyfon themfelves in cold Blood with all the 
Contentment imaginable ; and at the fame time fing a fort of 
tune that one may fafely fay proceeds from the Heart. But 



460 Some New Voyages 

if the furviving Party dreams but once of the Deceafed, they 
fay, that the Spirit of Dreams was not fure that the dead Per- 
fon was uneafie in the Country of Souls, forafmuch as he only 
pafs'd by without returning, and for that reafon they think 
they are not oblig'd to go keep him Company. 1 

/ Thefe Savages are uncapable of Jealoufy ; that is a Paflion 
they know nothing of. They jeer the Europeans upon that 
head ; and brand a man's diftruft of his Wife, for a piece of 
manifeft FollyJ) as if, fay they, we were not certain that 'tis 
impoflible for fo weak an Animal to be true to its promifes. 
To purfue their fallacious way of arguing, they alledge that 
fufpicion is only a doubt, and that to doubt of what one fees 
is an argument of Blindnefs and Folly ; and in fine, that 'tis 
impoflible, but that the conftraint and perpetuity that attends 
our Marriages, or the bait of Gold and Silver, fliould oblige 
a Woman when Cloy'd with one and the fame Husband, to 
whet her Appetite in the Embraces of another Man. I am 
fully convinced that a Savage would chufe rather to fuffer 
Mutilation than to Embrace his Neighbours Wife. Nor is 
the Chaftity of the fhe Savages lefs nice, for I do not believe 
that in the fpace of Fifty Years there has been one Inftance 
among 'em of the Invafion of another Man's Bed. 2 'Tis true 



1 The influence of dreams is one or the most marked superstitions of the Indians. 
They are regarded as divine intimations, whose suggestions must be followed even to 
the extent of suicide and death. The influence of " medicine men " was largely per- 
petuated by means of this belief in dreams. See post. — Ed 

2 Among the Western Indians adultery was punished by mutilation, and even by 
death. Consult Jes. Rel. y xlv, p. 237 ; liv, p. 187 ; Wis. Hist. Colls. , xvi, pp. 362, 
375 ; Thwaites, Hennepin's New Discovery, pp. 482, 483. — Ed. 



to North-America. 461 

the French, being uncapable to diftinguifh between the Mar- 
ried and Unmarried Women, fometimes make their Addrefs 
to the former, when they find them alone in the Woods, or 
when they walk out into the Fields ; but upon such occafions 
they always receive this Anfwer; [43] The Fiend which is 
before mine Eyes binders me to fee thee- 

[The Savages go always by the Mothers Name/) To 
make this plain by an example : the Leader of the Nation of 
Hurons, who is called Saftaretfi, 1 being Married to a Daughter 
of another Huron Family, by whom he has feveral Children, 
that General's Name is extindt at his Death, for that his 
Children affume the Name of the Mother. Now, it may be 
ask'd how the Name of Saftaretfi has been kept up for the 
fpace of Seven or Eight Hundred Years among that People, 
and is likely to continue to future Ages? But the Queftion 
is eafily Anfwered, if we confider, that the Sifter of this 
Saftaretfi being Married to another Savage, whom we ftiall 
call Adario, the Children Springing from that Marriage, will 
be called Saftaretfi after the Mother, and not Adario after this 
Father. When I asked them the Reafon of the Cuftom, they 
replyed, that the Children having received their Soul from 
their Father, and their Body from their Mother, 'twas but 



1 The family of Sastaretsi were the hereditary chiefs of the nation of the Tobacco 
or Petun Hurons (see p. 54, note 2, ante). They belonged to the deer clan (or 
totem) of this tribe, and exercised their authority until 1794, when, at Wayne's battle 
of Fallen Timbers, this clan was almost annihilated, A chieftain of this name treated 
with the French in 1682 (N. Y. Colon. Docs., ix, p. 178); another died at Quebec 
in 1746, and by that means precipitated the Huron revolt under Chief Nicholas 
(see Wis. Hist. Colls. , xvii). The Sastaretsi were commonly faithful to the French 
alliance. — Ed. 



462 Some New Voyages 

reafonable that the Maternial Name ihould be perpetuated. 
I reprefented to them I do not know how often, that God 
alone was the only Creator of Souls, and that it was more 
reafonable to derive the original of that Cuftom from the 
certainty that they had of the Mother beyond that of the 
Father; but they positively affirmed that this reafon was 
abfurd, without offering any proof. 1 

When a Woman has loft a Husband that leaves Brothers 
who are Batchelours, one of thefe Marries the Widow Six 
Months after his Death. The fame is the Cafe with the 
Sifters of a Wife ; for when a Married Woman Dies, com- 
monly one of the Sifters fupplies her place. But you muft 
take notice that this Cuftom is only obferved by the Savages 
that pretend to be Wifer than their [44] Neighbours. Some 
Savages continue Batchelours to their Dying day, and never 
appear either at Hunting or in Warlike Expeditions, as being 
either Lunatick or Sickly : But at the fame time they are as 
much efteem'd as the Braveft and Haileft Men in the Country, 
or at leaft if they rally upon 'em, 'tis never done where they 
are prefent. Among the Illinefe there are feveral Hermaphro- 
dites, who go in a Woman's Habit, but frequent the Com- 
pany of both Sexes. 2 Thefe Illinefe are ftrangely given to 
Sodomy, as well as the other Savages that live near the River 
Miffifipi, 



1 This custom of naming children was used in support of the theory of mutterrecht 
as a basis of ancient family institutions. See Morgan, Ancient Society (New York, 
1877); McLennan, Patriarchal Theory (London, 1885). — Ed. 

2 See Marquette's description of the class called <( berdashes," in Jes. ReL, lix, 
pp. 129, 309, 310. — Ed. 



to North- America.. 463 

This, Sir, is all that I could learn of the way of Marriage 
and the Amours of the Americans; who are fo far from giving 
a full loofe to their Venerial Appetite, that they always a& 
with a command over themfelves, being very moderate in 
their Adventures with Women, whom they make ufe of only 
for the Propagation of their Families and the Prefervation of 
their Health. Their Conduct upon this Head may ferve for 
a juft Reprimand to the Europeans. 

I obferv'd before, that if once a Girle proves with Child, 
ftie never gets a Husband ; but I ought to have added that 
fome young Women will not hear of a Husband, through 
a principle of Debauchery. That fort of Women are call'd 
Ickoue ne Kioujfa, i. e. Hunting Women : for they commonly 
accompany the Huntfmen in their Diverfions. To juftify 
their Condud, they alledge that they find themfelves to be of 
too indifferent a temper to brook the Conjugal yoak, to be 
too carelefs for the bringing up of Children, and too impa- 
tient to bear the paffing of the whole Winter in the Villages. 
Thus it is, that they cover and difguife their Lewdnefs. Their 
Parents or Relations dare not cenfure their Vicious Conduit ; 
on the contrary they feem to approve of it, in [45] declaring, 
as I faid before, that their Daughters have the command of 
their own Bodies and may difpofe of their Perfons as they 
think fit ; they being at their liberty to do what they pleafe. 
In fhort, the Children of thefe Common Women are accounted 
a Lawful Iffue, and intitled to all the Privileges of other 
Children; abateing for one thing, namely, that the noted 
Warriours or Counfellours will not accept of 'em for their 



464 Some New Voyages 

Sons in Law, and that they cannot enter into Alliance with 
certain Ancient Families ; though at the fame time thefe 
Families are not poffeffed of any peculiar Right or Prehem- 
inence. The Jefuits do their utmoft to prevent the Lewd 
Practices of thefe Whores, by Preaching to their Parents that 
their Indulgence is very difagreeable to the Great Spirit, that 
they muft anfwer before God for not confineing their Children 
to the meafures of Continency and Chaftity, and that a Fire is 
Kindled in the other World to Torment 'em for ever, unlefs 
they take more care to corredl: Vice. 

To fuch Remonftrances the Men reply, Thai's Admirable ; 
and the Women ufually tell the Good Fathers in a deriding 
way, That if their Threats be well grounded, the Mountains of the 
other World muft confift of the Afhes of fouls. 



Ki. 2*. tioon Sun 



P^S 




-Rifirt^ S 










. v*<? Jcfowy Jtui 



to iVflr^-America. 465 



A View of the Difeafes and Remedies of the Savages. 

THE Savages are a robuft and vigorous fort of People, of 
a Sanguine Temperament, and an admirable Com- 
plexion. They are unacquainted with a great many Difeafes 
that afflift [46] the Europeans , fuch as the Gout, Gravel, 
Dropsy, &c. Their Health is firm, notwithftanding that they 
ufe no precaution to preferve it ; for on the contrary one 
would think that they weaken themfelves by the Violent Exer- 
cifes of Dancing, Hunting, and Warlike-Expeditions, in which 
they have frequent returns of Heats and Colds in one day, 
which in Europe wbuld occafion a Mortal Diftemper. Some- 
times indeed they are feiz'd with Plurifies, but thefe are as 
unfrequent as they are mortal ; for this is the only Diftemper 
that all their Remedies cannot conquer. The Small-Pox are 
as common in the North of Canada, as the Great-Pox are to the 
Southward : in the Winter time the Small-Pox is very danger- 
ous, by reafon of the difficulty of refpiration ; but notwith- 
ftanding that 'tis mortal, the Savages matter it fo little, that 
when 'tis upon 'em, they walk about from Hut to Hut, if they 
are able ; or if they have not ftrength to walk, are carried 
about by their Slaves. In the Illinefe Country, and near the 
Miffifipi, the Venereal Diftemper is very common. I remember, 
that in the Interview I had with the Akanfas upon that great 

30 



466 Some New Voyages 

River, at the Mouth of the Mijfouris (as I faid in my Sixteenth 
Letter) I faw a Savage, who uncovering himfelf, fhew'd me 
part of his Body, that was ready to fall off, through Rotten- 
nefs ; at that time he was bufy'd in boiling Roots, and after I 
had ask'd him the ufe of 'em, he gave me to underftand by 
his Interpreter, that he hop'd to be cur'd in a Months time, 
by drinking the Juice of thefe Roots, and eating conftantly 
the Broth or Decodtion of Meat and Fifh. 

Brandy makes a terrible havock among the People of 
Canada, for thofe who drink it are much more numerous than 
thofe who have the power to abftain from it. That Liquor, 
which of it felf is murdering ftuff, and which is brew'd and 
adulterated [47] before 'tis imported into this Countrey, 
fweeps off men fo faft, that one who has not feen the fatal 
effedls of it can fcarce credit 'em : It extinguifhes their Nat- 
ural Heat, and throws almoft all of 'em into that Languifhing 
Diforder, which we call a Confumption : They look pale, livid 
and ghaftly like Skeletons. 1 Their Feafts are the bane and 
entire ruine of their Stomacks, as being nothing but plentiful 
Entertainments, at which they value themfelves upon leaving 
nothing. 2 They pretend, that by vertue of their drinking 
great quantities of Water and Broth, they digeft their Vi&uals 



1 The ravages of the liquor habit among the aborigines of North America are 
well-known. The Indians do not drink for the taste of the liquor itself, but for the 
effect it produces — intoxication constituting a great enjoyment, for which they will 
sacrifice much. They do not hold anyone responsible for acts committed in that state 
— see vol. i, p. 124, ante. The early Jesuits opposed the brandy trade with the 
Indians, but were unable to secure its prohibition — see ibid., p. 94. — Ed. 

2 The " eat-all " feasts were among the most marked and disgusting habits of the 
Indians. See Le Jeune's description in Jes. Rel.> vi, pp. 281 -293. — Ed. 



to North- America. 467 

with greater Facility than the Europeans, who load their Stom- 
acks with Wine and other Liquors, that produce Crudities. 

The Savages are not at all alarm'd by Sicknefs, for they 
fear Death much lefs than the Pain and Duration of their 
Illnefs. When they are fick, they only drink Broth, and eat 
fparingly ; and if they have the good luck to fall afleep, they 
think themfelves cur'd : They have told me frequently, that 
fleeping and fweating would cure the mod ftubborn Difeafes in 
the World. When they are fo weak that they cannot get out 
of Bed, their Relations come and dance and make merry before 
'em, in order to divert 'em. To conclude, when they are ill, they 
are always vifited by a fort of Quacks, (Jongleurs); of whom 
'twill now be proper to fubjoin two orthree Words by the bye. 

A Jongleur is a fort of Phyfician, or rather a Quack, who 
being once cur'd of fome dangerous Diftemper, has the Pre- 
fumption and Folly to fancy that he is immortal, and poffeffed 
of the Power of curing all Difeafes, by fpeaking to the Good 
and Evil Spirits. Now though every Body rallies upon thefe 
Fellows when they are abfent, and looks upon 'em as Fools 
that have loft their Senfes by [48] fome violent Diftemper, 
yet they allow 'em to vifit the Sick ; whether it be to divert 
'em with their Idle Stories, or to have an Opportunity of 
feeing them rave, skip about, cry, houl, and make Grimaces 
and Wry Faces, as if they were poffefs'd. When all the Buftle 
is over, they demand a Feaft of a Stag and fome large Trouts 
for the Company, who are thus regal'd at once with Diverfion 
and Good Cheer. 

When the Quack comes to vifit the Patient, he examines 



468 Some New Voyages 

him very carefully ; // the Evil Spirit be here, fays he, we /hall 
quickly diflodge him. This faid, he withdraws by himfelf to a 
little Tent made on purpofe, where he dances and fings hold- 
ing like an Owl; (which gives the Jefuits Occafion to fay, 
That the Devil converfes with 'em.) After he has made an end 
of this Quack Jargon, he comes and rubs the Patient in fome 
part of his Body, and pulling fome little Bones out of his 
Mouth, acquaints the Patient, That thefe very Bones came out of 
his Body ; that he ought to pluck up a good heart, in regard that his 
Diftemper is but a Trifle ; and in fine, that in order to accelerate the 
Cure, 'twill be convenient to fend his own and his Relations Slaves 
to flioot Elks, Deer, &c. to the end they may all eat of that fort of 
Meat, upon which his Cure does abfolutely depend. 

Commonly thefe Quacks bring 'em fome Juices of Plants, 
which are a fort of Purges, and are called Maskikik. But the 
Patients choofe to keep them by 'em rather than to drink 
them; for they think all Purgatives inflame the Mafs of the 
Blood, and weaken the Veins and Arteries by their violent 
Shocks. All their Cure confifts in fweating well, in drinking 
Broth, in keeping themfelves very warm, in fleeping if they 
can, and in drinking the Lake-water or Spring-water, in the 
Paroxyfms of Fevers, as well as in other Diftempers. 1 



1 There is a large literature on the subject of " medicine men " and their thera- 
peutics. There appear to have been two classes of these practitioners : those of the 
rational school, who depended for their cures upon herbs, baths, etc.; and the mystics 
or conjurers, who sought by religious ceremonies to expel the unwelcome manitou from 
the patient. For observations of ethnological students, see Jes. ReL, index ; Masson, 
Bourgeois, ii, p. 259-265, 363 ; Hoffman, " Midewininof theOjibwa," in U. S. Bur. 
of Eth. Report, 1885-86 ; Bourke, " Medicine Men of the Apache/' ibid, 1887-88 ; 
also Brinton, Myths, pp. 304-328. — Ed. 



to North-America. 469 

[49] They cannot conceive how we come to be fuch Fools 
as to make ufe of Vomits ; for when ever they fee a French- 
man take down fuch a violent Remedy, they cannot forbear 
faying that he fwallows an Iroquefe. They plead, that this fort 
of Remedy fhakes the whole Machine, and makes terrible 
Efforts upon all the inward Parts. But they are yet more 
aftonifh'd at our cuftom of Bleeding ; For, fay they, the Blood 
being the Taper of Life, we have more occafion to pour it in than to 
take out, confidering that Life finks when its Principal Caufe is 
mov'd off ; from whence } tis a Natural Confequence, that after lofs 
of Blood Nature atts but feebly and heavily, the Intrails are over- 
heated, and all the Parts are dry*d, which gives rife to all the Dif- 
eafes that affliEl the Europeans. 

The Savages are never eight Days together without Sweat- 
ing, whether they be well or bad ; only they obferve this dif- 
ference, that when they are perfectly well they throw them- 
felves while the fweating moifture is yet upon them, into the 
River in Summer, and into the Snow in Winter ; whereas when 
they are out of order they go immediately into a warm Bed. 
Five or fix Savages may fweat conveniently in the place allotted 
for that ufe, which is a fort of Oven or Stove cover'd with 
Mats, Skins, &c. In the middle of this Bagnio there ftands 
a Difh or Porringer full of burning Brandy, or of great red 
hot Stones, which occafions fuch a piercing heat, that in the 
twinkling of an Eye they fweat prodigioufly. 1 They never 



1 The sweat houses of the Indians are familiar to all students of aboriginal life ; 
they were used both in sickness and in health. For a good description see Jes. ReL, 
vi, pp. 189, 191 ; xxxviii, pp. 253, 255. — Ed. 



470 Some New Voyages 

make ufe of hot Baths and Glyfters, unlefs it be when they are 
over perfwaded by the Jefuits and our Phyficians. 

I remember, that in a Conference I had one Day with a 
Savage, the Barbarian faid with a great deal of Senfe, That a 
good Air, good Water, and Contentment of Mind could not indeed 
keep a [50] Man's Life from coming to an end, but that at leaft it 
muft be own'd, that thefe Advantages contribute in a great meafure 
to make a Man run through the courfe of his Life without being 
fenfible of any Diforder or Inconveniecy. They make a Jeft of the 
Impatience of the Europeans, who would be cur'd as foon as 
they are fick. They alledge that our fear of Death, occafion'd 
by the invafion of the leaft Feaver, does fo inflame and fortifie 
the Difeafe, that oftentimes we fall a Sacrifice to Fear it felf ; 
whereas if we look'd upon our Illnefs as a Triffle as well as 
Death, and kept our Bed with Patience and a good Heart, 
without offering Violence to Nature, by cramming down 
Drugs and Medicines, the good old Dame would not fail to 
Comfort and Refrefh us by degrees. 

The Savages are always againft the making ufe of our 
Surgeons and Phyficians. They affirm, that all mixtures of 
Drugs are Poyfon that deftroys Natural Heat, and confumes 
the Breaft ; and that Glyfters are only proper for the Euro- 
peans, though after all they fometimes make ufe of them, 
when the French refort to their Villages. They are of the 
Opinion, that the obferving of a Diet heats the Blood, and 
that 'tis of dangerous Confequence to baulk the Appetite as 
to what it craves, provided the Aliment hath a good Juice. 
The Meat that they eat is little more than half done ; but 



to North-Pimtvicz. 471 

their Fifh is always over boyl'd. They never touch Sallade, 
upon the Plea that all cold Herbs oblige the Stomach to 
hard labour. 

There's no Wound or Diflocation that they cannot cure 
with the Simples or Plants, whofe Vertues they are well ac- 
quainted with ; and, which indeed is Angular, their Wounds 
never run to a Gangrene. But after all, this is not to [51] 
be imputed to thefe Herbs, nor to the Air of the Country, 
but to their hail Conftitution ; for notwithstanding the ufe of 
thefe very Remedies a Gangrene invades the Wounds of the 
French, who queftionlefs are harder to cure than the Savages. 
This People attribute our liablenefs to Gangrenes, and indeed 
all our Difeafes, to the Salt that we eat ; for they cannot tafte 
any fait thing without being fick unto Death, and drinking 
perpetually. They cannot be perfwaded to drink Ice-water, 
for they alledge that it infeebles the Stomach, and retards 
Digeftion. Such, Sir, are their fantaftical Opinions of things, 
which proceed from their Prepoffeflion and Bigotry with ref- 
erence to their own Cuftoms and ways of Living. 'Tis in 
vain to vifit them when they lie at the point of Death, in order 
to prefs them to Bleed or take a Purge ; for they ftill make 
anfwer, that they cannot confent to the forwarding of their 
Death by the Remedies of the French, which they take to be 
as bad as the Perfons who exhibit them. 

As foon as a Savage dies he is dreft as neatly as can be, 
and his Relations Slaves come and mourn over him ; neither 
Mother, Sifter nor Brother fhews the leaft mark of Affliction ; 
they fay, Their deceas'd Friend is happy in being thus ex- 



472 Some New Voyages 

empted from farther Sufferings ; for this good People believe, 
and not without Reafon, that Death is a paffage to a better 
Life. 1 When the Corps are dreft they fet them upon a Mat 
in the fame Pofture as if the Perfon were alive ; and his Rela- 
tions being fet round him, every one in his turn addreffes him 
with a Harangue, recounting all his Exploits as well as thofe 
of his Anceftors. He that fpeaks laft expreffes himfelf to this 
purpofe. 4 You fuch a one, you fit now along with us, and 

* have the fame Shapes that [52] we have; you want neither 

* Arms, nor Head, nor Legs. But at the fame time you ceafe 
4 to be, and begin to evaporate like the fmoke of a Pipe. 
4 Who is it that talk'd with us but two Days ago ? Sure ! 
4 'twas not you ; for then you would fpeak to us ftill. It muft 
4 therefore be your Soul which is now lodg'd in the great 
4 Country of Souls along with thofe of our Nation. This 
4 Body which we now behold will in fix Months time become 
4 what it was two Hundred Years ago. Thou feeleft nothing, 
4 thou knoweft nothing, and thou feeft nothing, becaufe thou 
4 art nothing. Neverthelefs out of the Friendfhip we had for 
4 thy Body while animated by thy Spirit, we thus tender the 
4 Marks of that Veneration which is due to our Brethren and 
4 our Friends. 

After they have made an end of their Harangues the Male 
Relations remove to make room for the (he Friends, who 



1 All tribes of North American Indians appear to have entertained some form of 
belief in the future life. See Brinton, Myths, pp. 271-278. The Jesuits describe the 
mourning and wailing consequent upon death, but assert that it is largely customary 
rather than the expression of grief. They likewise mention the funeral orations. See 
Lejeune, in Jes. Rel., x, pp. 265-277. — Ed. 



to North- America. 473 

make him the like Compliment. This done, they fhut the 
Corps up twenty four Hours in the Hut for the Dead, and 
during that time are imploy'd in Dances and Feafts, which are 
far from bearing a mournful fhew. After the twenty four 
Hours are expir'd the Slaves of the deceas'd Perfon carry his 
Corps upon their Backs to the Burying-place, where it is laid 
upon Stakes that are ten Foot high, in a double Coffin of 
Bark, with his Arms and fome Pipes with Tobaco and Indian 
Corn put up in the fame Coffin. When the Slaves are carry- 
ing the Corps to the Burying-place, the Male and Female 
Relations accompany them, Dancing all the while ; and the 
reft of the Slaves of the deceas'd Perfon carry fome Bag- 
gage, which the Relations prefent to the dead Perfon and lay 
upon his Coffin. The Savages that live upon the long River 
burn their Corps, as I infinuated before; [53] but you muft 
know that they keep them in Vaults or Cellars till they have 
a fufficient number to burn together, which is perform'd out 
of the Village, in a place fet a part for that Ceremony. 1 In 
fine, the Savages know no fuch thing as Mourning, and never 
mention the Dead in particular; I mean, they never repeat 
their Names. 2 They deride us when they hear us recount the 
Fate of our Parents, our Kings, our Generals, &c. 



1 Cremation was seldom practiced by the barbarous nations of the North, but was 
customary in Central America and among certain California tribes. The scaffolds 
built for corpses were but temporary resting places ; among perhaps most of the wan- 
dering tribes the body was taken down at the close of the hunt or raid, when the 
tribesmen next passed that way, and interred at the village of the deceased; among 
the Hurons, at the end of a period of from eight to twelve vears, all bones were col- 
lected and interred. Jes. ReL, i, p. 267. — Ed. 

2 This singular custom of avoiding mention of the name of the dead is frequently 



474 Some New Voyages 

Upon the Death of a Savage his Slaves marry the other 
Women Slaves, and live by themfelves in a diftind Hut, as 
being then free, or fuch as have no Matter to ferve. The 
Children that fpring from this fort of Marriages, are adopted 
and reputed the Children of the Nation, by reafon of their 
being born in the Village and in the Country. There's no 
reafon, fay they, that fuch Children fhould bear the Misfortunes 
of their Parents, or come into the World in Slavery, fince they 
contributed nothing towards their Creation. Thefe Slaves take 
care to go every Day to the foot of their Matter's Coffin, and 
there offer fome Pipes and Tobaco, as a grateful acknowl- 
edgment of their Liberty. But now that I am got upon the 
Subject of Tobaco, I mutt acquaint you that almoft all the Sav- 
ages fmoak, but they never chew Tobaco, nor take it in Snuff. 
They fow and reap a great deal of it, but then it differs from 
what we have in Europe, though our firft Seed came from 
America; and in regard that 'tis in a manner good for noth- 
ing, they are forc'd to buy up Brafil Tobaco, which they mix 
with a certain Leaf of an agreeable Smell, call'd Sagakomi} 



mentioned by the Jesuits. For great men, the custom of resuscitation was practiced, 
whereby one was appointed to take upon himself the name and responsibilities of the 
deceased. Jes. Ret., i, p. 267; xvii, p. 242. — Ed. 

1 Sagakomi (sacacommis) is the bear berry {Arctostaphylos uva-ursi), one of the 
ingredients of Indian tobacco or kinnikinnik. The Spanish called it manzanita. 
Lewis and Clark say that this word is derived from the habit of the clerks (commis) 
of the North West Company who carried this berry in a bag (sac) for smoking ; — 
see Thwaites, Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, iv, pp. 13, 21, 
22 ; but Coues, New Light on the Early History of the Greater Northwest (New York, 
1897), p. 581, shrewdly conjectures that the form sacacommis was a pun upon a native 
word — as is here proven. Brazil tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) is stronger than the 
northern species (N. rustica), hence more desired by the Indians. — Ed. 



to ifor^-America. 475 

I have nothing more to fay upon this Head ; for I think I 
have given you a fufficient account [54] of their Difeafes and 
of their Remedies, which in my Opinion are as Savage as 
themfelves. But let that be as it will, 'tis certain they feldom 
die of any other Diftemper than of a Pleurify. As for the 
other Difeafes they get over them with the greateft danger 
in the World, for fetting afide their Courage and Patience 
which goes beyond any thing that we can imagine, they take 
all the ways of the World to burft themfelves by Eating and 
Drinking when they have grofs Feavours upon them, and 
when the fit is over fmoaking that Brafel Tobaco, which with- 
out difpute is the ftrongeft fort that we know of. 

The Women of this Country are fubjedl to the Natural 
Diforders as well as elfewhere, and fometimes die of them. 
'Tis true they have an admirable Remedy for redreffing the 
Diforders that flow from that Source ; I mean, a certain 
Potion ; but it hath no Operation unlefs they abftain from 
all manner of Excefs, which they are very unwilling to do. 
Some French Surgeons affur'd me, that the European Women 
void a much greater quantity and hold the Flux longer upon 
them than thefe Americans, who feldom have thofe upon them 
above two Days at a time. Another Inconvenience that fre- 
quently annoys them, is an over-bearing quantity of Milk; 
for which they ufe to put little Puppies to fuck their Breafts. 



476 Some New Voyages 



[55] The Diverfions of Hunting and Shooting ufual among 

the Savages. 

I HAVE already defcrib'd the Hunting of the Elks and 
fome other Animals of Canada in my 10th and nth Letter, 
fo that now it remains only to give you an exadt account of 
the Beavers, which are faid to be Amphibious Animals, as I 
obferv'd in my 16th Letter, with which I fent you the Figure 
of thefe Animals. And becaufe thefe Beafts do fome things 
very furprifing by a wonderful Inftinft, to give you a right 
Notion wherein their Cunning confifts, I fend you a Draught 
of thofe Ponds which they know how to make more Artifi- 
cially than any Man can do. 

The Savages of Canada reflecting on the excellent Qualities 
of the Beavers, are wont to fay, That they have fo much Wit, 
Capacity and Judgment, that they cannot believe their Souls die 
with their Bodies. They add, That if they were permitted to 
reafon about things invifible, and which fall not under their Senfes, 
they durfl maintain, that they are Immortal like ours. But not to 
infift on this Chimerical Fancy, it muft be allow'd, that there 
are an infinite number of Men upon the Earth (without men- 
tioning the Tartars, the Peafants of Mufcovy, of Norway i and a 
Hundred other forts of People) who have not the Hundredth 
part of the Underftanding which thefe Animals have. 



to Aftfr^-America. 477 

The Beavers difcover fo much Art in their Works, that we 
cannot without offering violence to our Reafon attribute their 
Skill to mere [56] Inftind, for it is lawful to doubt of fome 
things whereof we cannot difcover the Caufe, provided they 
have not any Connexion with Religion ; I mean fuch things 
as appear fo ftrange to Sence and Reafon, that we cannot give 
credit to them, unlefs we have feen them our felves. How- 
ever, I will venture to write to you many Particulars upon this 
Subje6t, which perhaps may make you doubt of the truth of 
my Narrative. I will begin with affuring you, that thefe Ani- 
mals join together in a Society confifting of an Hundred, and 
that they feem to talk and reafon with one another by certain 
bemoaning inarticulate Sounds. 1 The Savages fay they have 
an intelligible Jargon, by means whereof they communicate 
their Sentiments and Thoughts to one another. I never was 
an Eye Witnefs of this kind of Affemblies, but many Savages 
and Conreurs de Bois, who are People worthy of Credit, have 
affur'd me, that there is nothing more true. They add, that 
they confult among themfelves about what things they muft 
do to maintain their Cottages, their Banks and their Lakes, 
and about every thing that concerns the Prefervation of their 
Commonwealth. Thefe good People would perfwade me, 
that the Beavers fet Centries while they are cutting through 
great Trees, as big as Tuns, with their Teeth, in the Neigh- 
bourhood of their little Lakes, and that when thefe Centinels 



1 On the methods of communication between beavers, consult a recent monograph 
by Dugmore, " The Outlaw ; a character study of a Beaver," in Smithsonian Insti- 
tution Report, 1900, pp. 517-522. — Ed. 



478 Some New Voyages 

cry out, upon the approach of Men or Beafts, all the Beavers 
that are at Work throw themfelves into the Water and fave 
themfelves by diving, till they come at their Cottages. 1 I 
mention this matter of Fadt upon the Report of a Thoufand 
Perfons, who could have no Intereft to impofe upon me 
with Fables ; but what follows I have obferv'd my felf, in the 
Country where the Outagamis Hunt, [57] which I mention'd 
in the beginning of my 16th Letter. 

The Beavers finding a Rivulet that runs crofs a Meadow, 
fet themfelves to make Banks and Ramparts, which flopping 
the courfe of the Water caufe an Inundation over the whole 
Meadow; that fometimes is no lefs than two Leagues in 
Circumference. This Bank is made with Trees which they 
cut down with their four great fharp Teeth, and then drag 
them along as they fwim in the Water. Thefe Trees being 
rang'd a crofs at the bottom of this Meadow, the Animals 
load themfelves with Grafs and fat Earth, which they tranf- 
port upon thdir great Tails, and throw in between the Wood 
with fo much Art and Induftry, that the moft skilful Brick- 
layer can hardly make a ftronger Wall with Lime and Morter. 
In the Night time they are heard to Work with fo much 
Vigour and Diligence, that one would think them to be Men 
at Work, if he were not affur'd before hand that they are 



1 Apropos of Lahontan's hearsay reports of the sagacity of the beaver, the fol- 
lowing should be noted : *' Numberless writers upon this fertile and suggestive theme 
have been too easily betrayed into a fanciful exaggeration of facts, making the beaver 
a marvel of reflective, purposive, and cooperative intelligence — an imaginary picture, 
which an appeal to nature does not justify." — Riverside Natural History, v., 
p. 120. — Ed. 



to iVflr^-America. 479 

Beavers. Their Tails ferve them for Trouels, and their Teeth 
for Axes, their Paws fupply the place of Hands, and their 
Feet ferve inftead of Oars: In fine, they make Banks of 4 or 
500 Paces in length, of 20 Feet in heighth, and 7 or 8 in thick- 
nefs, in the fpace of 5 or 6 Months, though there are not 
above a Hundred at moft that Work upon them. 1 I muft 
obferve here by the by, that the Savages, out of a fcruple of 
Confcience, never break thefe Banks, but only bore a hole 
through them, as I fhall fhow you hereafter. Befides their 
Taleirt of cutting down the Trees, their Art of making them 
fall upon the Water appears to me altogether furprizing; 
for it requires Judgment and clofe Attention to fucceed in it, 
and chiefly to nick the time when the Wind can aflift them to 
make the fall of the [58] Tree more eafie, and to make them 
fall upon their little Lakes. But this is not the fineft Work 
of thefe Animals, that of their Cottages furpaffes all Imagina- 
tion ; for it requires both Skill and Strength to make holes at 
the bottom of the Water, for planting their fix Pofts which 
they take care to place exa&ly in the middle of the Lake : 
Upon thefe fix Pofts they fix their little Houfe, which is built 
in the form of an Oven, and is made up of fat Earth, Herbs 
and Branches of Trees, having three Stories that they may 
mount up from one to the other when the Waters rife by 
Rains or Thaw. The Rafters are of Rufties, and each Beaver 
hath an Apartment to himfelf. They enter into their Cabin 



1 Upon the subject of beaver dams, consult Jes. Rel., i, p. 251 ; ix, pp. 129, 131 ; 
Martin, Castorologia, pp. 75, 76; Wells, "The Beaver," in Harper's Magazine , 
January, 1889. — Ed. m 



480 Some New Voyages 

under Water, thro' a great hole in the firft Floor, which is 
encompafs'd with Afp Wood cut in pieces on purpofe, that 
they may the more eafily drag it into their Cells when they 
have a mind to eat ; for fince it is their common Food, they 
are always fo Provident as to lay up great heaps of it, and 
chiefly during the Autumn, forefeeing that the cold Weather 
will freeze up their Lakes, and keep them fhut up two or 
three Months in their Cabins. 1 

I fhould never make an end if I attempted to give an 
account of all the feveral Artifices of thefe Ingenious Animals, 
the Order fettled in their little Commonwealth, and the Pre- 
cautions they ufe to fecure themfelves from the purfuit of 
other Animals : I fhall only obferve, that all other Animals 
upon Earth, however Strong, Aftive and Vigorous they may 
be, have other Animals which they are aflfraid of; but thefe I 
now fpeak of are not apprehenfive of any danger but only 
from Men, for the Wolves, the Foxes, the Bears, &?c. care not 
for offering to attack them in their Cabines, although they 
have the faculty of Diving; and it is certain it [59] is not 
their Intereft to do it, for the Beavers would defend them- 
felves very eafily with their fharp cutting Teeth ; fo that they 
cannot be infulted but by Land, and 'tis for that reafon they 
never go farther than twenty Paces from the edge of their 
Lake, and always fet Centinels to watch, who cry out to give 
them notice when they hear the leaft noife. 



1 It does not appear to be true that beavers can determine the direction a tree will 
fall ; see Martin, op. ctt., pp. 68-72. Nor do they plant posts to build their lodges ; 
see Hearn's account in Martin, p. 226; also Jes. ReL, ix, pp. 127, 129. — Ed. 



to North- America. 481 

It remains now only that I fhould give an Account of the 
Nature of the Countries where the Beavers are hunted, fome 
of which are defcrib'd in my Map. 1 And firft you muft know, 
that you cannot go four or five Leagues in the Woods of 
Canada, but you meet with a little Beaver-Lake : So that one 
may fay, that all this vaft Continent is a Country for Beaver 
hunting; but this is not what I mean. The Places for Hunting 
that I now fpeak of are a multitude of little Lakes replenfli'd 
with thefe Animals, the diftance of which from one to another 
is inconfiderable. For Inftance, thofe of Saguinan, of L 9 ours 
qui dort, of the River of Puants, are about twenty Leagues in 
length, and in that whole compafs of Ground their are found 
Sixty little Beaver Lakes more or lefs, where a certain number 
of Savages may Hunt in the Winter time. 2 'Tis commonly 
about the end of Autumn that the Savages fet out from their 
Villages in a Canow to go and poft themfelves in the places 
for Hunting, and as they know all the places much better 
than I do the Streets of Quebec, they agree among themfelves, 
as they are Travelling, to allot each Family a certain compafs 
of Ground, fo that when they arrive at the place they divide 
themfelves into Tribes. 3 Each Hunter fixes his Houfe in the 
Center of that Ground which is his Diftridt, as you may fee 



1 For a map of beaver habitat and distribution, see Martin, p. 58. The beaver 
will probably soon become extinct in North America ; even the interesting preserved 
colonies in the Yellowstone National Park, where they can still be studied with com- 
parative ease, suffer a steady depletion at the hands of poachers. — Ed. 

2 See pp. 143, 168, 208, ante. — Ed. 

3 Martin {Castorologia, p. 140) cites instances where the Indians kept with fidelity 
to the bounds of their beaver reserves. — Ed. 

31 



482 Some New Voyages 

defcrib'd in this Cut. There are eight or ten Hunters in each 

Cottage, [60] who have four or five Lakes for their fhare. In 

each Lake there is at leaft one Houfe or Kennel of Beavers, 

and fometimes two or three. After the Huntsmen have built 

their Huts they employ themfelves in laying Traps for Otters, 

Foxes, Bears, Land Beavers and Martens, upon the fides of their 

Lakes ; and when they are fet go very orderly to look after 

them every Day: But above all they are fo Juft, that they would 

choofe rather to die for Hunger than to ftraggle out of the 

Bounds allotted them, or to fteal the Beafts that are taken in 

their Neighbours Traps. They feed well and make merry 

during this Hunting Seafon, which lafts for four Months ; for 

they find more than they have occafion for, of Trouts, Hares, 

Wood-Foul, Bears, and fometimes they meet with Deer and 

Roebucks. 

The Beavers are feldom catch'd by Traps unlefs they put 

in them fome pieces of red Afp* which they love 

A fort of extreamly, and is not eafie to be found. They 
a Ivillow. 

are taken in the Autumn by making a great hole 

under their Banks, by which they drain all the Water out of 

their Lakes, and then the Beavers being left on dry Ground 

the Savages kill them all, except a dozen of Females, and half 

a dozen of Males ; after which they are very exadt in flopping 

up the hole they had made, which they do in fuch a manner 

that the Lake is filPd with Water as before. 

Their way of Hunting in the Winter time when the Lake 

is frozen, is by making holes round the Kennels of the 



to Norths America. 483 

Beavers, upon which they place Nets that reach from one to 
the other, and when they are extended as they fhould be, 
they lay open the Kennels of thefe poor Animals with an Ax ; 
upon which they throw themfelves into the Water, and coming 
to take [61] Breath at thefe Holes, are catch'd in the Nets; 
at this rate not one of them efcapes, but the Savages having 
no mind to extirpate 'em throw back into the Holes, the fame 
number of Beavers, Male and Female, as they ufually do at 
their Hunting in Autumn, as I have already told you. 

They may likewife be kill'd when they Swim upon the 
Water, or when they come Afhore to cut down Trees ; but 
then you mull be very well hid and not ftir, for upon the leaft 
noife that they hear, they throw themfelves into the Water, 
and Dive till they come to their Kennels. This way of Hunt- 
ing is peculiar to Travellers, who finding themfelves lodg'd 
near fome Beaver Lake, endeavour to furprize them, by 
Sculking behind fome Log or fome great Tree till Night 
comes on. 1 

The Savages take alfo other Animals in thefe Beaver- 
Hunting-Countries, by running up and down. I have already 
told you, that they fet Traps, in which Foxes, Wolves, Martens 
and others are catch'd when they bite at the Bait. I have alfo 
explain'd to you the way of making this fort of Traps, in my 



1 On methods of beaver hunting, see Jes. ReL> vi, pp. 299-303 ; Masson, Bour- 
geois, ii, pp. 342-344. On modern methods, consult Wells, " Beaver." The use of 
castoreum as a bait was not adopted until near the close of the eighteenth century, 
and led to new methods of hunting which rapidly reduced the numbers of this animal. 
For the method of preparation of this bait, see frequent references in Original Journals 
of Lewis and Clark Expedition. — Ed. 



484 Some New Voyages 

nth Letter. Thefe Engines do not differ from one another, 
but only in bulk : Thofe for the Bears are the ftrongeft, but 
they are of no ufe till the beginning of Winter ; for then the 
Bears feek out great Trees which are Hollow, where the 
Branches begin to fpread, that they may Neftle in them. 
Many People will hardly believe that thefe Animals can live 3 
Months in fuch Prifons, without any other Food but the Juice 
of their Paws which they fuck continually : And yet the matter 
of Fa6l is undeniably true. But I reckon it yet more ftrange, 
that they are able to climb up to thofe Lurking-Holes, efpe- 
cially at a time when they are fo Fat, [62] that 2 Savages 
conduct them whither they pleafe with Poles, they being 
fcarce able to walk. This I faw 3 or 4 times during the Win- 
ter in 1687, when I Wintered at Fort St. Jofepb ; for the Hurons 
of Gaintfouan brought fome of them off, which enter'd the 
Fort without any relu&ancy. 1 

The Savages make likewife Traps for the Land-Beavers, 
which for the reafon given in my 16th Letter, neftle on the 
Land, like Foxes, Conies and Badgers : And notwithftanding 
that they are purfu'd by the other Beavers, yet they make 
their Dens about the Lakes, Brooks and Rivers. They are 
eafily taken in thefe Traps, efpecially when they are Baited 
with the Head of an Otter: For there is fo great an Antipathy 



1 This Huron appellation has not been certainly identified ; but consult Coyne 
(ed.), "Exploration of the Great Lakes, 1669-70," in Ontario Historical Society 
Records and Papers , iv (Toronto, 1903) , especially the map ; also Jones, l< Identifi- 
cation of St. Ignace II and of Ekarenniondi," in Ontario Archaeological Report, 1903, 
pp. 92-136, particularly the map of Petun Country, p. 113. — Ed. 



to iV r ortb- America. 485 

between thefe 2 forts of Animals, that they are continually at 
War with one another. 1 

The Savages inform'd me, that they faw a great Company 
of Otters Affembled together about the Month of May, who 
had the boldnefs to attack the Beavers in their Huts, but 
were beaten back and driven from the Lake with lofs. They 
added, that a Beaver can defend himfelf againft 3 Otters, by 
the help of his Teeth and Tail. In fine, 'tis certain that the 
Lake Beavers are feldom taken in Traps, unlefs they be Baited 
with fome Afpwood, as I have already obferv'd. I acquainted 
you above that the Savages vifit their Traps every day, and 
carry into their Cottages the Prey that they find catch'd. 
Immediately after that, the Slaves Flea the Beafts that are 
taken, and ftretch out their Skins in the Air, or on the Ice to 
dry them. This Imployment lafts as long as the time of 
Hunting, which ends with the great Thaw ; and then they put 
up their Skins in Bundles, and carry them to the place where 
they left the Canows when they firft came into this Hunting- 
Country. 

[63] Altho the Savages have great reafon to be afraid 
of their Enemies, while they lye difperfed up and down in 
a Country, which is no lefs than 20 Leagues in Compafs, 
as I intimated above ; yet they fcarce ever ufe the Precaution 
of fending out Scouts upon all hands, and for want of it are 
often Surpriz'd, when they leaft think of it. I could relate 
20 fatal Excurfions of the Iroquefe into the Hunting-Countries 

1 On land beavers, see pp. 170-172, ante. — Ed, 



486 Some New Voyages 

I have been (peaking of, in which they cut the Throats of many 
of our Friends and Allies. I did all that I could to per- 
fuade our Allies that their Condu6l was faulty upon this 
occafion, fince they could eafily fecure themfelves from fuch 
Infults, by Building their Cottages at a place where they 
might poll a Guard of Centinels, to watch and difcover any 
Enemies, that might advance to the Frontiers of thefe Hunt- 
ing-Countries. They only made anfwer; that this indeed was 
reafonable, and that it was true, they did not Jleep in fafety for 
want of that Precaution. In fine, they imagine that their Ene- 
mies are bufied in Hunting on their own Coafts; and upon 
that Apprehenfion, are fuch Fools as not to ufe any Precau- 
tion. But this I know, that the Iroquefe take quite another 
Method, having their Scouts and advanc'd Guards, which 
are always in Motion; by which means they are fcarce ever 
difturb'd in their Hunting. Neverthelefs, I think I ought 
not to conclude this Chapter, without giving you an account 
of 2 Attempts wherein the Iroquefe mifs'd of their defign 
to furprize their Enemies, tho they had very good Succefs 
upon many other occafions. 

In the year 1680. The Oumamis and Ilinefe being at Hunt- 
ing near the River Oumamis; a Party of 400 Iroquefe furpriz'd 
them, kilPd 30 or 40 Hunters, and took 300 Prisoners, 
including [64] Women and Children. 1 After they had refted 
a little while, they prepar'd to return Home by fhort Jour- 



1 Evidently this wa9 an episode (although probably with exaggerated numbers) 
occurring in the Ulinois-Iroquois war (1680-82). The Miami were at first reluctant 
allies of the latter, but later complained that they "were daily slaughtered by the 
Iroquois. " See N. Y. Colon. Docs., ix, pp. 162, 177, 192. — Ed. 



to North-America. 487 

neys, becaufe they had reafon to believe that they fhould 
reach their own Villages before the Iltnefe and Oumamis 
could have time to Rally, and give notice of their Difafter 
to fuch of the Nations as were Hunting in remoter Places. 
But they were fo much deceiv'd, that the Iltnefe and Oumamis 
Rallied to the number of 200, and refolv'd to die Fighting 
rather than fuffer their Countrymen to be carried away by 
the Iroquefe. In the mean time, becaufe their Party was not 
an equal Match for the Enemies, they contriv'd a notable 
Stratagem : For after they had well confider'd in what man- 
ner they fhould Attack them, they concluded that they ought 
to follow them at a fmall diftance till it began to Rain. Their 
Projedt fucceeded, and the Heavens feem'd to favour it : For 
while it Rain'd continually one whole day from Morning to 
Night, they fo quicken'd their pace, from the time that the 
Rain begun to fall, that they pafs'd by on one fide at 2 
Leagues diftance from the Iroquefe, and fo got before them 
to lay an Ambufcade in the middle of a Meadow, which the 
Enemy was to crofs in order to reach a Wood, where they 
had a mind to make a halt and kindle great Fires. The 
Iltnefe and Oumamis lying upon their Belly among the Fern, 
waited till the Iroquefe were got into the middle of them 
before they Shot off their Arrows ; and then they Attack'd 
them fo vigoroufly with their Clubs, that the Enemy finding 
their Fire-Arms unferviceable, by reafon that their Prime was 
wet, were fore'd to throw them down on the Ground, and 
defend themfelves with the fame Arms wherewith they were 
Attack'd, (I mean with Clubs.) But as I obferv'd before, 



488 Some New Voyages 

that the [65] Ilinefe are fomething more dextrous and nimble 
than the Iroquefe, fo the latter were forc'd to yield to the for- 
mer, and retreated Fighting till Night came on, after they had 
loft 180 Soldiers. The Fight which lafted but one hour, had 
continued all Night, if the Conquerors had not been afraid, 
left their Countrymen being ftill Bound and left behind 
'em, ftiould be expos'd to fome Surprize in the dark: And 
therefore after they had rejoyn'd them, and feiz'd all the 
Fire-Arms of their Enemies who were fled and difpers'd up 
and down, they return'd into their own Country, without 
taking one Iroquefe, for fear of weakning themfelves. 

The 2d Attempt hapned 3 years after this, in the Hunting- 
Country of the Outagamts ; where the Governor of that Na- 
tion, as I inform'd you in my 16th Letter, gave me 10 Soldiers 
to accompany me to the Long River. The Blow then given 
was after this manner. A Body of 1000 Iroquefe being come 
in their Canows about the end of Autumn, as far as the Bay 
of Mijfifagues, in the Lake of the Hurons, 1 without being dif- 
cover'd, Landed at this place ; and being very numerous, 
march'd up the Country with their Nets, in order to Fifh in 
the little Lakes and Rivers, till the Frofty Seafon fhould come 
on, which hapned a few days after. After the Ice was ftrong 
enough to bear them, they continued their Courfe, coafting 
along the great Lake of the Hurons, till they were 5 or 6 
Leagues below the Fall call'd Saut Sainte Marie, which they 
would not approach to for fear of meeting with fome Coureurs 



1 " Bay of Missisagues" is the present Georgian Bay, off Lake Huron. The 
Huronia of the Jesuit Relations was bounded on the west by this bay. — Ed, 



to North-America. 489 

de bois in the Fort of the Jefuits. Having crofs'd the Bay, 
they judg'd it convenient to make very fliort Journies, for 
fear of being difcover'd. And they were fo cautious as to 
march all in a Row upon the Snow; that if [66] by chance 
any one ftiould difcover their Footfteps, it might be thought 
that they were not above Thirty or Forty at the moft. After 
this manner they TravelPd till the 15th or 20th of February, 
without being perceiv'd, but at laft they had the misfortune to 
be difcover'd by four Sauteurs, who feeing fo great a number 
pafs over a little Lake, run with all fpeed to the Hunting 
Country of the Outagamis to give them notice, notwithftanding 
that the Sauteurs were then at War with the Outagamis. In the 
mean time the Thaw coming on fuddenly contrary to the Ex- 
pectation of the Iroquefe, who reckon'd upon Twenty Days of 
Froft to come, according to the common courfe of the Seafon; 
this made them mend their pace, and look out for the nar- 
roweft and leaft frequented Paffes. The Outagamis were 
mightily perplex'd what courfe to take in this cafe. It was 
certain that they might get back again to their Villages in 
fafety, but then they would be forc'd to abandon their Wives 
and Children, who had not ftrength to run as the Men. In 
fine, after they had held a Council among themfelves, they 
refolv'd to advance as far as a certain Pafs about half a League 
in length and Thirty Paces in breadth, between two little 
Lakes, which way they faw plainly that the Iroquefe were 
oblig'd to pafs. 

The Outagamis being no more than four Hundred thought 
fit to divide themfelves into two Bodies, and it was agreed, 



490 Some New Voyages 

that two Hundred fhould be pofted at the end of a Pafs which 
they fhould Fortifie immediately with a Range of Stakes from 
one Lake to another ; and that the other two Hundred fhould 
go about a quarter of a League off of the other end of the 
Pafs, thro' which the Iroquefe were to march, to the end that 
every one having cut down a Stake they [67] might all run 
quickly in to ftop up that end of the Paffage, and that imme- 
diately after the Iroquefe had entred the Defile, the Scouts ap- 
pointed to obferve their March fhould come and give them 
notice ; all which was punctually put in Execution : For as 
foon as that great Multitude, who induftrioufly pitch'd upon 
the narrow Roads, was entred into this Pafs, the two Hundred 
Outagamis, who were about a quarter of a League to one fide 
of it, run in with all their Might and carried with them a 
fufficient number of Pales to enclofe that little piece of Land 
which was bounded by the two little Lakes, fo that they had 
time enough to fet them up and faften them with Earth, 
before the Iroquefe, being aftonifh'd to find their way block'd 
up at the other end, could return back the fame way, to fee 
themfelves lhut up between two Barricadoes. Now the Sav- 
ages, as I have often told you, are never fo rafh as to attack a 
Redoubt of Fifty Palifadoes, yet thefe Iroquefe were refolv'd 
to venture upon an Attack, and with that view run up with all 
expedition to force the new Barricado ; but they flacken'd 
their pace after the firft difcharge which the Outagamis made 
through the intervalls of the Pales, for they had not time to 
joyn them as they fhould be. The Iroquefe feeing themfelves 
thus fhut up, took the number of the Outagamis to be much 



to North-America. 491 

greater than realy it was. In the mean time the great Queftion 
was, how to get out of this Prifon ? For to throw themfelves 
into the Water and fwim over one of thefe Lakes, was to run 
the hazard of ones Life, befides that one muft be long-winded 
and have a good Heart to fwim over a broad Lake, at a time 
when the Water was cold, the Ice being not quite melted. 
This Confultation gave the Outagamis time to fortifie their 
Barricadoes, and to [68] fend out Scouts who were plac'd at 
a diftance from one another, upon the Banks of thefe two 
Lakes, to knock all on the Head that offer'd to fwim to the 
fhore. 

Notwithftanding all thefe Precautions the Iroquefe found 
out a wonderful Expedient, which was to make Floats of the 
Trees wherewith they were encompafs'd ; but the blows of the 
Ax made too great a noife, which difcover'd their Defign to 
the Outagamis, and therefore they made Canows of Hart-skins 
to run backward and forward upon the two Lakes in the 
Night time. Thefe Boats were made in five or fix Days, 
during which time the Iroquefe fifh'd and catch'd abundance of 
Trouts in the fight of the Outagamis, who could not hinder 
them. After this no body doubted, but they muft crofs one 
of the Lakes, and fight ftoutly when they came to the Landing 
place, in cafe their fecret Navigation was difcover'd. That 
they might the better fucceed in their Defign they made a 
Feint, which had infallibly anfwer'd their end if the bottom of 
the Lake had not been Clay: For about Midnight having 
Sacrific'd Twenty Slaves upon one of the Lakes, whom they 
forc'd to pufh a Float along, they made account to pafs the 



492 Some New Voyages 

other the fame way, making ufe of Poles inftead of Oars : But 
in regard that the Poles funk fo deep into the Clay, that the 
Steerfmen could not pull them out again without great diffi- 
culty, they made but flow difpatch; infomuch that the Outa- 
garnis, that at first were under a miftake in joyning themfelves 
to the Slaves, had time to run to the other Lake, where they 
found the Iroquefe about a Musket-fhot off the Shore. As 
foon as the Iroquefe came to have but three Foot Water they 
threw themfelves into the Water with their Guns cock'd, fuf- 
fering at [69] the fame time the Fire of the Outagarnis, who 
were not above three Hundred, there being Fifty of them left 
to guard each Barricado. 'Tis a wonder the Iroquefe were 
not all cut off in the Landing, for they funk in the Clay up to 
their Knees. 'Tis true, 'twas in the Night time, and for that 
reafon all the Enemy's Fire might not bear upon them. How- 
ever five Hundred of them fell in the Water, and the reft 
having gain'd the Shoar notwithftanding all the oppofition of 
the Outagarnis, attack'd them with fuch Fury that if the Hun- 
dred Men that were left for a Guard to the Barricadoes had 
not run in to their Afliftance upon the firft noife of the Guns, 
the poor Outagarnis were in danger of falling upon the Spot. 
They fought till the break of Day with wonderful fury, and 
that in the greateft Confufion imaginable, being difpers'd up 
and down a Wood, infomuch that feveral were kill'd by their 
own Men, who could not diftinguifh who was who. The Iro- 
quefe were obftinately refolv'd not to yield the Field of Battel, 
out of regard to their wounded Men, and in confideration 
that they would not have the Outagarnis to take the Hair of 



/£/.a. 





Ajai'cun- arpronchina /vn/iu torch to hu twftrtjs 
6ed, tv/v> sn-cfttu/ his offers cover: /terrace ri'ith 
tie Coverlet . 



Ajavaae carruuia a torch to u-tec/zu/e of Jus 
mistrt'fs rv/io shet vs stereo tvci 1 1 to ciJi nit 
/nni6ul>/oivmJout the tin At 








1 Jitt age j tit it ui o; i the foe t oj 
* bed aiic/cotiferttna <vitn Cu 



tf//ier/v/.,,;."i uttfte cCoerofl/v Atitt 



to North- America. 493 

their Dead. .But at laft they were oblig'd to give way, with 
out being purfued, and fled half a League off where they 
rally'd. I was inform'd by feveral Iroquefe fome Years after 
this Engagement happen'd, that thofe who furviv'd the En- 
gagement were for venturing upon a new Brulh; but con- 
fidering that they wanted Powder, and that they were oblig'd 
to return home through the Country of the Sauteurs, or thofe 
who live on the Confines of the great Water Falls, they 
chang'd their Refolution. But after all they were much out 
in not coming to a frelh Engagement ; for being ftill three 
Hundred ftrong they could not but [70] have the better of it, 
for the Outagamis were not fo numerous by one third, having 
loft half their number in that (harp Engagement, not to men- 
tion that of the two Hundred which remain'd there were 
Thirty Wounded. In fhort the Outagamis having intrench'd 
themfelves in the fame place where the Fight was, took care 
in the firft place to drefs the Wounds both of their own Men 
and of their Prifoners; and after taking the Hair off the 
Heads of all their dead Enemies, fent out Scouts to obferve 
the Enemy, after which they return'd home in fafety. 

When the Outagamis arriv'd at their Villages, the firft 
thing they did was a return of Thanks to the four Sauteurs that 
had given them Intelligence of the approach of the Iroquefe. 
They proclaim'd them to be great Matters of War, and pre- 
fented 'em with one half of what they had got at Hunt- 
ing, which amounted to Sixty Thoufand Crowns, pretending 
farther, that thefe four Savages ought to inherit the Beaver 
and other Skins belonging to thofe of the Outagamis that 



494 Some New Voyages 

were kill'd in the Battle. In fine, after entertaining those 
Intelligencers with good Chear, and all the Marks of Honour 
that were poffible in their way, they fent them in a Canow to 
Saut St. Mary, by the way of the Bay of Puantes, with a Guard 
of Fifty Warriors. The Sauteurs refus'd both their Prefents 
and their Convoy, upon the account that the two Nations 
were then at War with one another : But the Outagamis forc'd 
them upon 'em, and 'twas this that procur'd a Peace between 
them at the end of four Months. 1 

This, Sir, as I take it is fufficient to give you an Idea of the 
Hazards that the Savages run at their Beaver Hunting. In 
the mean time, tho' I have but juft made an end of two Mili- 
tary Adventures, yet I allot the very next Chapter [71] for 
an account of their Military Art, in which you'l meet with 
fomethings that will ferve for Diverfion to your felf and 
Entertainment to your Friends. 



1 Lahontan appears to be the only contemporary author who relates this defeat of 
the Iroquois by the Foxes (Outagamis). Allouez speaks of a war between them, 
about 1670; but it is strange that so signal a victory of the French-allied Indians 
should not have been mentioned in the official documents of the period. The story 
would therefore appear to be of doubtful authenticity. — Ed. 



to iVflr^-America. 495 



The Military Art of the Savages. 

THE Savage calPd Rat, whom I have mention'd fo often 
in my Letters, has faid to me feveral times, that the 
only thing in the World that vex'd and difturb'd his Mind 
was the feeing Men wage War with Men. Prithee, my Brother, 
faid he, do but look; our Dogs agree perfectly well with the 
Iroquefe Dogs, and thofe of the Iroquefe bear no Enmity to the 
Dogs that come from France. / do not know any Animal that 
wages War with others of its own Species, excepting Man, who 
upon this fcore is more Unnatural than the Beafts. For my part 
(continues he) / am of the Opinion, that if the Brutes could 
Think and Reafon, and communicate their Thoughts, 'twould 
be an eafie matter for them to extripate the Human Race: For, 
in earneft, if the Bears and Wolves were but capable of forming 
a Republick, who could hinder them to draw together a Body 
of ten or twelve Thoufand, and to fall upon us? If fucb a thing 
fhould happen, what defence can we make? They would fcale 
our Villages with the greateft Facility imaginable, and after the 
pulling down of our Huts devour our felves. Could we in fucb 
a Cafe undertake a Hunting Expedition, without running the 
rifque of being torn in Pieces ? We fhould then be reduced to live 
upon Accorns and Roots, without Arms and without Cloatbs, and 
to run the perpetual hazard of falling into the Clutches of tbefe 



496 Some New Voyages 

Animals. Their Strength and Nimblenefs would fink all Oppo- 
fetion from us, and command us to yield. [72] Let us conclude 
therefore, my dear Brother, that this Reafon which Man boafts 
fo much of is the greateft Inftrument of his Mifery; and that if Men 
were without that Faculty of Thinking, Arguing and Speaking, they 
would not imbarque in mutual Wars as they now do, without any 
regard to Humanity or Sacred Promifes. 

Such, Sir, are the Moral Thoughts of a Savage, who pre- 
tends to Philofophife upon the Cuftom that we have of kill- 
ing Men with Juftice and Honour. The Jefuits do their 
utmoft to remove this Scruple by fuch Reafons as they have, 
as they do upon feveral other Subjects, and the Savages hear 
'em very gravely, but at the fame time they tell 'em that they 
do not underftand 'em. 

The Wars of the Savages are grounded upon the Right 
of Hunting, or of a Paffage upon fuch and fuch Grounds ; 
for their Limits are adjufted, and every Nation is perfectly 
well acquainted with the Boundaries of their own Country. 
Now thefe Americans are as Cruel to their Enemies, as they 
are True to their Allies ; for fome Nations among them ufe 
their Prifoners with the laft degree of Inhumanity ; as I fhall 
fhew you more at large in the Sequel. When the Europeans 
offer to Cenfure the Savages for their barbarous and cruel 
Ufage, they reply very coldly, That Life is nothing, that they 
are not reveng } d on their Enemies by cutting their Throats, but by 
putting them to a long, tedious, /harp and lafting Torture; and 
that Women would be as chearful Warriors as Men, if there 



to North-Kmencz. 497 

were nothing to be fear'd but bare Death. At the Age of Fifteen 
they begin to bear Arms, and lay 'em down at Fifty. If they 
happen to bear Arms fooner or later, 'tis only in the way 
of marauding, for they are not lifted into the number of the 
Warriors. 

[73] The Strength of the Iroquefe lies in engaging with 
Fire-Arms in a Forreft; for they fhoot very dexteroufly; 
befides that they are very well vers'd in making the beft 
advantage of every thing, by covering themfelves with Trees, 
behind which they ftand ftock ftill after they have difcharg'd, 
though their Enemies be twice their Number. But in regard 
that they are more clumfy and not fo clever as the more 
Southern Americans^ they have no Dexterity in handling a 
Club ; and thus it comes to pafs, that they are always worfted 
in the open Field, where the Clubs are the only Weapons ; 
for which Reafon they avoid any Engagement in Meadows 
or open Fields as much as is poflible. 

The Savages never court an Engagement but by way of 
Surprifal, that is, the fide which makes the firft difcovery is 
almoft always fure of having the better of it ; for they have it 
in their choice to make the Attack either in the open Field, 
or in the mod dangerous Defiles or Paffes. 

In the Day time they take all the Precaution in the World 
to cover their March, by fending out Scouts on all Hands, 
unlefs it be that the Party is fo ftrong as to fear nothing ; for 
then, indeed, they March all in a clofe Body. But they are 
as Negligent in the Night time, as they are Vigilant in the 

32 



498 Some New Voyages 

Day ; for they place neither Centries nor Guards at the entry 
of their Camp, and when they go a Hunting or Shooting of 
Beavers, they are equally fecure or carelefs. When I enquir'd 
into the reafon of this bad Difcipline, I was affur'd that the 
Savages did it by way of Prefumption, as reckoning fo much 
upon the Reputation of their Valour, that they imagine their 
Enemies will not be fo bold as to Attack them : And when 
they fend out Scouts in the Day time, that Precaution pro- 
ceeds more [74] from an itch to furprife their Enemies, than 
from the fear of being furpris'd themfelves. 

There are a great many Savage Nations in Canada that 
tremble at the very Name of the Iroquefe, for the latter are a 
brave fort of People ; they are expert Warriors, ready upon 
all Enterprifes, and capable to put them in Execution, with 
all due Dexterity. 'Tis true, they are not fo fprightly as moft 
of their Enemies, nor fo happy in fighting with Clubs ; and 
'tis for that Reafon that they never march but in numerous 
Bodies, and that by flower Marches than thofe of the other 
Savages. In fine, you'l fee in my Lift of the Nations of Can- 
ada, which of 'em are Warlike, and which are only qualify'd 
for Hunting. 

The Savages have a wonderful Talent in furprifing their 
Enemies ; for they can trace the Footfteps of Men and Beafts 
upon Grafs and Leaves, better than the Europeans can upon 
Snow or wet Sand. Nay, which is more, they can diftin- 
guifh with a great deal of Facility between frefh Trafts and 
thofe of longer (landing, and can make a juft Eftimate of the 
number and kind that made them. Thefe Tradts they follow 



to North-Kmenc2L. 499 

whole Days without being miftaken. This I have feen fo 
often with my own Eyes, that there's no room left for the 
leaft doubt upon the matter. 

The Warriors never undertake any thing without the 
Advice of the Ancient Men, to whom they propofe their 
Projedts. Upon a Propofal thus made the old Men meet 
and confult upon it; after which their Speaker walks out 
of the Council-Hut, and with a loud Voice Proclaims the 
Refolution of the Council, that all the Village may have due 
Information of the fame. 

[75] You muft obferve that each Village hath its General 
or Great Head of the Warriors, who in confederation of his 
Valour, Capacity and Experience is proclaim'd fuch by an 
unanimous Confent. 1 But after all, this Title inverts him with 
no Power over the Warriors ; for thefe People are Strangers to 
a Military as well as to a Civil Subordination. Nay, they are 
fo far from it, that if the great Leader fhould order the fillyeft 
and moft pittiful Fellow in his Army to do fo and fo, why 
truly, this fhaddow of a Captain would receive this Anfwer 
from the Centinel, That what he orders another to do he ought 
to do it him/elf. But 'tis fuch an uncommon thing for the 
Leader to ad fo indifcreetly, that I Queftion if there be one 
Inftance of it. However this mutual Independance is of no 
ill Confequence ; for though the great Leader is not inverted 
with Power and Authority, yet they acquiefce entirely in 



1 In most tribes the civil and military government is separate, the war chief being 
from a different clan than the head chief, and usually chosen for ability and valor. 
See Powell, "Wyandot Government," in U. S. Bur. of Eth. Report, 1879-80, 
pp. 59-69; Dorsey, "Omaha Sociology," Ibid, 1881-82, pp. 312-333. — Ed. 



500 Some New Voyages 

what he Propofes. He no fooner opens his Mouth in faying, 
/ think fuch and fuch a thing proper, let's detach Ten or Twenty 
Men, &c. than 'tis put in Execution, without the leaft Oppofi- 
tion. Befides the great Leader there are fome other Leaders 
that Head a certain number of Warriors who follow them out 
of Friendfhip and Refped ; and thefe are not look'd upon as 
Leaders or Commanders by any other than their own Family 
or Followers. 1 

When the old Men think it proper that a Party of 
Warriors lhould take the Field, the Great Leader who always 
affifts at the Council, hath the privilege of making his choice 
whether he'll Head them himfelf, or ftay at home in the Vil- 
lage. If he hath a mind to go himfelf, he orders the Cryer 
of that Nation to make publick Proclamation in all the Streets 
of the Village, That on fuch a Day he gives the Feaft of War 
to thofe who [76] pleafe to be prefent. Then, thofe who have 
a mind to go in that Party, fend their Dirties to the General's 
Houfe on the appointed day, and are fure to be there them- 
felves before noon. When the Company is all gather'd, the 
General walks out to a publick place with his Club in his 
hand, being followed by the Warriours who fit down round 
him. This done, there comes fix Savages, with as many 
Kettle Drums, which make a Clutter, rather than a Warlike 
Sound. 2 Thefe Drummers fit down fquat upon their Tails 



1 There seem to be some traces among the North American Indians of the institu- 
tion of fellowship, or " comitatus" — see Powell, op. cit. y p. 68. Private war parties 
were frequently organized, the instigator becoming leader of the band of his selected 
associates. — Ed. 

2 For an account of Indian drums, see Masson, Bourgeois, ii, pp. 332, 333. — Ed. 



to North- America. 501 

by a Poft fix'd in the Center of the great Ring : And at the 
fame time, the General fixes his Eyes upon the Sun, all the 
Company following his example, and makes his Addreffes to 
the Great Spirit ; after which a Sacrifice is commonly offer'd 
up. When this Ceremony is over, he fings the Song of War, 
the Drummers beating Time to him after their way ; and at 
the end^of every Period, which contains one of his Exploits, 
he knocks againft the Poft with his Club. When he has 
made an end of his Song, each Warriour fings in his turn 
after the fame fafhion, provided he has made a Campagne be- 
fore ; for if he has not, he's doom'd to Silence. This done, 
the whole Company returns to the General's Hutt, where 
they find their Dinner ready for them. 

If the General do's not think it fit to Command the Party 
in Perfon, and choofes to ftay at home ; the Warriours that 
defign to go upon the Party, choofe one of the Under-Leaders 
that I mention'd but now: And the Under-Leader thus chofen, 
obferves the fame Ceremonies of Addrefling the Great Spirit, 
Sacrificing, Singing, and Feafting. The laft Ceremony is con- 
tinued every day till they March out. 

Some of thefe Parties go half way, or three quarters of 
their way in Canows; particularly [77] thofe who live upon 
the Banks of Lakes, as well as the Iroquefe. The Iroquefe have 
this advantage over their Enemies, that they are all Arm'd 
with good Fire-Locks ; whereas the others who ufe thofe En- 
gines only for the Shooting of Beafts, have not above half 
their number provided with 'em: And 'tis for this reafon, 
that the nearer they come to their Enemies Country, the lefs 



502 Some New Voyages 

they fpread out in Hunting or Shooting, efpecially with Fire- 
Arms, the report of which might Alarm the Enemy. When 
they come within thirty or forty Leagues of danger, they give 
over Hunting and Shooting, being afraid to fire their Guns ; 
and content themfelves with the Indian Corn, of which each of 
them carries a Bag of ten pound weight ; and upon which 
they feed, after 'tis mix'd with a little Water without Boiling. 
When the Illinefe, the Outagamis, the Hurons, and the 
Sauteurs wage War with the Iroquefe, and have a mind to make 
a bold Attempt ; if there be but thirty of them, they'll march 
dire&ly up to the end of the Village, prefuming that in cafe 
of a difcovery, they can eafily fave themfelves by their good 
Heels. In the mean time, they have the Precaution to March 
one after another ; and he that comes laft takes care to ftrow 
the Ground with Leaves, in order to cover their footfteps. 
After they have paft the Village, and are got into the Iroquefe 
Country, they run all night ; and in the day time lye flat upon 
their Bellies, in the Copfes and Thickets, being fometimes 
difpers'd, and fometimes all in a Body. Towards the Even- 
ing, or as foon as the Sun fets, they Spring out from their 
Ambufcade, and fall upon every one they meet, without fpar- 
ing either Age or Sex : For 'tis a cuftomary thing with thefe 
Warriours to (hew no Mercy, not to Children and Women. 
After they have finifh'd their Maffacre, and taken [78] the 
Hair off the Heads of the Dead, they have the boldnefs to 
make a Funeral Cry. If they fee any Iroquefe at a diftance, 
they ftrain their Voices to acquaint 'em that they have kill'd 
fome of their Folks, whom they may take care to Bury : That 



to iVtfr^-America. 503 

the Adtion was accomplifh'd by fuch a Leader and fuch a 
Nation. This done, they all betake themfelves to Flight by 
different Roads, and run with their utmoft fpeed till they 
come to a general place of Rendezvous, about thirty or forty 
Leagues off. In the mean time, the Iroquefe do not give 
themfelves the trouble of purfuing them, as being fenfible 
that they are not fo nimble Footed as to overtake 'em. 

If thefe Parties are two or three hundred Men ftrong, 
they'll venture to enter the Village in the Night time ; making 
one or two of their Warriours to Scale the Paliffadoes and 
open the Gates, in cafe they are fhut. But you muft know, 
that the Outaouas^ as well as the other Savages that have not 
fo much Courage and A6Hvity, content themfelves with pur- 
fuing the Iroquefe in the Countries where they Hunt or Fifti: 
For they dare not come within forty Leagues of their Villages, 
unlefs they know of a place of Refuge, in cafe of a difcovery 
or purfuit : And there can be no other Refuge than fome little 
Forts kept up by the French. 

The Savages never take any Prifoners at the Gates of their 
Enemies Villages; by reafon of the Expedition they are oblig'd 
to make in running Night and Day to fave themfelves: 'Tis 
in the Hunting and Fifhing Countries, and in the other places 
that afford them an opportunity of furprizing their Enemy, 
that they take 'em Prifoners : For upon fuch occafions, the 
weaker fide being forc'd to give way, and to maintain a run- 
ning Fight without any Order or Difcipline, [79] while every 
one flies his own way, 'tis not poflible but that the Con- 
querors muft take Prifoners: And there's always fome ftrong 



504 Some New Voyages 

brawny Savages who know how to throw down the Prifoner 
dextroufly, and to bind him in a moment. But there are 
fome of the defeated Parties, who choofe rather to kill them- 
felves than to be took Prifoners ; and others are fo obftinate 
that they muft be Wounded before they can be catch'd. 
As foon as a Savage is Fetter'd, he fings his Death Song, 
after the manner defcrib'd in my 23d Letter. The Iroquefe 
that have the misfortune to be catch'd, have nothing to expe6t 
but fearful Torture, if they fall into the hands of the Oumamis, 
the Outaouas, the Algonkins, and the Savages of Acadia : For 
thefe People are extream cruel to their Prifoners. 1 The leaft 
Puniihment they inflicft upon 'em, is, that of obliging the 
poor Wretches to put their Finger into the mouth of a lighted 
Pipe ; which makes an agreeable diverfion to the Conqueror 
in his Journey home. The other Nations ufe their Prifoners 
with much more Humanity. From hence we may conclude, 
that we ought to make a great difference between the feveral 
Nations of Canada; fome of which are Warlike, others Cow- 
ardly; fome a lively Acftive People, others Heavy and Dull: 
In a Word, the Cafe is the fame in America as it is in Europe, 
where every Nation has not the Virtues or Vices of another. 
For the Iroquefe, and the other Nations that I nam'd along 
with them, burn all their Prifoners; whereas the other Nations 
content themfelves with the keeping of them in Slavery, 
without putting any to Death. 'Tis the firft fort that I mean 
to fpeak of in the three enfuing Paragraphs. 

1 The torture of Indian captives, and the barbarities therein committed, are well- 
known. For early descriptions, see Jes. ReL, i, p. 271 ; iv, pp. 199, 201 ; x, p. 
227. — Ed. 



to North-America.. 505 

[80] As foon as a party of Barbarians approach their own 
Village, they make as many Dead-Cries as they have loft Men; 
and when they come within a Mufquet-Shot of the Village, 
they renew the mournful Tune; and repeat it for a certain 
number of times anfwerable to the number of the flain among 
the Enemies. Then the Youths under fixteen, and above 
twelve years of age, Arm themfelves with Sticks, and make 
a Lane in order to beat the Prifoners, which they put in 
execution as foon as the Warriours have made their entry, 
carrying the Hair of thofe they have flain upon the end 
of their Bows. 

The next day, the old Men meet in Council upon the 
diftribution of the Prifoners, which are commonly prefented 
to fuch Married Women or Maids as have loft Relations in 
the Expedition, and to thofe that want Slaves. After the 
diftribution is adjufted, three or four Young Scoundrels of the 
Age of fifteen, take the Prifoners and conduct them to thefe 
Women or Girles. Now, if the Woman to whom the prefent 
is made, means that the poor Wretch fhould die, fhe gives 
him to underftand that her Father, her Brother, her Hus- 
band, &?c. having no Slaves to ferve them in the Country 
of the Dead, it behoves him to take a Journey thither out 
of hand. If evidence be brought that the poor Slave has 
kill'd either Women or Children in his lifetime, the young 
Executioners lead him to a Woodpile, where he is forc'd 
to undergo the difmal Torments mentioned in my 23d Letter; 
and fometimes fomewhat that is yet more terrible. But if the 
unfortunate Prifoner can make it appear that he only kill'd 



506 Some New Voyages 

Men, they content themfelves with the Shooting of him. 
If the Woman or Girl has a mind to fave the Prifoners life 
(which often happens) fhe takes him by the hand; and [81] 
after conducing him into the Hut, cuts his Bonds and orders 
him Cloaths, Arms, Victuals and Tobacco. This favour is 
ufually accompany'd with thefe words. / have given thee thy 
life, I have knock* d off thy chains, pluck up a good heart, ferve me 
well, be not ill minded, and thou (halt have whereupon to comfort 
thee for the lofs of thy Country and thy Relations. Sometimes the 
Iroquefe Women adopt the Slaves that are prefented to 'em, 
and then they are look'd upon as Members of the Nation. 
As for the Women Prifoners they are diftributed among the 
Men, who are fure to grant 'em their lives. 1 

You muft take notice that the Savages of Canada never 
exchange their Prifoners. 2 As foon as they are put in Chains, 
their Relations and the whole Nation to which they retain, 
look upon 'em as dead ; unlefs it be that they were fo much 
Wounded when they were taken, that they could not poffibly 
kill themfelves. Thefe indeed they receive when they make 
their efcape ; but if the other Prifoners fhould offer to return, 
they would be contemn'd by their neareft Relations, and no 
body would receive 'em. The way of waging War among 
the Savages is fo harfh, that one muft have a Body of Steel to 



1 This custom of adoption of prisoners was one of great value to the white cap- 
tives, and saved the lives of many. See Withers, Chronicles of Border Warfare 
(Thwaites's ed., Cincinnati, 1895), for typical instances. — Ed. 

2 The author means that captives are not exchanged while a state of war persists 
between the tribes. Upon the arrangement of peace, the captives are all returned. 
See Wis. Hist. Colls., xvi, pp. 447-451 ; 465-467. — Ed. 



to North-America. 507 

bear the Fatigues they are oblig'd to undergo. Now if we 
joyn to this inconveniency that of their giving but little Quar- 
ter to one another ; and for the moft part, without any regard 
either to Women or Children, we will not think it ftrange that 
the number of their Warriours is fo fmall, that fometimes one 
Nation can fcarce mufter up a thoufand. 

The Savages are never rafh in declaring War; they hold 
frequent Councils before they refolve upon it, and muft be 
very well affur'd of the fteddinefs of the Neighbouring Na- 
tions, whofe [82] Alliance or Neutrality they require. Befides, 
before they come to fuch a refolution, they make it their bufi- 
nefs to fathom the Minds of fuch Nations as lye remote; to 
the end that they may take juft meafures, by weighing all the 
Confequences ferioufly, and endeavouring to forefee all the 
accidents that may happen. They ufe the Precaution of fend- 
ing Deputies to the People whom they propofe for their 
Allies, to make a narrow inquiry whether their Old Men have 
Heads well turn'd for Government, and for the giving of 
judicious and feafonable Counfels to their Warriours, whofe 
number they want to know as well as their Valour and Ex- 
perience. The next thing that they have in view, is the 
carrying on of the Trade of Skins with the French without 
difadvantage, and the Hunting of Beavers in Winter without 
expofing themfelves to danger. After all, they make this pro- 
pofal to their Allies ; that they fhall engage not to put an end 
to the War till their Enemies are intirely deftroy'd, or elfe 
oblig'd to abdicate their Country. 

Their way of declaring War is this: They fend back to 



508 Some New Voyages 

the Nation that they have a mind to quarrel with, a Slave of 
the fame Country ; with orders to carry to the Village of his 
own Nation an Axe, the Handle of which is painted red and 
black. Sometimes they fend three or four fuch Slaves, oblig- 
ing them to promife before hand, that they fhall not bear 
Arms againft them ; and commonly this Promife is religioufly 
obferv'd. 1 

It remains only to acquaint you how they make Peace ; you 
muft know that the Savages never think of an Accommoda- 
tion till after a long War : But when they are fenfible that 'tis 
their Intereft to come to it they detach five, or ten, or fifteen, 
or twenty Warriors, to make a [83] Propofal to the Enemies. 
Thefe Commiflioners go fbmetimes by Land, and fometimes 
in Canows, and always carry the great Calumet of Peace in 
their Hand, much after the fame manner as a Cornet carries 
his Standard. I fet forth in my Seventh Letter what a pro- 
found Veneration all the Savages of Canada have for this 
famous Pipe. There was not one Inftance of their Violating 
the Sacred Rights of this Pipe before the Embaffy of Chevalier 
Do, at which time they took occafion to revenge the Bufinefs 
of the Rat) as I gave you to know in my Seventeenth Letter. 
If the Commiflioners of Peace march by Land, as foon as they 
arrive within a Musket-fhot of the Village, fome young Men 
march out and poft themfelves in an oval Figure. This done, 
the Commiflioner that carries that great fign of Peace, makes 
up towards them, finging and dancing the Calumet Dance ; 



1 This is a rare custom, the object being to surprise the enemy before he is pre- 
pared for war. — Ed. 



to iVflr^-America. 509 

which he continues to do while the old Men meet in Council. 
If the Inhabitants of the Village do not think it proper to 
accept of the Propofal of Peace, their Orator or Speaker 
makes a Harangue to the Envoy that carries the Calumet, 
who upon that goes and rejoins his Company. This Pacifick 
Retinue is regal'd with Prefents of Tents, Corn, Meat and 
Fifh; but at the fame time they are acquainted that they muft 
depart their Country the next Day. If on the other Hand, 
the old Men agree to the conclufion of a Peace, they march 
out and meet the Commiffioners, and after conducting the 
whole Company into the Village, provide them with extra- 
ordinary good Lodgings and a plentiful Table, during the 
whole courfe of the Negotiation. When the Commiffioners 
come by Water they fend out a Canow while the reft lye by ; 
and as foon as this Canow comes near to the Village, the In- 
habitants [84] of the Village fend out another to meet it, and 
condud the Propofer of Peace to their Habitations, where the 
Ceremonies are perform'd after the fame manner as before. 1 
This great Calumet is likewife made ufe of by the Confederate 
Savages, that demand Paffage thro' the Country of their 
Allies, whether by Land or Water, in purfuance of Warlike 
or Hunting Expeditions. 



1 The person of an envoy was sacred among Indian tribes, and to maltreat one 
was the worst of insults. Dorsey describes similar ceremonies as persisting among the 
Omaha. U. S. Bur. of Eth. Report, 1881-82, p. 368. —Ed. 



510 Some New Voyages 



A View of the Heraldry, or the Coats of Arms 
of the Savages. 

AFTER a perufal of the former Accounts I fent you of the 
Ignorance of the Savages with reference to Sciences, 
you will not think it ftrange that they are unacquainted with 
Heraldry. The Figures you have reprefented in this Cut 
will certainly appear ridiculous to you, and indeed they are 
nothing lefs : But after all you'l content your felf with excuf- 
ing thefe poor Wretches, without rallying upon their extrava- 
gant Fancies. They make ufe of the Blazoning reprefented 
in the Cut, for the following Purpofes. 1 

When a Party of Savages have routed their Enemies in 
any Place whatfoever, the Conquerours take care to pull the 
Bark off the Trees for the height of five or fix Foot in all 
Places where they flop in returning to their own Country ; 
and in honour of their Vi&ory paint certain Images with Coal 
pounded and beat up with Fat and Oyl. Thefe Pictures, 



1 Lahontan's somewhat absurd and distorted description of Indian heraldry prob- 
ably arose from his misconception of the institution of totemism — a primitive super- 
stition by which each gens or clan of a tribe adopted some animal as a totem or 
mythical protector. One of the earliest uses of the term " totemism" was by John 
Long (see Thwaites, Early Western Travels, ii, pp. 123-125), but there is now a 
large literature upon this subject. See M'Lennan, Patriarchal Theory ; Lang, Myth, 
Ritual, and Religion (London, 1887); Brinton, Myths of 'New World ; and sociolog- 
ical articles in U. S. Bur. of Eth. Reports, already cited. — Ed. 



to North- America. 511 

which are defign'd and explain'd in the infuing Chapter, con- 
tinue upon the peeFd Tree for ten or twelve [85] Years, as if 
they were Grav'd, without being defac'd by the Rain. 

This they do to give all Paffangers to underftand what 
Exploits they have done. The Arms for the Nation, and 
fometimes a particular Mark for the Leader of the Party, are 
painted in Colours upon thefe ftrip'd Trees ; and for that 
reafon 'twil not be improper to fubjoin a Defcription of 'em. 

The five Outaouafe Nations have a Sinople or Green Field, 
with four Elks in Sable Canton'd, and looking to the four 
Corners of the Efcutcheon, there being a heap of Sand in the 
middle. 

The Illinefe bear a Beech Leaf with a Butterfly Argent. 

The Nadoueffis or Scioux have a Squirrel Gules, gnawing a 
Citron Or. 

The Hurons bear a Beaver Sable, fet fquat upon a Beaver 
Kennel Argent, the midft of a Pool or Lake. 

The Outagamis bear a Meadow Sinople, crofs'd by a wind- 
ing River Pale, with two Foxes Gules at the two Extremities 
of the River, in Chief and Point. 

The Pouteoutamis call'd Puants bear a Dog in Argent, fleep- 
ing upon a Mat d } Or. Thefe People obferve the Rules of 
Blazoning lefs than the other Nations. 

The Oumamis have a Bear Sable, pulling down with his two 
Paws a Tree Sinople moffy, and laid along the Efcutcheon. 

The OucabipoueSj call'd Sauteurs, have an Eagle Sable, 
pearching upon the top of a Rock Argent, and devouring an 
Owl Gules. 



5i2 Some New Voyages 



[86] An Explication of the Hieroglyphicks that jiand oppo- 
fite to the Letters ABCDEFGHIK, being 
placed at the fide of a Column reprefenting the Foot 
of a fuppos'd Tree. 

IF we take the Word Hieroglyphick in its natural Senfe, 'tis 
only a Reprefentation of Sacred and Divine Objedls, Cal- 
culated according to the Ideas we have of 'em. But without 
any regard to the Etymology, I choofe rather to make ufe of 
the common Priviledge of an infinity of Authors, in bellowing 
the Title of Hieroglyphick Symbols upon all thefe Figures 
that correfpond to the following Letters. 1 

A. Oppofite to this Letter you fee the Arms of France^ 
with an Ax above. Now the Ax is a Symbol of War among 
the Savages, as the Calumet is the Bond of Peace : So that 
this imports, that the French have taken up the Ax, or have 
made a Warlike Expedition with as many tens of Men as there 
are Marks or Points round the Figure. Thefe Marks you 
fee are Eighteen in number, and fo they fignifie an Hundred 
and eighty Warriors. 



1 On the subject of picture writing see Mallery, " Picture- Writing of American 
Indians" in U. S. Bur. of Eth. Report, 1888-89; 7 es > R*l»> Ixvii, P- 227; 
Hoffman, " On Native Indian Pictographs," in Catholic University Bulletin (Wash- 
ington), April, 1897. — Ed. 



to North- America. 513 

B. Over againft this Letter you meet with a Mountain 
that reprefents the City of Monreal, (according to the Sav- 
ages) and the Fowl upon the Wing at the top fignifies De- 
parture. The Moon upon the Back of the Stag fignifies the 
firft Quarter of the July Moon, which is calFd the Stag-Moon. 

[87] C. Oppofite to this Letter you defcry a Canow, 
importing that they have travel'd by Water as many Days 
as you fee Huts in the Figure, i. e. 21 Days. 

D. Upon the fame parallel with this Letter you fee a 
Foot, importing that after their Voyage by Water they 
march'd on Foot as many Days as there are Huts defign'd ; 
that is, feven Days Journeys for Warriors, each Days Journey 
being as much as five common French Leagues, or five of 
thofe which are reckon'd to be twenty in a Degree. 

E. By this Letter you perceive a Hand and three Huts, 
which fignifie that they are got within three Days Journey 
of the Iroquefe Tfonnontouans, whofe Arms are a Hut with two 
Trees leaning downwards, as you fee them drawn. The Sun 
imports that they were juft to the Eaftward of the Village : 
For you muft obferve, that if they had march'd to the Weft- 
ward the Arms of thefe Savages had been plac'd where the 
Hand is, and the Hand had been turn'd and plac'd where 
you now fee the Hut with the two Trees. 

F. Oppofite to this Letter you perceive twelve Marks, 

fignifying fo many times ten Men, like thofe at the Letter A. 

The Hut with the two Trees being the Arms of the Tfonnon- 

touans (hews that they were of that Nation ; and the Man in a 

lying pofture fpeaks that they were furpris'd. 
33 



5 H Some New Voyages 

G. In the row which anfwers to this Letter there appears 
a Club and eleven Heads, importing that they had kill'd 
eleven Tfonnontouans, and the five Men ftanding upright upon 
the five Marks fignifie, that they took as many times ten 
Prifoners of War. 

[88] H. Oppofite to this Letter you fee nine Heads in an 
Arch, the meaning of which is, that nine of the Aggreffors 
or of the Vi6torious fide (which I fuppofed to be French) 
were kill'd ; and the twelve Marks underneath fignifie that as 
many were Wounded. 

/. Oppofite to this Letter you fee Arrows flying in the 
Air, fome to one fide and fome to the other, importing a 
vigorous Defence on both fides. 

K. At this Letter you fee the Arrows all pointed one way, 
which fpeaks the worfted Party either flying or fighting upon 
a Retreat in diforder. 

The meaning of the whole is in a few Words as follows. 
An Hundred and eighty French Men fet out from Monreal 
in the firft Quarter of the July Moon, and fail'd twenty one 
Days ; after which they march'd thirty five Leagues over Land 
and furpris'd a hundred and twenty Tfonnontouans on the Eaft 
fide of their Village, eleven of whom were KilPd, and fifty 
taken Prifoners; the French fuftaining the lofs of nine Kill'd 
and twelve Wounded, after a very obftinate Engagement. 1 



1 The drawings accompanying thi9 description are evidently the work of a 
European quite unacquainted with Indian pictographs. For correct drawings of 
Indian representations of expeditions and battles, see illustrations in Mallery, op. 
cit. f pp. 552-556 ; Thwaites, "Atlas of Maximilien^ Voyage," in Early Western 
Travels, xxv. — Ed. 



to North- America, 515 

This may ferve to prompt you and me to return thanks 
to God for vouchfafing to us the means of expreffing our 
Thoughts by the bare ranking of twenty three Letters, and 
above all of Writing in lefs than a Minute a Difcourfe that 
the Americans cannot Decypher with their impertinent Hiero- 
glyphicks in the fpace of an Hour. Though the number of 
thofe dark Symbols is of no large extent, yet 'tis very per- 
plexing to an European; for which Reafon I have contented 
my felf in learning only fuch of 'em as are mod Effential ; 
the knowledge of which [89] I owe to Neceffity more than 
Curiofity. I could fend you others that are as extravagant 
as thefe I now fend you ; but confidering that they will be of 
no ufe to you, I choofe to fave my felf the labour of drawing 
them upon Paper, and you the trouble of looking 'em over. 

/ am. Sir, 

Tours, &c. 



[90] A 

CONFERENCE 

OR 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN THE 

AUTHOR and AT>ARIO, 

A Noted Man among the 

SAVAGES. 

CONTAINING 

A Circumflantial View of the Cufloms and Humours 
of that People. 

Lahon- T AM infinitely well pleas'd, my dear Adario, that 
tan. X I have an opportunity of reafoning with you 
upon a Subjedl of the greateft Importance ; for my bufinefs 
is to unfold to you the great Truths of Chriftianity. 

Adario, I am ready to hear thee, my dear Brother, in order 
to be inform'd of a great many things that the Jefuits have 
been Preaching up [91] for a long time ; and I would have 
us to difcourfe together with all the freedom that may 
be. If your Belief is the fame with that of the Jefuits, 



518 Some New Voyages 

'tis in vain to enter into a Conference; for they have enter- 
tain'd me .with fo many Fabulous and Romantick Stories, 
that all the credit I can give 'em, is to believe, that they 
have more Senfe than to believe themfelves. 

Lahontan. I do not know what they have faid to you; but 
I am apt to believe that their Words and mine will agree very 
well together. The Chriftian Religion is a Religion that Men 
ought to profefs in order to obtain a place in Heaven. God 
\hath permitted the difcovery of America , meaning to fave all 
Nations that will follow the Laws of Chriftianity. 'Twas his 
Divine Pleafure that the Gofpel ftiould be Preach'd to thy 
Nation, that they may be inform'd of the true way to Para- 
dife, the bleffed Manfion of good Souls. 'Tis pity thou wilt 
not be perfwaded to make the beft ufe of the Favours and 
the Talents that God hath beftow'd upon thee. Life is fhort; 
the Hour of our Death is uncertain, and Time is precious. 
Undeceive thy felf therefore, as to the imagin'd Severity 
of Chriftianity, and imbrace it without delay, regrating the 
lofs of thofe Days thou has fpent in Ignorance, without a due 
fenfe of Religion and Worfhip, and without the knowlege of 
the true God. 

Adario. How do you mean, without the Knowledge of the 
True God? What! are you mad? Do'ft thou believe we are 
void of Religion, after thou haft dwelt fo long amongft us? 
Do'ft not thee know in the firft place, that we acknowledge 
a Creator of the Univerfe, under the Title of the Great Spirit 
or Mafter of Life ; whom we believe to be in every thing, 
and to be unconfin'd to Limits? 2. That we own the Immor- 



to North- America. 519 

tality of the Soul. 1 [92] 3. That the Great Spirit has fur- '' 
nifh'd us with a Rational Faculty, capable of diftinguifhing 
Good from Evil, as much as Heaven from Earth ; to the end 
that we might Religiousfly obferve the true Meafures of Juftice 
and Wifdom. 4. That the Tranquility and Serenity of the 
Soul pleafes the Great Mafter of Life : And on the other 
hand, that he abhors trouble and anxiety of Mind, becaufe 
it renders Men Wicked. 5. That Life is a Dream, and Death 
the Seafon of Awaking, in which the Soul fees and knows the 
Nature and Quality of all things, whether vifible or invifible. 
6. That the utmoft reach of our Minds can't go one Inch 
above the Surface of the Earth : So that we ought not to cor- 
rupt and fpoil it by endeavouring to pry into Invifible and 
Improbable things. This my dear Friend is Our Belief, and 
we a6l up to it with the greateft Exaftnefs. We believe that 
we fhall go to the Country of Souls after death ; but we have 
no fuch apprehenfion as you have, of a good and bad Manfion 
after this Life, provided for the good and bad Souls ; for we 
cannot tell whether every thing that appears faulty to Men,* 
is fo in the Eyes of God. If your Religion differs from 4 
ours, it do's not follow that we have none at all. Thou 
knoweft that I have been in France, New-York and Quebec; 
where I Study'd the Cuftoms and Doctrines of the Englifli 
and French. 2 The Jefuits allege, that out of five or fix hun- 

*0n Indian religious beliefs, see pp. 435, note 1, ante. — Ed. 

2 For a brief biography of Adario see p. 149, note 2, ante. Lahontan is the 
only contemporary authority who speaks of the travels of this interesting savage ; 
but a letter of 1691 mentions a Huron who is about to pass into France, and wishes 
to see the king. Possibly this may have been Adario, the most noted of his tribe. 
See Canadian Archives, 1885, p. Ivi. — Ed. 



520 Some New Voyages 

dred forts of Religions, there's only one that is the good 
and the true Religion, and that's their own ; out of which 
no Man fhall 'fcape the Flames of a Fire that will burn his 
Soul to all Eternity. This is their allegation : But when they 
have faid all, they cannot offer any Proof for it. 

[93] Lahontan. They have a great deal of reafon, Adario, 
to affert that there are bad Souls ; for without draggling far 
for a Proof, they need only to give thine for an Inftance. He 
that is unacquainted with the Truths of the Chriftian Religion, 
is not capable of receiving a Proof. All that thou haft offer'd 
in thy own defence is prodigious Madnefs. The Country of 
Souls that thou fpeakeft of is only a Chimerical Hunting 
Country : Whereas our Holy Scriptures inform us of a Para- 
dife, Seated above the remoteft Stars, where God does actually 
refide ; being incircled with Glory, and the Souls of all the 
Faithful Chriftians. The fame very Scriptures make mention 
of a Hell, which we take to be Situated in the Centre of the 
Earth : And in which the Souls of all fuch as reject Chrif- 
tianity, as well as thofe of bad Chriftians, will burn for ever 
without Confumption. This is a Truth that you ought to 
think of. 

Adario. Thefe Holy Scriptures that thou quoteft every 
foot, as well as the Jefuits, require that mighty Faith which the 
Good Fathers are always teazing us with. But this can be 
nothing but a perfuafion : To believe, Imports no more than 
to be perfuaded of a thing: and to be perfuaded or convinc'd, 
is to fee a thing with one's eyes, or to have it recommended 
by clear and folid Truths. Now how can I have that Faith, 



to North-America. 521 

fince thou canft neither prove a tittle of what thou fay'ft, nor 
fhew it me before my eyes. Believe me, my Friend ; do not 
wrap up thy Mind in obfcurity; give over the vifionary 
thoughts of thefe Holy Scriptures, or elfe let us make an end 
of our Conferences upon that Head; for according to our 
Principles, we muft have probability in every thing we admit 
of. What Ground haft thou for the Deftiny of the good 
Souls, who are [94] lodg'd with the Great Spirit above the 
Stars, or the Fate of the bad ones that fhall burn for ever in 
the Centre of the Earth ? Thou canft not but charge God 
with Tyranny, if thou believeft that he Created but one fingle 
Man, with intent to render him eternally Miferable amidft the 
Flames in the Centre of the Earth. I know you'll pretend, 
that the Holy Scriptures prove that Great Truth : But grant- 
ing it to be fo, then the Earth muft be of eternal Duration ; 
which the Jefuits deny. That flaming Place muft therefore 
ceafe to be, when the Earth comes to be confum'd. Befides, 
how canft thou imagine, that the Soul which is a pure Spirit, a 
thoufand times fubtiler and lighter than Smoak ; how canft 
thou imagine, I fay, that this airy Being fhould move to the 
Centre of the Earth, contrary to its natural tendency? 'Tis 
more likely, it fhould mount upwards and fly to the Sun, 
where you may fix that fiery place more reafonably ; efpecially 
confidering that this Star is much bigger, and infinitely more 
hot than the Earth. 

Lahontan. Hark ye me, my dear Adario, thy Blindnefs is 
fcrew'd up to an extremity, and the hardnefs of thy Heart 
makes thee reject this Faith and thefe Scriptures ; the truth 



522 Some New Voyages 

of which does eafily appear, if one would but lay afide Preju- 
dices : For you have nothing to do but to caft your Eye upon 
the Prophecies contain'd in the Sacred Pages ; which beyond 
all difpute were Written before they came to pafs. This 
Sacred Hiftory is confirm'd by Heathen Authors, and by the 
Monuments of greateft Antiquity, and thofe the moft uncon- 
tefted that paft Ages can afford. Believe me, if thou wouldft 
but reflect upon the manner in which the Religion of Jefus 
Chrift was Eftablifh'd in the World, and the Change that it 
wrought; if thou hadft but a juft view of the [95] Characters 
of Truth, Sincerity and Divinity that fhine in the Scriptures: 
In a word, if thou didft but enter into the particulars of our 
Religion ; thou wouldft fee and be fenfible, that its Doctrines 
and Precepts, its Promifes and Threats, are not chargeable 
with any abfurdity ; nor with any ill defign, or any thing that 
runs contrary to our natural Sentiments : And that nothing 
is more fuitable to right Reafon, and the Principles of Con- 
fcience. 

Adario. This is the fame Stuff that the Jefuits have had up 
above a hundred times. They will have it, that fome five or 
fix thoufand years ago, all that is fince come to pafs, was then 
unchangeably decreed. They lay down the way in which the 
Heavens and the Earth were Created ; and tell you, that Man 
was made of the Duft of the Earth, and the Woman out of 
one of his Ribs, as if God had not made her of the fame 
Stuff ; that a Serpent tempted this Man in a Garden of Fruit- 
Trees to eat of an Apple, which was the occafion that the 
Great Spirit put his own Son to Death, on purpofe to fave 



to North-America. 523 

all men. If I fhould fay that thefe advances have a greater 
appearance of fabuloufnefs than of truth, you would clofe 
upon me with Reafons fetch'd from your Bible : But accord- 
ing to your own words, this Scripture of yours had not always 
a Being; the invention of it bears the date of fome three 
thoufand years ago ; and 'twas not Printed till within thefe 
four or five Centuries. Now, confidering the divers events 
that come round in the courfe of feveral Ages, one muft 
certainly be very credulous in giving credit to fo many idle 
Stones as are huddled up in that great Book that the Chrif- 
tians would have us to believe. I have feen fome of the Books 
that the Jefuits Writ of our Country ; and thofe who knew 
how to read [96] 'em, explain'd to me the fenfe of 'em in the 
Language that I fpeak ; but I found they contain'd an infinity 
of Lyes and Fictions heap'd up one above another. Now, if 
we fee with our eyes that Lyes are in Print, and that things 
are not reprefented in Paper as they really are ; how can you 
prefs me to believe the Sincerity of your Bible that was Writ 
fo many Ages ago, and Tranflated out of feveral Languages 
by ignorant Men that could not reach the juft Senfe, or by 
Lyars who have alter'd, interpolated, or pared the Words 
you now read. I could mention feveral other Objections, 
which in the end will perhaps influence thee in fome meafure, 
to own that I have fome reafon to confine my Belief to fuch 
things as are vifible and probable. 

Lahontan. Poor Adario, I have laid before thee, the cer- 
tainty and evidence of the Chriftian Religion ; but inftead of 
being convinc'd, thou look'ft upon my Proofs as Chimerical, 



524 Some New Voyages 

and offereft the moft foolifh Reafons in the World. You quote 
the Falfhoods Written in the Accounts of your Country that 
you have feen ; as if the Jefuits who Writ 'em could not have 
been impos'd upon by thofe who fupplied them with fuch 
Memoirs. 1 You muft confider, that thefe Defcriptions of 
Canada are Bawbles that cannot come into the Ballance with 
the Books that treat of Sacred things ; fuch things as a hun- 
dred different Authours have Writ of, without contradidting 
one another. 

Adario. How do you mean, without contradicting one an- 
other? Why! That Book of Holy Things, is not it full of 
Contradi&ions? Thefe Gofpels that the Jefuits fpeak of, do 
not they occafion difcord between the French and the Englijh f 
And yet if we take your word for it, every Period of that 
Book fprung from the Mouth [97] of the Great Spirit. But 
if the Great Spirit mean'd that his Words fhould be under- 
ftood, why did he talk fo confufedly, and cloath his Words 
with an ambiguous Senfe? One or two things muft follow 
from this advance. If he was born and died upon the Earth, 
and made fpeeches here, why, then his difcourfes muft be loft; 
for he would certainly have fpoke fo diftindly and plainly, 
that the very Children might conceive his meaning. Or, if 
you will have the Gofpels to be his genuine Words, and 
contain nothing but what flow'd from him ; why, then he muft 
have come to raife Wars in the World inftead of Peace ; which 
cannot be. The Englijh have told me that tho' their Gofpels 
contain the fame Words with the French, yet there's as great 



1 Upon the early Jesuit histories of Canada, see p. 412, note 1, ante. — Ed. 



J \'u a c/ts comejrim. the ftctse Co 
//;rj' :z thei:ifc/t;s into u /aAe 




-■itneiifttviu trout /or r/u enter tain- 



'£%&£} Jffi* £?V "^ 



*te* 



# 



I hi vurt/incr putcc for 



iAzntino 



to ifor^-America. 525 

a difference between their Religion and yours, as between 
Night and Day. They fay pofitively that their's is the beft ; 
and on the other hand, the Jefuits allege, that the Religion of 
the Englifli, and of a thoufand Nations befides, is good for 
nothing. If there be but one true Religion upon Earth, who 
muft I believe in this cafe ? Who is it that do's not take their 
own Religion to be the moft perfect ? How can the Capacity 
of Man be able to fingle out that Divine Religion from 
amongft fo many more, that lay claim to the fame Title? 
Believe me, my dear Brother, the Great Spirit is Wife, all his 
Works are perfect ; 'tis he that made us, and he knows per- 
fectly well what will become of us. 'Tis our part to ad freely, 
without perplexing our thoughts about future things. He 
order'd thee to be Born in France, with intent that thou 
fhouldeft believe what thou neither feeft nor conceiveft ; and 
me he has caus'd to be Born a Huron, to the end that I lhould 
give credit to nothing but what I underftand, and what my 
reafon teaches me. 

[98] Lahontan. Reafon teaches thee to be a Chriftian, and 
yet you refufe to be fuch. If you would, you might under- 
ftand the Truths of our Gofpel, in which all things are of a 
piece, and nothing can be found that favours of Contradi&ion. 
The Englijh are Christians as well as the French ; and tho' thefe 
two Nations have fome difference upon the fcore of Religion, 
it only relates to fome Paffages of Scripture, that they under- 
ftand different ways. The firft and principal point that occa- 
fions fo many difputes, is this. The French believe that fince 
the Son of God faid, that his Body was in a morfel of Bread ; 



526 Some New Voyages 

we are bound to take it for a truth, in regard that he could 
not lie. He told his Apoftles that the Bread was truly his 
Body, and that they ought to eat it, and to perpetuate that 
Ceremony in Commemoration of him. Accordingly this Pre- 
cept is obferv'd ; for fince the death of that God made Man, 
the Sacrifice of the Mafs is perform'd every day among the 
French, who make no doubt of the real prefence of the Son of 
God in that bit of Bread. But the Englifti pretend, that the 
Son of God being in Heaven, cannot be Corporally prefent 
upon Earth, and that his words infuing upon that Inftitution 
(the repetition of which would be tedious to thee) are evi- 
dence that he is only Spiritually prefent in the Bread. This 
is all the difference between them and us ; for as to the other 
Points, they are fo trifling, that we could eafily come to an 
accommodation upon 'em. 

Adario. I perceive then, the words of the Son of the 
Great Spirit are chargeable with felf-contradi6lion or obfcu- 
rity; for as much as you and the Englijh difpute about his 
meaning with fo much heat and animofity : And this feems to 
be the principal Spring of the hatred that thefe two [99] 
Nations bear to one another. But that is not what I infift 
upon. Doft thou hear, my Brother; both the one and the 
other muft needs be fools, in believing the Incarnation of a 
God; confidering the ambiguity of thofe Difcourfes mention'd 
in your Gofpel. There you meet with an infinity of things 
which are too grofs to come from the Mouth of fo perfed a 
Being. The Jefuits affure us, that the Son of the Great Spirit 
declar'd that he fincerely defired the Salvation of all Men. 



to iVflr^-America. 527 

Now, if he defires it, doubtlefs it muft come to pafs; and yet 
they are not all Sav'd neither, for as much as he has faid ; 
many are calVd, but few are cbofen. This I take to be a plain 
Contradiction. The Fathers reply, that God does defire the 
Salvation of men, but upon the condition that they defire it 
themfelves. But after all, we do not find that God has added 
that Claufe, for if he had, he had not fpoke fo pofitively. But 
the Myftery lies here. The Jefuits have a mind to pry into 
the Secrets of the Almighty, and to affume what himfelf did 
not preterfd to, for he mention'd no fuch condition. The cafe 
is the fame, as if the great Captain General of the French 
fhould give notice by his Viceroy, that 'tis his pleafure that 
all the Slaves of Canada fhould be Tranfported to France, 
where they might all grow rich ; and thereupon the Slaves 
fhould make anfwer that they will not go, becaufe that great 
Captain cannot defire it unlefs they be of the fame mind 
themfelves. Is not it true, my Brother, that their anfwer 
would be ridicuFd, and they would be forc'd to go to France 
againft their will? Can you offer anything to the contrary? 
In a word, the Jefuits have commented to me upon fo many 
Expreflions in that Book that contradid one another, that 
I'm amaz'd to find that they ftill call it the [ioo] Holy Scrip- 
tures. 'Tis written there, that the firft man whom the Great 
Spirit made with his own Hands, did eat of a forbidden Fruit, 
for which both he and his Wife were punifh'd, as being equally 
Criminal. Now, let's fuppofe the Puniftiment inflidted upon 
the account of the Apple to be what you will; this poor 
Man had nothing to complain of, but that the Great Spirit 



528 Some New Voyages 

knowing that he would eat of it, fhould have Created him to 
be Miferable. But let's confider the cafe of his Pofterity, who 
according to the Jefuits are involv'd in his Overthrow : Are 
the Children Blame-worthy for the Gluttony of their Father 
and their Mother? If a man Murder'd one of our Kings, 
muft the Punifhment reach to his whole Generation ; to 
Fathers, Mothers, Uncles, Coufins, Sifters, Brothers, and 
all his other Relations? Shall we fuppofe, therefore, that 
when the Great Spirit gave this Man a Being, he knew not 
what he might do after his Creation? But that cannot be. 
But let's fuppofe again that all his Pofterity were accomplices 
of the Crime, (which at the fame time is an unjuft fuppofition) 
do's not your Scripture make this Great Spirit to be a Being 
of fuch Mercy and Clemency, that his Loving-Kindnefs to 
the Human Race leaves all Conception far behind it? Is not 
he fo great and fo puiffant, that if all the Spirits of men that 
either are, or have been, or are to come, were united in one 
Perfon, 'twould be impoflible for that Mighty one to com- 
prehend the leaft tittle of his Omnipotence? Now, fince his 
goodnefs and mercy are fo tranfcendent, can't he by one 
Word vouchfafe a Pardon to that man and all his defen- 
dants? And fince he is fo powerful and great, how improb- 
able is it, that fuch an Incomprehenfible Being fhould turn 
himfelf into a Man, and not only live a miferable Life, [101] 
but die an infamous Death ; in order to expiate the Sin of 
fo mean a Creature, that is as much or more beneath him, as 
a Flie is beneath the Sun and the Stars ? Where would that 
infinite Power be then? What ufe would it be of to him, 



to North- America. 529 

and what advantage would he make of it ? To my mind, to 
believe the debating of the Divine Nature, fpeaks a doubt 
of the Incomprehenfible reach of his Omnipotence, and an 
extravagant Prefumption with refped to our felves. 

Lahontan. Do'ft not thou perceive, my dear Adario, that 
the Great Spirit being fo powerful, and intitled to the Per- 
fections you have nam'd, the Sin of our Primitive Father muft 
by confequence be the moft enormous and heinous Crime that 
imagination it felf can reach ? To make the cafe plain by an 
example ; If I beat one of my Soldiers, there's no harm done, 
but if I offer'd an affront to the King, my Crime would be 
inflam'd to the laft degree, and be juftly accounted unpardon- 
able. Now, Adam having offer'd a piece of Indignity to the 
King of Kings, we come into the lift of his Accomplices, as 
being part of his Soul ; and confequently the Divine Juftice 
requires fuch a Satisfa&ion as the Death of his Son. 'Tis 
true, God could have Pardon'd us with one Word ; but for 
reafons that I cannot give you eafily to underftand, he was 
gracioufly pleas'd to live and to die for all Mankind. I own 
that he is merciful, and that he might have acquitted Adam 
the fame day that the Crime was committed ; for his Mercy 
is the ground of all the hopes we have of Salvation : But if he 
had not refented Adam } % Difobedience, his Prohibition had 
been a jeft. Had he overlook'd it, the confequence would 
have been that he did not fpeak ferioufly; and upon that 
foot, all the World would have had a juft Plea for doing what 
they pleas'd. 

[102] Adario. Hitherto thou proveft nothing; and the 
34 



530 Some New Voyages 

more I fift the pretended Incarnation, I find it the lefs prob- 
able. What ! To think that this Great and Incomprehenfible 
Being, the Creator of the Earth, of the Seas, and of this vaft 
Firmament, ftiould be capable of debafing himfelf fo far, as 
to lye nine Months Prifoner in the Bowels of a Woman, and 
expofe himfelf to the miferable Life of his Fellow Sinners, 
that Writ the Books of your Gofpel; to be Beaten, Whip'd, 
and Crucify'd like an unhappy Wretch ; this, I fay, is what 
can't enter into my thoughts. 'Tis written, that he came 
upon the Earth on purpofe to die there, and with the fame 
Breath 'tis faid that he was afraid to die. This implies a 
Contradiction two ways. In the firft place, if his defign was 
to be Born, in order to die, he ought not to have dreaded 
death ; for, what is the ground of the fear of death ? The 
dread of death proceeds from this, that one do's not know 
what will become of 'em when they depart this Life. But he 
was not unacquainted with the place he was bound for, fo 
that he had no reafon to be afraid. You know very well that 
we and our Wives Poyfon our felves frequently, in order to 
keep one another Company in the Regions of the dead, when 
one or t'other is fnatch'd away. 1 So you fee plainly the lofs 
of Life does not fcare us, tho' at the fame time, we are not 
certain what courfe our Souls will fteer. What anfwer canft 
thee give me upon this Head ? In a fecond place ; Since the 
Son of the Great Spirit was invefted with a Power equal to 
that of his Father; he had no occafion to pray his Father to 



1 Suicide by poisoning was not infrequent among Indians, although not deemed 
commendable. See Jes. ReL, index, caption Suicide. — Ed. 



to iVtfr^-America. 531 

fave his Life, in regard that he was able to guard off Death 
by his own Power ; and that in praying to his Father he pray'd 
to himfelf. As for my part, my dear Brother, I can't have any 
notion [103] of what thou wouldeft have me to Conceive. 

Lahontan. I find you were in the right of it in telling me 
but now, that your capacity would not reach an inch above 
the furface of the Earth. Your way of Reafoning is fufficient 
Proof of your Affertion. Now that I have heard this, I do 
not think it ftrange that the Jefuits have fo much trouble in 
Preaching to you, and giving you to underftand the Sacred 
Truths. I play the fool in reafoning with a Savage, that is 
not capable of diftinguifhing a Chimerical Suppofition from 
a certain and a (landing Principle, or a Confequence well 
drawn from a falfe Inference. To give you an inftance. 
When you fpake of this truth, that God was willing to fave 
all men, and at the fame time that they are but few who are 
fav'd ; you charg'd a Contradiction upon it, and at the fame 
time there's no fuch thing in the cafe : For he defires to fave 
all men that wifti their own Salvation, by obferving his Law 
and his Precepts ; that is, fuch as believe his Incarnation, the 
truth of the Gofpels, the rewards provided for the Good, the 
punifhments prepared for the Wicked, and a State of Futurity. 
But in regard that few fuch will be found, all the reft are 
doom'd to the everlafting Flames of that Fire that you make 
a jeft of. Take care you are not one of the latter Clafs. If 
it Ihould happen fo, 'twould be a great trouble to me, becaufe 
thou art my Friend. You will not fay then, that the Gofpel 
is cramm'd with Contradictions and Chimaera's ; you will not 



532 Some New Voyages 

then require grofs Proofs for all the Truths I have laid before 
you ; you'll repent in earneft of having branded our Evan- 
gelifts for weak and filly Tale-tellers. But, the worft is, 'twill 
then be too late. Prithee, think of all this, and be not fo very 
obftinate; [104] for, in earneft, if thou doft not yield to the 
unconteftable Reafons that I produce for our Myfteries, I will 
never fpeak to thee as long as I live. 

Adario. Ha ! my Brother, do not trouble thy head, I do 
not pretend to provoke thee by offering my Reafons. I do 
not hinder thee to believe the Gofpels : I only beg the favour 
that thou'lt fuffer me to doubt the truth of all the Advances 
thou haft made. Nothing can be more natural to the Chrift- 
ians than to believe the Holy Scriptures, upon the account, 
that from their Infancy they have heard fo much of 'em, that 
in imitation of fo many People Educated in the fame Faith, 
they have 'em fo much Imprinted upon their Imagination, 
that Reafon has no farther influence upon their Minds, they 
being already prepoffefs'd with a firm belief of the truth of 
the Gofpels. To People that are void of Prejudice, fuch as 
the Hurvns, there's nothing fo reafonable, as to examine things 
narrowly. Now, after frequent reflexions for the courfe of 
ten years upon what the Jefuits Preach'd of the Life and 
Death of the Son of the Great Spirit, I muft tell you, that all 
my Hurons will give thee fourty reafons to the contrary. As 
for my own part, I have always maintain'd that if 'twere pofli- 
ble that the Great Spirit had been fo mean, as to defcend to 
the Earth, he had fhewn himfelf to all the Inhabitants of the 
Earth ; he had defcended in Triumph, and in publick view, 



to North- America. 533 

with Splendour and Majefty ; he had rais'd the dead, reftor'd 
fight to the blind, made the lame to walk upright, cur'd all 
the difeafes upon the Earth : In fine, he had fpoke and com- 
manded all that he had a mind to have done, he had gone 
from Nation to Nation to work thefe great Miracles, and to 
give the fame Laws to the whole World. Had he done fo, 
we had been all of the fame [105] Religion, and that great 
Uniformity fpread over the face of the Earth, would be a 
lafting Proof to our Pofterity for ten thoufand years to come, 
of the truth of a Religion that was known and receiv'd with 
equal approbation in the four Corners of the Earth. But 
inftead of that Uniformity, we find five or fix hundred Reli- 
gions, among which that Profefs'd by the French, is according 
to your Argument the only true one, the only one that is 
Good and Holy. In fine, after I had reflected a thoufand 
times upon thofe Riddles that you call Myfteries, I was of the 
Opinion that a Man muft be Born beyond the great Lake 1 ; 
that is. he muft be an Englijh-man or a French-man, that can 
form any Idea of 'em. For when they allege that God, who 
can't be reprefented under any Figure ; could produce a Son 
under the Figure of a Man : I am ready to reply, that a Wo- 
man can't bring forth a Beaver ; by reafon that in the courfe 
of Nature, every Species produces its like. Befides, if before 
the coming of the Son of God all men were devoted to the 
Devil, what reafon have we to think that he would affume the 
Form of fuch Creatures as were lifted into the Service of the 



1 " Beyond the Great Lake " was a common rendition of the Indian term for the 
land across the ocean. — Ed. 



534 Some New Voyages 

Devil. Could not he take upon him another Form, which 
might be finer and more pompous than the Humane ? That 
he might, is the more reafonable, fince the third Perfon of 
that Trinity (which is fo inconfiftent with Unity) affum'd the 
Form of a Dove. 

Lahontan. Thou haft drawn up a Savage fort of a Syftem 
by inventing Chimaera's that are nothing to the purpofe. 
Give me leave to tell thee once more, that I fee 'tis in vain 
for me to attempt to convince thee by folid Reafons, in regard 
that thou art not capable of underftanding 'em. I muft there- 
fore refer you to the Jefuits. [106] In the mean time, I have 
a mind to give you to underftand one thing that's very plain, 
and that will fall within the Verge of your Genius, viz. That 
'tis not the bare believing of the Great Truths of the Gofpel 
which you deny, that is fufficient to conduct one to the Man- 
fions of the Great Spirit. Over and above the belief, one 
muft inviolably obferve the Precepts of the Law that is there 
deliver'd ; that is to fay, one muft not adore any thing but 
the Great Spirit alone, one muft not work on the days allotted 
for folemn Prayer, one muft honour their Father and their 
Mother, and not only avoid the embraces of Girles, but be 
free from an inclination that way, unlefs it be upon the foot 
of Marriage. 'Tis requir'd for this end, that we fhould not 
kill or promote the killing of any one; that we fhould not 
fpeak ill of our Brethren, or utter Lies, or touch another 
man's Wife, or incroach upon the property of our Brethren. 
We muft go to Mafs on the days appointed for that purpofe 
by the Jefuits, and Faft fome days of the week. For tho' 



to North-America. 535 

you believ'd the Holy Scriptures as much as we do, unlefs 
you obferve the Precepts they contain, you'll be doom'd to 
everlafting Flames after your death. 

Adario. So, my dear Brother, this is what I expecfted. 
'Tis a long time fince I knew all that thou haft now fet forth ; 
and indeed I take it to be a very reafonable Article in your 
Gofpel. Nothing can be jufter and more plaufible than thofe 
Precepts you fpeak of. You aft difingenuoufly in faying that 
unlefs the Commandments are punctually obferv'd and prac- 
tis'd, the giving Faith and Credit to the Gofpel will not avail: 
For, pray, how comes it about that the French believe the 
Gofpel, and yet make a jeft of its Precepts. This I take to 
be a manifeft Contradiction : [107] For, in the firft place, as 
to the Adoration of the Great Spirit, I fee no fign of it in 
your Actions, fo that your Worfhip confifts only in Words, 
and feems to be Calculated to cheat us. To give you an in- 
ftance ; do not you fee every day that your Merchants when 
they bargain with us for Beaver-Skins, do commonly fay, my 
Goods coft me fo much, 'tis true as I Adore the Almighty ; I 
lofe fo much by you, 'tis as true as that God is in Heaven. 
But I do not find that they offer him the Sacrifice of their 
mod valuable Goods, as we do after we have bought 'em 
from them, when we burn 'em before their Faces. In the 
next place, as for Working on the days fet apart for Worfhip, 
I do not find that you make any difference between Holy- 
Days and Work-Days ; for I have frequently feen the French 
bargain for Skins on your Holy-Days, as well as make Nets, 
Game, Quarrel, beat one another, get Drunk, and commit a 



536 Some New Voyages 

hundred extravagant A6Hons. In a third place, touching the 
Veneration we have for our Fathers or Anceftours, 'tis but 
feldom that you follow their Counfel ; you fuffer 'em to die 
for Hunger, you leave 'em and take up feparate Habitations ; 
you are always ready to ask fomething of 'em, but never to 
give 'em any thing ; and if you expedl any thing from 'em, 
you wifh for their death ; or at leaft you expedt it with impa- 
tience. In the fourth place, as for Continence with refped to 
the tender Sex ; who is it among you (abating for the Jefuits) 
that has ever afted up to it ; do not we fee every day that 
your Youths purfue our Daughters and our Wives, even to 
the very Fields, with a defign to inveigle 'em by prefents ? 
Do not they Roll every Night from Hutt to Hutt in our 
Village, in order to debauch 'em ? And doft not thee know 
how many fuch Adventures [108] there are among thy own 
Soldiers? In the fifth place, to touch upon the head of Mur- 
der; 'tis fuch a common thing among you, that upon the 
leaft accident, you clap your Hands to your Swords and 
Butcher one another. I remember when I was at Paris, Peo- 
ple were run thro' in the Streets every night ; and upon the 
Road between Paris and Rochel, I was told that I was in danger 
of my life. Sixthly. Lying and Slandering your Brethren, is 
a thing that you can as little refrain as Eating and Drinking. 
I never heard four French-Men Converfe together, without 
fpeaking ill of fome body ; and if you knew what I have heard 
'em fay publickly of the Viceroy, the Intendant, the Jefuits, 
and of a thoufand People that you know, not excepting your 
Self, you would be convinc'd that the French are very well 



to North-America. 537 

vers'd in Defamations. And as to the bufinefs of Lying, I 
affirm it for a truth, that there is not one Merchant in this 
Country that will not tell you twenty Lies in felling the worth 
of a Beaver's Skin in Goods ; not to mention the lies they 
invent in order to defame their Neighbours. In a feventh 
place, to adjuft the Point of ingaging with Married Women, 
we need no other Proof than to hear your Difcourfes when 
you have got a little Drink in your Heads ; then you'll enter- 
tain us with a great many fine Stories of your Adventures that 
way. But to go no farther, pray reckon up how many Chil- 
dren are got upon the Wives of the Conreurs de Bois during 
their Husbands abfence. ? In the eighth place, to come to the 
Article of not encroaching upon our Neighbours Property, 
how many Thefts or Robberies have you feen committed 
among the Coureurs de Bois fince you came to this Country? 
Have not the Thieves been taken in the Fa6t, and punifh'd 
accordingly? Is not it fuch a common [109] thing in your 
Towns, that one can't walk in the Streets in the Night time 
with fafety, and that you dare not leave your Doors open? 
In the ninth place, as for going to your Mafs to hear fome 
Words fpoke in an unknown Language ; 'tis true the French 
go commonly to it, but their defign in going is to think of 
other things than Praying. At Quebec, the Men go to Mafs 
to pick up the Women, and the Women take the fame Method 
to make Alignments with the Men. I have feen fome of 
your Women call for Cufhions, for fear of fpoiling their 
Stockins and Petti-coats ; then they fit down upon their 
Heels, and pull a Book out of a great Bag, which they open 



538 Some New Voyages 

and hold in their hands, tho' at the fame time, they look more 
at the Men they like, than at the Prayers contain'd in the 
Book. Moft of your French People take Snuff when they're 
at Mafs ; they talk, and laugh ; and fing rather for Diverfion 
than out of Devotion. And, which is yet worfe; I know that 
during the time of Mafs, feveral Women and Girles take the 
opportunity of purfuing their Amours, by flaying at home all 
alone. As for your Fafts, I muft fay they are very comical : 
You eat of all forts of Fifh till you burft again, you cram down 
Eggs and a thoufand other things, and yet you call this faft- 
ing. In fine, my dear Brother, you French Folks do all of 
you make large Pretenfions to Faith, and yet you are down- 
right Infidels ; you would fain pafs for wife People, and at the 
fame time you are fools ; you take your felves to be Men of 
Senfe, but at the bottom Ignorance and Prefumption is your 
true Charafter. 

Lahontan. This conclufion, my dear Brother, favours too 
ftrong of the Hurons, in being apply'd to all the French in 
general. If your reprefentation were juft, ne're a one of 'em 
would go to [no] Paradife. But we know that there are 
Millions of 'em in the State of the Bleffed, whom we call 
Saints, and whofe Images you fee in our Churches. I own 
that there are but few of the French who have that true Faith 
that's the only Principle of Piety ; feveral make a Profeflion 
of believing the Truths of our Religion, but this belief is 
wanting as to its due ftrength and livelinefs. I own that the 
greateft part of thofe who know the Divine Truths, and make 
a Profeflion of believing them, do a6l quite contrary to what 



to North- America. 539 

Faith and Religion injoyns. I cannot deny the juftnefs of 
your Charge, in alleging a Contradiction upon 'em. But 
you muft confider, that fometimes Men fin againft the light 
of their own Confcience, and fome Men lead wicked Lives 
that have receiv'd good Inftru6tion. Now this may be owing 
either to their want of Attention, or to the force of their Paf- 
fions, and the tyes they lye under to their Temporal Intereft. 
Man being full of Corruption is fway'd to evil by fo many 
various motives, and by fo ftrong an inclination that way, that 
'tis hard for him to renounce it, without an abfolute Neceffity; 
Adario. When you fpeak of Man, you ought to fay 
French-Man; for you know that the Pafiions, the Intereft, 
and the Corruption we fpeak of, are not known among us : 
But that is not the Point I would be at. Do ye hear, my 
Brother, I have talk'd frequently to the French of all the 
Vices that reign among them ; and when I have made it out 
that they have no regard to the Laws of their Religion, they 
confefs'd that 'twas true, and that they faw it plainly and 
knew it to be fo ; but at the fame time they faid 'twas impofli- 
ble for them to obferve thofe Laws : Upon that I ask'd 'em 
if they did not believe then that their Souls would be doom'd 
to eternal Flames; and receiv'd this anfwer, [in] That the 
Mercy of God is fo great, that whoever trufts in his Goodnefs fhall 
be Sav'd ; that the Gofpel is a Covenant of Grace, in which God 
condefcends to the Condition and Wcaknefs of Man, who is tempted 
by fo many violent and frequent A ttraSives, that he is forc y d to give 
way ; and that this World being a place of Corruption, there can 
be no Purity in Corrupt Man, unlefs it be in the Country where 



540 Some New Voyages 

God refides. This, I think, is a lefs rigid fort of Morality than 
that of the Jefuits, who fend us to Hell for a Trifle. Your 
French Men have reafon to fay, That 'tis impojfible to keep that 
Law ; fo long as the diftindion of Meum and Tuum is kept 
up among you : You need no other proof for this than the 
Example of all the Savages of Canada^ who notwithftanding 
their Poverty are Richer than you, among whom all forts of 
Crimes are committed upon the fcore of that Meum and 
Tuum. 

Lahontan. I own, my dear Brother, that thou'rt in the 
right of it ; and I can't but admire the Innocence of all the 
Savage Nations : And 'tis for that reafon that I earneftly wifh 
they were acquainted with the San6Uty of our Scriptures, I 
mean, that Gofpel that thou and I have talk'd fo much of. 
There's nothing wanting but that to render their Souls Eter- 
nally Happy. All of you live fo Morally that you will then 
have but one Difficulty to furmount before you arrive at 
Paradife; I mean, that Cuftomary Fornication that prevails 
amongft the fingle perfons of both Sexes, and the liberty that 
the Men and the Women take in breaking their Marriage 
Bonds, in order to a Reciprocal Change, and a frefh Choice. 
For the Great Spirit has faid, That Death and Adultery are the 
only two things that can break that indijfoluble Bond. 

[112] Adario. We fhall take another Opportunity of Dif- 
courfing more particularly of that great Obftacle that thou 
findeft to ftand in the way of our Salvation. In the mean 
time, I'll content my felf with giving thee one Reafon with re- 
fpedt to one of the two Points that are mention'd, that is, the 



to North- America. 541 

liberty that Batchelors and Girls take with one another. In 
the firft place the young Warrior will not Embarque in a 
Married State till he has made fome Campaigns againft the 
Iroquefe, and took fome Slaves to ferve him either in the Vil- 
lage, or at Hunting, Fifhing, &c. and till he is perfectly well 
vers'd in the Exercifes of Hunting, Shooting and Fifhing. 
Farther, he will not enervate himfelf by the frequent Exercife 
of Venery, at a time when his Strength enables him to ferve 
his Nation in oppofing their Enemies ; not to mention that 
he will not expofe a Wife and Children to the affliction of 
feeing him kill'd or taken Prifoner. Now, considering that 
'tis impoffible for a young Man to abftain from the Embraces 
of Women altogether, you muft not Cenfure the Youths for 
keeping Company with young Women once or twice a Month, 
nor the Girles for receiving their Addreffes. Without that 
Liberty our Batchelors would be liable to great Diforders, as 
Experience has taught me, with reference to feveral that ob- 
ferv'd a fevere Continence to make 'em run the better; and 
befides, our Daughters and young Women would be there- 
by tempted to a mean fubmiffion to the Embraces of Slaves. 
Lahontan. Believe me, my dear Friend, God will not be 
fatisfied with thefe Reafons ; he orders you either to Marry, 
or to entertain no Commerce with the Sex: For everlafting 
Flames are entail'd upon one amorous thought alone, upon 
[113] one longing wifh, one bare defire to fatisfie the brutifh 
Paflion. When thou fattens upon Continence a Character of 
Impoffibility, thou giveft God the lie, for he injoyns nothing 
but what is poffible. 'Tis in our Power to moderate our 



542 Some New Voyages 

Paffions when we will ; there's nothing requir'd towards that 
but our Good-will and Confent. All Men that believe in 
God ought to obferve his Precepts, and to refift Temptations 
by the affiftance of his Grace which never fails 'em. To 
inftance in the Jefuits, Doft not thee think that when they, fee 
a pretty Girle in thy Village, they feel the Influence of Temp- 
tation as well as other Folks ? Queftionlefs they do ; but they 
call in God to their Affiftance ; they pafs the whole courfe of 
their Lives, as well as all our Priefts, without Marrying, or- 
having any criminal Converfation with the tender Sex. When 
they put on the black Habit they make folemn Promifes to 
God to that Effect. They wage an uninterrupted War with 
all Temptations, during the whole courfe of their Lives, and 
are oblig'd to reach the Kingdom of Heaven by Violence. 
When one therefore is apprehenfive of falling into that Sin, he 
can't avoid it better than by throwing himfelf into a Cloyfter. 
Adario. I would not for ten Beaver Skins lye under an 
obligation of filence upon this Head. In the firft place, that 
fet of Men are guilty of a Crime in taking an Oath of Con- 
tinence, for God having created an equal number of Men and 
Women, he mean'd that both the one and the other fhould 
be imploy'd in the Propagation of Mankind. All things 
in Nature multiply, whether Trees, Plants, Birds, Beafts, or 
Infe&s. They repeat this Leffon to us every Year, and fuch 
Perfons as do not follow it are ufelefs to the World, they do 
good to none but themfelves, [114] and rob the Earth of the 
Corn that feeds 'em, in regard that they convert it to no ufe, 
according to your Principles. A fecond Crime that they are 



to North- America. 543 

guilty of confifts in violating their Oath (which they do 
but too commonly) and making a Jeft of their Word and 
Promifes to the Great Spirit. This Crime draws on one 
or two more, whether in Converfing with young Women or 
with N other Men's Wives. If they keep Company with Girles, 
'tis manifeft that by Deflowring 'em they rob 'em of what 
they can never return ; I mean, they rob 'em of that Flower, 
which the French have fuch an itch to gather themfelves 
when they Marry, and which they look upon as fo valuable 
a Treafure, that a Robbery of that Nature is reckon'd a 
Crime of the higheft demerit. Another Crime they are 
guilty of confifts in ufing the abominable precaution of doing 
things by halves to prevent Impregnation. If they court the 
Embraces of Married Women, they ftand accountable for 
the Adultery, and for the Injury that the Woman does to 
her Husband. Farther; the Children fpringing from thofe 
Adulterous Embraces are Robbers and Interlopers, that live 
upon the Means of a pretended Father and half Brethren. 
In a fifth place, they are chargeable with the unlawful and pro- 
phane Methods that they take to ftifle their Brutifh Paffion ; 
for they being the Perfons that Preach your Gofpel, they give 
a quite different turn to things in private to what they do pub- 
lickly, or elfe they could never find a Salvo for their Libertinifm 
which the Vulgar take for a Crime. Thou art fenfible, my 
Friend, that I fpeak juftly upon the Point, and that in France 
I have feen fome of thefe Black Priefts that would not hide 
their Talent under their Caps when they came into the Com- 
pany of Women. [115] Give me leave, my dear Brother, to 



544 Some New Voyages 

tell thee once more that 'tis impoffible for thefe Men to be 
without the Converfation of Women at a certain Age, and 
far lefs to be free from amorous Thoughts. As for that 
Refiftance and thofe vigorous Efforts thou fpeak'ft of, that's 
but a frivolous and poor Plea, as well as their idle pretence of 
avoiding the Temptation by being mew'd up in a Convent. 
If Convents are Antidotes againft Temptation, why do you 
fuffer the young Priefts and Monks to Confefs Maids and 
Married Women ? Is that the way to avoid the Temptation ; 
or is it not rather a plain contrivance for a handfome Oppor- 
tunity? What Man in the World can hear the Amorous 
Intrigues of the confeffing Ladies, without being Tranfported, 
efpecially if he be one of thofe who injoy Health, Youth and 
Strength, who live without Fatigue or Working, and who en- 
courage Nature with the moft Nourifhing Liquors and Food, 
feafon'd with I do not know how many Drugs and Spices, 
that are fufficient to inflame the Blood without any other 
Provocation? For my part, after a due Confederation of 
thefe Articles, I fhall not think it ftrange if there be not 
fo much as one Ecclefiaftick in the Paradife of the Great 
Spirit. And pray, how have you the Confidence to maintain 
that this Cattel turn Monks and Priefts in order to avoid 
Sin, when you know they are addidted to all manner of Vice ? 
I have been inform'd by French Men of very good Senfe, that 
thofe who enter into Priefts or Monks Orders among you, 
have no other view than to live at their eafe, without the 
fatigue of Work, and without the difquieting fears of dying 
for Hunger or being oblig'd to venture their Lives in the 



to TVar^-America. 545 

Army. If you would have your Priefts good Men, they 
ought [116] to be all Married, and to live with their refpedt- 
ive Families; or elfe they fhould be all above Sixty Years 
of Age. Then indeed they might Confefs, Preach and vifit 
Families without Scruple, and Edifie all the World by their 
Example. Then, I fay, 'twould not be in their Power to 
feduce Maids or married Women; their Age and their Con- 
dud would fpeak them Wife, Moderate and Confiderate ; and 
at the fame time the Nation would fuftain no lofs by their 
being fet apart for Divine Service, in regard that after Sixty 
Years of Age they are not fit for Warlike Exploits. 

Lahontan. I told you before, that you ought not to charge 
the whole World with the Mifdemeanours of a few. 'Tis true 
there are fome who take upon 'em Monks or Priefts Orders, 
with no other defign than to fubfift handfomely ; and unmind- 
ful of the devoirs of their Miniftry, think of nothing but 
calling in their yearly Rents. I own that fome of 'em are 
Drunkards, and extravagant in their A&ions and Words; 
that among fome of 'em who are wedded to their Intereft, 
Sordid Avarice bears the Afcendant; that fome are Proud 
and Implacable in the way of Refentment ; that fome of 'em 
are Whore-mafters, Debauchees, Swearers, Hypocrites, Igno- 
rant Fellows, Worldly minded, Backbiters, &c. But their 
number is but very inconfiderable with refped to the whole ; 
for the Church receives none but the wifer and graver fort of 
Men, of whom they have fome moral Affurances, and whom 
they try and endeavour to know throughly before they admit 
'em : Tho' after all their precaution it can't be otherwife but 

85 



546 Some New Voyages 

that they muft be impos'd upon fometimes ; and indeed this 
is a great Misfortune, for when the Conduit of Ecclefiafticks 
is blacken'd with fuch [117] Vices, it raifes the greateft Scan- 
dal that can be ; the Sacred Word is polluted in their Mouths, 
the Laws of God are contemn'd, Divine Things are difre- 
fpe&ed, the Office of the Miniftry is debas'd, Religion in 
general is trampled under Foot, and the People ftiaking off 
the due regard to Religion give way to an uncontroul'd 
Licencioufnefs. But in the mean time you ought to confider, 
that in fuch Cafes we take our Meafures from their Dodtrine 
more than from the Example of fuch fcandalous Ecclefiafticks; 
we are not upon the fame lay with you who have not the necef- 
fary Difcretion to diftinguifh the Doftrine from the Example, 
and to remain unfhaken by the Scandalous Lives of thofe you 
faw at Paris, whofe Converfation and Sermons were far from 
being of a piece. In fine, all that I have to fay upon this 
Head, turns upon this, that the Pope having given exprefs 
Orders to our Bifhops not to confer the Ecclefiaftical Dignity 
upon any unworthy Objedt, they take all the Precaution imag- 
inable, and at the fame time ufe their utmoft Efforts to reclaim 
thofe who have already gone affray. 

Adario. I am furpris'd to find that you give all along fuch 
fuperficial Anfwers to all the Objections I have offer'd. I 
perceive that you court Digreffions, and always depart from 
the Subjedt of my Queftions. But fince 'tis fo, I'll come to 
the Pope then; and with reference to that Point, you muft 
know that one Day at New Tork an Englijh-man gave me to 
know that the Pope was fuch another Man as he or I was ; 



to A^r^-America. 547 

but tha| he fent every body to Hell that he Excommunicated ; 
that he released whom he pleas'd from a fecond place of Tor- 
ment, that it feems you have forgot, and open'd the Gates of 
the Great Spirit's Country to fuch Perfons as he lik'd, as 
being [118] intrufted with the Keys of that upper Region. 
If all this be true, methinks all his Friends lhould kill them- 
felves when he expires, that they may croud in along with him 
when he opens the Gates for himfelf; and if it be in his 
Power to fend Souls to Hell, 'tis a dangerous thing to be 
rank'd in the number of his Enemies. At the fame time, 
I was inform'd by that Englijh Gentleman, that this Papal 
Authority had no footing in England, and that the Englijh 
ridicul'd it. Now, prithee, tell me whether this Englijh Chris- 
tian fpoke the truth, or not. 

Labontan. The unfolding of this queftion would run me 
out to fo wide a compafs of things, that I fhould not have 
done, not in fifteen days. The Jefuits will fatisfie you upon 
that point better than I can pretend to. However I'll take 
the liberty to fay one thing, namely: That the Englijh Man 
rally'd and jeer'd while he mention'd fome things that were 
true. He had a great deal of reafon to perfuade you that 
thofe of his Religion, did not depend upon the Pope for their 
Paffage to Heaven, becaufe that lively Faith which you and I 
fpoke of before, conduces 'em thither without any regard to 
that holy Man. The Son of God is willing to fave all the 
Englijh by his Blood and Merits. And thus you fee that they 
are happier than the French, of whom God has requir'd good 
Works that they fcarce ever mind, and who are doom'd to 



548 Some New Voyages 

everlafting Flames, if their evil Actions run counter to the 
above mentioned Commandments of God ; tho' at the fame 
time, both they and we are of the fame Faith. As to the 
fecond flaming place, which we call Purgatory, they are ex- 
empted from the neceflity of paffing thro' it ; becaufe they'd 
rather choofe to continue upon Earth thro' all the Ages of 
Eternity without vifiting Paradife, than to Burn [119] for 
fome thoufands of years by the way. They are fo tender 
upon this point of Honour, that they'll never accept of any 
Prefent at the purchafe of bearing fome Baftinadoes. Accord- 
ing to their Notions of things, they do not take a man to be 
oblig'd by the giving him Mony and hard Ufage at the fame 
time : This is rather an affront in their way. But the French, 
who are lefs nice upon the point ; they take it for a mighty 
favour, that they're allowed to burn for an infinity of Ages in 
Purgatory, upon the apprehenfion that by that means, they will 
be better acquainted with the true value of Heaven. Now for 
as much as the Pope is the Creditor of the Englijh, and 
demands Reftitution of his own, they are far from asking his 
Pardons ; that is, his Paffports for removing to Heaven with- 
out touching at Purgatory; for if they did, he would order 'em 
a Pafs to that fort of Hell, which they pretend was never 
made for 'em. But we French Folks that pay him good round 
Annuities, being acquainted with his Wonder- Working Power, 
and affedted with a fenfe of our Sins againft God ; we, I fay, 
that lye under fuch Circumftances, muft of neceflity have 
recourfe to the Indulgences of that holy Man, in order to 
obtain a Pardon that he has Power to grant ; for if one of us 



to North-America 549 

be Condemn'd to lye forty years in Purgatory before he is 
remov'd to Heaven, why, 'twill coft the Pope but one Word 
to get the Sentence Revers'd. In fine, to repeat once more 
what I faid before, the Jefuits will inform you admirably well, 
of the Authority and Power of the Pope, and of the State of 
Purgatory. 

Adario. I am at a lofs to know how to form a diftindt Idea 
of the difference between you and the Englifti, as to the point 
of Belief; for the more I endeavour to have it fet in a clearer 
light, [120] the lefs light I find. To my mind, the beft way 
for all of you is to agree upon this conclufion; That the 
Great Spirit has beftow'd upon all Men, a Light fufficient to 
(hew 'em what they ought to do, without running the rifque 
of being impos'd upon : For I have heard that in each of thefe 
different Religions, there's an infinite number of Perfons of 
different Opinions. To inftance in your Religion ; every 
religious Order maintains certain Points that the reft do not, 
and obferves as great a diverfity in their Inftitutions as in their 
Habits. This makes me think that in Europe every particular 
Man forms a peculiar Religion to himfelf, which differs from 
that which he outwardly profeffes. As for my own part, I 
firmly believe that Men are not capable of knowing what the 
Great Spirit requires of 'em; and I can't diffuade my felf from 
believing, that fince the Great Spirit is fo juft and fo good, 
'tis impoffible that his Juftice fhould render the Salvation of 
Mankind fo difficult, as that all of 'em fhould be Damn'd that 
are not retainers to your Religion, and that even few of the 
Profeffors of it fhould be admitted into Paradife. Believe me, 



550 Some New Voyages 

my Friend ; the other World goes upon a lay that's quite dif- 
ferent from what we have in this. Few People know what 
paffes there : All oar knowledge amounts only to this ; That 
we Hurons are not the Authours of our own Creation, that 
the Great Spirit has vouchfaf'd us an honeft Mould, while 
Wickednefs neftles in yours ; and that he fends you into our 
Country, in order to have an opportunity of Correcting your 
Faults, and following our Example. Purfuant to this Prin- 
ciple, my Brother, thou may'ft believe as long as thou wilt, 
and have as much Faith as thou haft a mind to : But after all, 
thou fhalt never fee the good Country of Souls, unlefs thou 
[121] turn'ft Huron./ The Innocence of our Lives, the Love 
we tender to our Brethren, and the Tranquility of Mind which 
we injoy in contemning the meafures of Intereft : These, I fay, 
are three things that the Great Spirit requires of all Men in 
General. / We pra&ife all thefe Duties in our Villages, natur- 
ally; while the Europeans defame, kill, rob, and pull one 
another to pieces, in their Towns. The Europeans have a 
ftrong mind to Inherit a Place in the Country of Souls, and 
yet they never think of their Creator, but when they difpute 
with the Hurons. Fare well, my dear Brother ; it grows late : 
I'll now retire to my Hutt, in order to recoiled all the ad- 
vances thou haft made, that I may call 'em to mind to morrow, 
when I come to reafon the Point with the Jefuits. 



to North- America. 551 



Of Laws. 

Labon- TT7ELL, my Friend; thou haft heard what the 
tan. VV Jefuit had to fay; he has fet matters in a 

clear light, and made 'em much plainer than I could do. You 
fee plainly there's a great difference between his Arguments 
and mine. We Soldiers of Fortune have only a fuperficial 
knowledge of our Religion, tho' indeed we ought to know it 
better ; but the Jefuits have Study'd it to that degree, that 
they never fail of converting and convincing the moft obftinate 
Infidels in the Univerfe. 

Adario. To be free with thee, my dear Brother, I could 
fcarce underftand one tittle of what he meant, and I am much 
miftaken if he underftands it himfelf. He has repeated the 
very [122] fame Arguments a hundred times in my Hutt ; 
and you might have obferv'd, that yefterday I anfwer'd above 
twenty times, that I had heard his Arguments before upon 
feveral occafions. But, what I take to be moft ridiculous, 
he teazes me every minute to get me to interpret his Argu- 
ments, word for word, to my Countrymen; upon the Plea 
that a Man of my Senfe may find out in his own Language, 
more fignificant terms, and render the meaning of his Words 
more Intelligible, than a Jefuit who is not throughly Mafter 
of the Huron Language. You heard me tell him, that he 
might Baptife as many Children as he pleas'd, tho' at the 



552 Some New Voyages 

fame time he could not give me to know what Baptifm was. 
He may do what he pleafes in my Village ; let him make 
Chriftians, and Preach, and Baptife if he will ; I fhall not 
hinder him. But now, methinks, we have had enough of 
Religion, let us therefore talk a little of what you call Laws ; 
for you know that we have no fuch Word in our Language ; 
tho' at the fame time, I apprehend the force and importance 
of the Word, by vertue of the explication I had from you 
t'other day, together with the examples you mention'd, to 
make me conceive what you meant. Prithee tell me, are not 
Laws the fame as juft and reafonable Things ? You fay they 
are. Why then, to obferve the Law, imports no more than to 
j obferve the meafures of Reafon and Juftice : And at this rate 
you muft take juft and reafonable things in another fenfe 
than we do ; or if you take 'em in the fame fenfe. 'tis plain 
you never obferve 'em. 

Lahontan. Thefe are fine Diftin<5Hons indeed, you pleafe 
your felf with idle Flams. Haft not thee the Senfe to per- 
ceive, after twenty Years Converfation with the French , that 
what the Hurons [123] call Reafon is Reafon among the 
French. 'Tis certain that all Men do not obferve the Laws 
of Reafon, for if they did there would be no occafion for Pun- 
ifhments, and thofe Judges thou haft feen at Paris and Quebec 
would be oblig'd to look out for another way of Living. But 
in regard that the good of the Society confifts in doing Juftice 
and following thefe Laws, there's a neceffity of punifhing the 
Wicked and rewarding the Good ; for without that Precau- 
tion Murthers, Robberies and Defamations would fpread 



to North- America. 553 

every where, and in a Word, we fhould be the mod miferable 
People upon the Face of the Earth. 

Adario. Nay, you are miferable enough already, and indeed 
I can't fee how you can be more fuch. What fort of ^ Men 
muft the Europeans be? What Species of Creatures do they 
retain to ? The Europeans, who muft be forc'd to do Good, 
and have no other Prompter for the avoiding of Evil than the * 
fear of Punifhment. If I ask'd thee, what a Man is, thou 
wouldft anfwer me, He*s a Frenchman, and yet I'll prove that 
your Man is rather a Beaver. For Man is not intitled to that 
Character upon the fcore of his walking upright upon two 
Legs, or of Reading and Writing, and fhewing a Thoufand 
other Inftances of his Induftry. I call that Creature a Man, 
that hath a natural inclination to do Good, and never enter- v 
tains the thoughts of doing Evil. You fee we have no Judges; 
and what's the reafon of that? Why? We neither quarrel 
nor fue one another. And what's the reafon that we have no 
Law Suits ? Why ? Becaufe we are refolved neither to receive 
nor to know Silver. But why do we refufe admiffion to Silver 
among us ? The reafon is this \ We are refolv'd to have no 
Laws, for fince the World [124] was a World our Anceftors v 
liv'd happily without 'em. In fine, as I intimated before, the 
Word Laws does not fignifie juft and reafonable things as you 
ufe it, for the Rich make a Jeft of 'em, and 'tis only the poor 
Wretches that pay any regard to 'em. But, pray, let's look 
into thefe Laws, or reafonable things, as you call 'em. For 
thefe Fifty Years, the Governors of Canada have ftill alledg'd 
that we are fubjeft to the Laws of their great Captain. We 



554 Some New Voyages 

content our felves in denying all manner of Dependance, 
excepting that upon the Great Spirit, as being born free and 
joint Brethren, who are all equally Mafters: Whereas you are 
all Slaves to one Man. We do not put in any fuch Anfwer to 
you, as if the French depended upon us ; and the reafon of our 
filence upon that Head is, that we have no mind to Quarrel. 
But, pray tell me, what Authority or Right is the pretended 
Superiority of your great Captain grounded upon? Did we 
ever fell our felves to that great Captain? Were we ever in 
France to look after you ? 'Tis you that came hither to find 
out us. Who gave you all the Countries that you now inhabit, 
by what Right do you poffefs 'em ? They always belong'd 
to the Algonkins before. In earned, my dear Brother, I'm 
forry for thee from the bottom of my Soul. Take my advice, 
and turn Huron; for I fee plainly a vaft difference between 
thy Condition and mine. I am Mafter of my own Body, I 
have the abfolute difpofal of my felf, I do what I pleafe, I am 
the firft and the laft of my Nation, I fear no Man, and I 
depend only upon the Great Spirit : Whereas thy Body, as 
well as thy Soul, are doom'd to a dependance upon thy great 
Captain ; thy Vice-Roy difpofes of thee ; thou haft not the 
liberty of doing what thou haft a mind to ; thou'rt affraid of 
Robbers, [125] falfe Witneffes, Affaflins, &c. and thou de- 
pendeft upon an infinity of Perfons whofe Places have rais'd 
'em above thee. Is it true, or not? Are thefe things either 
improbable or invifible ? Ah ! my dear Brother, thou feeft 
plainly that I am in the right of it ; and yet thou choofeft 
rather to be a French Slave than a free Huron % What a fine 



to North- America. 555 

Spark does a Frenchman make with his fine Laws, who taking 
himfelf to be mighty Wife is affuredly a great Fool ; for as 
much as he continues in Slavery and a ftate of Dependence, 
while the very Brutes enjoy that adorable Liberty,' and like us 
fear nothing but Foreign Enemies. 

Lahontan. Indeed, my Friend, thy way of Reafoning is as 
Savage as thy felf. I did not think that a Man of Senfe, who 
hath been in France and New England, would fpeak after that 
Fafhion. What benefit haft thou reap'd by having feen our 
Cities, Forts and Palaces ? When thou talk'ft of fevere Laws, 
of Slavery, and a Thoufand other idle Whims, queftionlefs 
thou preacheft contrary to thy own Sentiments. Thou takeft 
pleafure in difcanting upon the Felicity of the Hurons, a fet of 
Men who mind nothing but Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Hunt- 
ing, and Fifhing ; who have not the enjoyment of any one 
Conveniency of Life, who travel four Hundred Leagues on 
Foot to knock four Iroquefe on the Head, in a Word, who 
have no more than the fhape of Men : Whereas we have our 
Conveniences, our unbending Diverfions, and a Thoufand 
other Pleafures, which render the Minutes of our Life fup- 
portable. To avoid the lafh of thofe Laws which are fevere 
only upon wicked and criminal Perfons, one needs only to 
live honeftly, and offer Injuries to no man. 

[126] Adario. Ay, my dear Brother, your being an honeft 
Man would not avail you ; if two falfe Witneffes fwear againft 
you, you'll prefently fee whether your Laws are fevere or not. 
Have not the Coureurs de Bois quoted me twenty inftances of 
Perfons that have been cruelly put to death by the lafh of 



556 Some New Voyages 

your Laws, whofe Innocence has appear'd after their death ? 
What truth there is in their Relations, I do not pretend to 
know; but 'tis plain that fuch a thing may happen. I have 
heard 'em fay farther (and indeed I had heard the fame thing 
in France before) that poor innocent Men are Tortur'd in a 
moft horrible manner, in order to force 'em by the violence 
of their Torment to a Confeffion of all that is charg'd upon 
'em, and of ten times more. What execrable Tyranny muft 
this be ! Tho' the French pretend to be Men, yet the Women 
are not exempted from this horrid Cruelty, no more than the 
Men ; both the one and the other choofe rather to die once 
than to die fifty times. And indeed they are in the right of 
it: For if it fhould happen that by the influence of extra- 
ordinary courage, they were capable of undergoing fuch 
Torments without confeffing a Crime that they never com- 
mitted ; what health, what manner of life can they enjoy there- 
after? No, no, my dear Brother, the black Devils that the 
Jefuits talk fo much of, are not in>the Regions where Souls 
burn in Flames, but in Quebec and in France, where they keep 
Company with the Laws, the falfe Witneffes, the Conveniencies 
of Life, the Cities, the Fortreffes and the Pleafures vou fpoke 
of but now. 

Labontan. The Coureurs de Bois and the other Sparks who 
told you fuch Stories, without acquainting you with the other 
Circumftances that they knew nothing of, are Block-heads 
that had [127] better have held their peace. I'll fet the 
whole matter before thee, in its clear and natural colours. 
Suppofe, two falfe Witneffes depofe againft a Man ; they are 



/>-S9- 



/ft/A a ftuee 







.if 



to North- America. 557 

prefently put into two feparate Rooms, where they can't fee 
or converfe with one another. Then they are examin'd one 
after another upon the Articles charg'd againft the Perfon 
Arraign'd ; and the Judges are of fuch tender Confciences, 
as to ufe their utmoft efforts to difcover whether one or both 
of 'em vary's, as to the Circumftances. If they happen to 
perceive any falfity in their depofitions, which is eafily per- 
ceiv'd, they Sentence 'em to die without remiflion. But if it 
appears that they are fo far from contradi&ing, that they 
back one another, they are prefented before the Prifoner, 
to fee if he has any Objection to make againft 'em, and if he 
is willing to rely upon their Confciences. If he has nothing 
to obje6t, and if the two Witneffes Swear by the Great Spirit, 
that they faw him Murder, Rob, &?c. the Judges condemn 
him out of hand. As for Torture, 'tis never made ufe of, 
but when there's only one Witnefs, whofe Oath can't infer 
Death; for the Law which requires the Teftimony of two 
Men for a fufficient Proof, looks upon the Atteftation of one 
but as half a Proof. But at the fame time, you muft remark 
that the Judges take all imaginable Precaution to avoid the 
paffing of an unjuft Sentence. 

Adario. I'm e'en as wife as I was ; for when all comes to 
all, the two falfe Witneffes have a perfect good underftanding 
between themfelves, before they are brought to the Bar, and 
they are not to feek for the Anfwers they are to make : And 
I find the depofition of one Scoundrel will put a Man to the 
Rack as well as that of an honeft Man ; who in my Opinion 
do's juftly forfeit [128] the Character of Honefty by fuch a 



558 Some New Voyages 

depofition, even when he has feen the Crime committed. 
The French are a fine fort of People, who are fo far from 
faving one another's Lives, like Brethren, that they refufe to 
do it when 'tis in their power. But, prithee, tell me ; what 
doft thou think of thefe Judges ? Is it true that fome of 'em 
are fo ignorant as they are faid to be ; and that others are fo 
Wicked as to pronounce unjufl Judgments contrary to their 
own Confciences; with intent to favour a Friend, or to oblige 
a Miftrefs or a great Lord, or to hook in Mony. I forefee 
thou'lt reply that the Allegation is falfe, and that Laws are 
juft and reafonable things. But at the fame time, I know 'tis 
as true as that we are here ; for a Man that demands his 
Eftate of another who is unjuftly poffefs'd of it, and makes 
the Innocence of his Caufe to appear as clear as the Sun- 
fhine ; that very Man, I fay, fhall never make any thing of 
his Suit; if the great Lord, the Miftrefs, the Friend, and 
the Mony bufinefs, fpeak on the Adverfary's behalf, to the 
Judges who are empower'd to decide the Caufe. The fame 
is the cafe of perfons Arraign'd for Crimes. Ha ! Long live 
the Harons; who without Laws, without Prifons, and without 
Torture, pafs their Life in a State of Sweetnefs and Tran- 
quility, and enjoy a pitch of Felicity to which the French are 
utter Strangers. We live quietly under the Laws of Inftind: 
and innocent Conducft, which wife Nature has imprinted upon 
our Minds from our Cradles. We are all of one Mind ; our 
Wills, Opinions and Sentiments obferve an exa6t Conformity; 
and thus we fpend our Lives with fuch a perfed good under- 
ftanding, that no Difputes or Suits can take place amongft us. 



to North-America. 559 

But how unhappy are you in being expos'd to the lafh of 
Laws, which your ignorant, [129] unjuft, and vicious Judges 
break in their private A&ions, as well as in the Adminiftration 
of their Offices ? Thefe are your juft and equitable Judges ; 
who have no regard to Right ; who make their Intereft the 
Standard of their Conduct, in the way of their Office ; who 
have nothing in view but the Inriching of themfelves ; who are 
not acceffible by any but the Daemon of Silver; who never 
adminifter Juftice, but thro' a Principle of Avarice or Paffion ; 
who give Countenance to Crimes, and fet afide Juftice and 
Honefty, in order to give a full range to Cheating, Quarrell- 
ing, and the carrying on of tedious Law Suits, to the abufe 
and violation of Oaths, and to an infinity of other Diforders. 
This is the practice of thefe doughty Affertors of the fine 
Laws of the French Nation. 

Labontan. I gave you to know before, that you ought not 
to give credit to all that every Fool whifpers in your Ear. 
You give Ear to fome Blockheads that have not a tinfture 
of Common Senfe, and that fpread lies under the notion of 
truths. Thefe bad Judges, that they fpeak of, are as uncom- 
mon as white Beavers ; for 'tis a queftion if there are four fuch 
in all France. Our Judges are men that love Vertue, and have 
Souls to be fav'd as well as thee and I ; being inverted with a 
publick Capacity, they are to anfwer for their Condud before 
a Judge that has no refpecft to Perfons, and before whom the 
greateft Monarch is no more than the meaneft Slave. There's 
fcarce any of thefe Men, who would not choofe to die, rather 
than wound their Confcience or violate the Laws. Mony is 



560 Some New Voyages 

too bafe a Metal to tempt 'em, and Women warm 'em no 
more than the Ice. Friends and great Lords make lefs Im- 
preflion upon their Minds, than the Waves upon the Rocks. 
They curb Libertinifm, [130] they redrefs Diforders, and do 
Juftice to all that Sue for it ; without the leaft regard to what 
we call Intereft. As for my own part, I have loft my whole 
Eftate by being caft in three or four Law-Suits at Paris ; but 
I would be loth to believe that the Judges are in fault, not- 
withftanding that my Adverfaries found both Mony and 
Friends to back bad Caufes. 'Twas the Law that gave it 
againft me, and I take the Law to be juft and reafonable, 
imputing my furprize upon the matter, to my unacquainted- 
nefs with that Study. 

Adario. I proteft I don't underftand one word of what 
thou haft faid ; for I know the contrary of what thou fayeft to 
be true, and thofe who inform'd me fo of the Judges are Men 
of undifputed Honour and Senfe. But if no body had given 
me any fuch Information, I am not fo dull Pated as not to fee 
with my own Eyes, the Injuftice of your Laws and your 
Judges. I'll tell thee one thing my dear Brother; I was a 
going one day from Paris to Verfailles, and about half way, I 
met a Boor that was going to be Whipt for having taken 
Partridges and Hares with Traps. Between Rochel and Paris, 
I faw another that was Condemn'd to the Gally's for having a 
little Bag of Salt about him. Thefe poor Men were punifti'd 
by your unjuft Laws, for endeavouring to get Suftenance to 
their Families ; at a time when a Million of Women were got 
with Child in the abfence of their Husbands, when the Phyfi- 



to North- America. 561 

cians Murder'd three fourths of the People, and the Gamefters 
reduc'd their Families to a Starving Condition, by lofing all 
they had in the World ; and all this with Impunity. If things 
go at this rate, where are your juft and reafonable Laws ; 
where are thofe Judges that have a Soul to be Sav'd as well as 
you and I? After this, [131] you'll be ready to Brand the 
Hurons for Beafts. In earneft, we fhould have a fine time of 
it if we offer'd to punifh one of our Brethren for killing a 
Hare or a Partridge ; and a glorious fight 'twould be, to fee 
our Wives inlarge the number of our Children, while we are 
ingag'd in Warlike Expeditions againft our Enemies ; to fee 
Phyficians Poifon our Families, and Gamefters lofe the Beaver 
Skins they've got in Hunting. In France, thefe things are 
look'd upon as trifles, which do not fall within the Verge of 
their fine Laws. Doubtlefs, they muft needs be very blind, that 
are acquainted with us, and yet do not imitate our Example. 

Lahontan. Very fine, my dear Friend ; thou goeft too faft ; 
believe me, thy Knowledge is fo confin'd, as I faid before, 
that thy Mind can't reach beyond the appearances of things. 
Wouldft thou but give Ear to Reafon, thou wouldft prefently 
be fenfible that we acft upon good Principles, for the fupport 
of the Society. You muft know, the Laws Condemn all with- 
out exception, that are guilty of the Adlions you've mention'd. 
In the firft place, they prohibit the Peafants to kill Hares or 
Partridges, efpecially in the Neighbourhood of Paris; by 
reafon that an uncontroul'd liberty of Hunting, would quickly 
exhauft the whole Stock of thofe Animals. The Boors Farm 
the Grounds of their Landlords, who referve to themfelves 



562 Some New Voyages 

the Priviledge of Hunting, as being Matters. Now, if they 
happen to kill Hares or Partridges, they not only rob their 
Matters of their Right, but fall under the Prohibition enabled 
by the Law : And the fame is the Cafe of thofe who run Salt, 
by reafon that the Right of Tranfporting it is folely lodg'd 
in the King. As to the Women and the Gamefters that you 
took notice of; you can't think fure that [132] we'd fhut 'em 
up in Prifons and Convents, and Condemn 'em to a perpetual 
Confinement. The Phyficians 'twould be unjuft to abufe, for 
of a hundred Patients they do not kill two ; nay, on the con- 
trary, they ufe their utmoft efforts to Cure 'em. There's a 
neceffity that Superannuated Perfons, and thofe who are worn 
out, fhould put a Period to their Lives. And after all, tho' all 
of us have occafion to imploy Doctors, if 'twere prov'd that 
they had kill'd any Patient, either thro' Ignorance or Malipe, 
the Law would not fpare 'em no more than others. 

Adario. Were thefe Laws obferv'd, you would ftand in 
need of a great many Prifons ; but I fee plainly that you do 
not fpeak all the truth, and that you're afraid of carrying the 
Thing farther, leaft my Reafons ihould put you to a ftand. 
However, let's now caft our eyes upon thofe two Men who fled 
laft year to Quebec^ to avoid the being Burnt in France. If we 
look narrowly into their Crime, we'll find occafion to fay, that 
Europe is pefter'd with a great many foolifh Laws. 1 But, to 



1 Sorcery was at this period a statutory crime in France, liable to be punished with 
death by burning. There was a considerable revival of the fear of witchcraft under 
Louis XIV, the last law passed upon the subject being the edict of 1682. As late 
as 173 1, a Jesuit was condemned by the parlement of Provence to be burned for 
sorcery. — Ed. 



to TVar^-America. 563 

fpeak to the purpofe ; thefe two French Men were Branded 
for Jugglers, pretended Magicians, and charg'd with the 
Crime of playing Magical Tricks. Now, what harm have 
thefe poor Fellows done ; perhaps they have had a fit of Sick- 
nefs, that has brought 'em into that State of Simplicity and 
Folly, as it happens fometimes among us. Prithee tell me, 
what harm do our Jugglers do ? When a Patient is recom- 
mended to 'em, they fhut themfelves up all alone in a little 
Hutt, where they Sing, Roar, and Dance, and utter fome 
extravagant Expreffions; then they give the Patient's Rela- 
tions to know, that they muft prepare a Feaft for Solaceing 
the Patient ; and this Feaft confifts of Flefh or Fifh, according 
to the Humour of this Juggler, who is only an imaginary 
[133] Phyfician, whofe Head has been turn'd by fome hot 
Feaver or other. You fee we rally upon 'em in their abfence, 
and fee thro' the Impofture ; you are fenfible that they are as 
foolifh in their A&ions as in their Words, and that they never 
go upon Hunting or Warlike Expeditions : And why would 
you Burn the poor Wretches, that in your Country fall under 
the fame Misfortune ? 

Lahontan. There's a great deal of difference between our 
Jugglers and yours : Thofe of that Profeflion among us, have 
interviews with the evil Spirit, and feaft with him every Night ; 
by vertue of their Witchcraft, they hinder a Man from 
Imbracing his own Wife ; by putting a certain Charm into 
the Vi&uals or Drink of Vertuous and Wife Ladies, they 
draw 'em to Debauchery; they Poyfon the Cattel, they blaft 
the Product of the Earth, they caufe Men to die in a languifh- 



564 Some New Voyages 

ing Condition, and a Big-Belly'd Woman to Mifcarry : In 
fine, they do an infinity of mifchievous Adtions, which I have 
not nam'd. This fet of Men calls themfelves Inchanters and 
Sorcerers ; but there's another fort that is yet worfe, namely, 
the Magicians, who converfe in a familiar way with the evil 
Spirit, and get him to appear in what Figure they pleafe, to 
thofe who have the curiofity to fee him. They have fecret 
Charms that will procure good Luck at Gaming, and Inrich 
thofe upon whom they are beftow'd ; they foretel Futurities, 
and have the Power to transform themfelves into all forts of 
Animals, and the moft frightful Figures ; they run about to 
certain Houfes, where theyjnake a fearful Howling, interlac'd 
with Cries and difmal Moans, and appear to be as tall as the 
loftyeft Trees, with Chains on their Feet, and Serpents in 
their Hands: In fine, they do fo terrify [134] the People, 
that they are forc'd to have recourfe to the Priefts, for their 
Exorcifms ; upon the apprehenfion that thefe Apparitions are 
Souls come from Purgatory to this World, to beg fome Maffes 
which are neceffary for their Tranflation into the Prefence of 
the Almighty. Now, take all thefe Articles together, you 
will not think it ftrange, that we Burn 'em without Mercy, 
purfuant to the Tenor of our Laws. 

Adario. Is it poflible, that you believe fuch idle Stories? 

Sure, you only rally to fee what I would anfwer. Thefe 

Stories feem to be of a piece with thofe I have Read in the 

* Books of fpeaking Animals. Some of our Coureurs 

de Bois Read thefe idle Fi&ions every day ; and I'm 

much miftaken if what you now fpeak of, is not Writ- 



to North- America. 565 

ten in thefe Books : For, one muft be a Fool that believes that 
the evil Spirit is inverted with the Power of coming upon the 
Earth ; fuppofing it to be true that he is fuch as the Jefuits 
reprefent him. No Creature can fubfift out of its own Ele- 
ment : Fifh die when forc'd upon the Land, and Man expires 
when under Water. How can you imagine then that the 
Devil can live out of his Element, which is Fire? Befides, If 
he could come upon the Earth, he would do mifchief enough 
by himfelf, without imploying thefe Sorcerers ; and if he con- 
vers'd with one Man, he would be ready to converfe with 
many others ; for confidering that in your Country the wicked 
out-number the good, every one of you would then turn Sor- 
cerer, and fo all would go to Deftru6Hon together ; the World 
would be turn'd upfide down ; and in a word, a remedylefs 
Diforder would enfue. Doft not thee know, my Brother, that 
to credit fuch idle Whims, is an affront offer'd to the Great 
Spirit; in regard that it charges him with Authorifing [135] 
Mifchief, and being the diredl Authour of all the abovemen- 
tion'd Diforders, by fuffering the Evil Spirit to turn out of 
Hell? Since the Great Spirit is fo good, as you and I are 
fenfible he is, 'tis more credible that he would fend good 
Souls with agreeable Shapes, to check men for their unwar- 
rantable Actions, and to invite 'em in an amicable way to the 
pra&ice of Vertue, by fetting forth the Felicity and Blifs of 
thofe Souls that are poffefs'd of the good Country. As for 
the Souls that lye in Purgatory (if fo be that there's any fuch 
place) I take it, the Great Spirit has no occafion to be 
intreated and pray'd to on their behalf, by thofe who have 



566 Some New Voyages 

enough to do to pray for themfelves : Befides, fince he gives 
'em leave to come to the Earth, he might as well allow them 
to mount up to Heaven. Upon the whole, my dear Brother, 
if I thought you fpoke ferioufly of thefe things, I fhould truly 
be apprehenfive that you are Delirious, or have loft your 
Senfes. Certainly, there muft be fome more inflaming Article 
againft thefe two Jugglers, or elfe both your Laws and your 
Judges are equally unreafonable. If 'twere true that thefe 
mifchievous Actions were adtually committed, the Confe- 
quence I fhould draw from thence, would be this ; That fince 
there's no fuch thing heard of among any of the Nations of 
Canada, it can't be otherwife but that the Evil Spirit has a 
power over you that he has not over us. Upon this lay, we 
are a good People, and you on the other hand are perverfe, 
malicious, and addi&ed to all degrees of Vice and Wicked- 
nefs. But, prithee, let's make an end of our Conferences 
upon this Head ; and fo I'll expedl no anfwer to what has 
been faid. To come back to your Laws, pray inform me how 
it comes to pafs that they fuffer Women to be Sold for Mony 
to thofe who have [136] a mind to make ufe of 'em? Why 
do they fuffer thofe publick Houfes where the Whores and 
Bawds are in readynefs all the hours of the day, to oblige all 
forts of Perfons ? Why are fome allow'd to wear Swords, in 
order to kill others that dare not wear 'em ? Why do not 
they prohibit the Selling of Wine above a determin'd quan- 
tity, or the adulterating of it with I do not know how many 
Ingredients, that ruin one's Health ? Do not you fee the 
Diforders committed at Quebec by Drunkards ? You'll anfwer 



to North- America. 567 

perhaps, as others have done before you ; that the Vintner is 
allow'd to Sell as much Goods as he can put off, for the main- 
tenance of himfelf and his Family ; and that he who drinks 
the Wine ought to regulate his own Condudt ; and be mod- 
erate in that as well as in all other things. But I'll prove that 
to be impoffible, for a Man in drink, lofes his Reafon before 
he is aware, or at leaft his Reafon is fo drown'd that he is not 
capable of diftinguifhing what he ought to do. Why do not 
your Laws reftrain the exceffive Gaming, that is the fource of 
a thoufand evils? Fathers ruin their Families (as I faid 
before) Children either Rob their Fathers, or run 'em into 
Debt ; the Wives and Daughters proftitute themfelves for 
Mony, when they're reduc'd to extremities, and have plaid 
away their Cloaths, and their Houfhold Furniture. This 
gives rife to difputes, murders, enmity, and irreconcileable 
hatred. Thefe prohibitions, my Brother, would be of no ufe 
among the Hurons ; but they are very much wanted among 
the French. If by fuch methods you would gradually reform 
the Diforders that Intereft has rais'd amongft you, I fhould 
hope that one day you might come to live without Laws as we 
do. 

[137] Lahontan. I acquainted you before, that our Laws 
inflid: Penalties on Gamefters ; and provide Punifhments for 
Whores and Bawds, and above all, for Publick Houfe-Keepers, 
when diforders happen in their Houfes. All the difference 
lies here, that our Cities are fo large and populous that 'tis 
not eafy for the Judges to trace all the Abufes that are com- 
mitted : But at the fame time, they are prohibited by the 



568 Some New Voyages 

Laws, and all poflible meafures are us'd to prevent 'em : In 
one word, our Judges indeavour with fuch care and applica- 
tion to ftiffle bad Cuftoms, to eftablifh a good Order in all the 
Branches of the Society, to punifh Vice and reward Vertue ; 
this, I fay, they do with fuch care and application, that if you 
could but fhake off your faulty Prejudices, and weigh narrowly 
the excellency of our Laws, you would be oblig'd to own that 
the French are a juft, judicious and knowing People, who pur- 
fue the true meafures of Juftice and Reafon more than you do. 
Adario. I would gladly embrace any opportunity of work- 
ing my felf into that Belief before I die, for I have a natural 
affe&ion for the French ; but I am very apprehenfive that I 
fhall not meet with that Confolation. Upon this foot, your 
Judges ought to begin firft to obferve the Laws, that their 
example may influence others ; they ought to difcontinue their 
Oppreflion of Widows, Orphans, and poor Creatures ; to give 
difpatch to the Suits of Perfons that come an hundred Leagues 
off for a Hearing ; and in a word, to form fuch Judgments 
of Caufes as the Great Spirit fhall do. I can never entertain 
a good thought of your Laws, till they leffen the Taxes and 
Duties that poor People are conftrain'd to pay, at a time when 
the Rich of all Stations pay nothing in proportion to their 
Eftates; till [138] you put a flop to the courfe of Drunken- 
nefs that fpreads thro' our Villages, by prohibiting the Coureurs 
de Bois to import Brandy among us. Then indeed I fhall hope 
that you'll compleat your Reformation by degrees, that a 
levelling of Eftates may gradually creep in among you ; and 
that at laft you'll abhor that thing call'd Intereft, which occa- 



to North-kmtr\Q2L~. 569 

fions all the Mifchief that Europe groans under. When you 
arrive at that pitch, you'll have neither Meurn nor Tuum to 
difturb you, but live as happily as the Hurom. This is enough 
for one day : I fee my Slave coming to acquaint me that I am 
wanted in the Village. Farewel, my dear Brother, till to 
morrow. 

Lahontan. I am of the Opinion, my dear Friend, that you 
would not have come fo foon to my Apartment, if you had 
not defign'd to purfue our laft Difpute. As for my part, I 
declare I will not enter the lifts farther with you, upon the 
confederation that you are not capable to apprehend my Argu- 
ments. You are fo prepoffefs'd on the behalf of your own 
Nation, fo ftrongly byafs'd to the Savage Cuftoms, and fo 
little fond of a due enquiry into ours ; that I fhall not daign 
to kill both my Body and my Soul, in endeavouring to make 
you fenfible of the ignorance and mifery that the Hurons have 
always liv'd in. Thou knoweft I am thy Friend ; and fo I 
have no other view, but to fet before thine eyes the Felicity 
that attends the French^ to the end that thou and the reft of 
thy Nation may live as they do. I told you, I do not know 
how often, that you infift on the Converfation of fome French 
Debauchees, and meafure all the reft by their Buftiel. I ac- 
quainted you, that they were punifh'd for their Crimes; but 
thefe reafons will not go down with you ; you obftinately [139] 
maintain your affertion by throwing in affrontive anfwers, as 
if the French were not Men. Upon the whole, I am downright 
weary of hearing fuch poor ftuff come from the Mouth of a 
Man that all the French look upon as a Man of excellent 



57° Some New Voyages 

Senfe. The People of thy Nation refped thee not only for 
thy Senfe and Spirit, but for thy Experience and Valour. 
Thou art the Head of the Warriours, and the Prefident of 
the Council; and without flattery, I have fcarce met with a 
Man of a quicker apprehenfion than thy felf. 'Tis upon this 
confederation, that I pity thee with all my heart for not throw- 
ing off thy prejudicate Opinions. 

Adario. Thou'rt miftaken, my dear Brother, in all thou 
haft faid ; for I have not form'd to my felf any falfe Idea of 
your Religion, or of your Laws. The Example of all the 
French in General, will ever oblige me to look upon all their 
A6lions as unworthy of a Man. So that my Idea's are juft; 
the prepoffeflion you talk of is well grounded ; and I am ready 
to make out all my advances. We talk'd of Religion and 
Laws, and I did not impart to you above a quarter of what I 
had to fay upon that Head. You infift chiefly upon our way 
of living, which you take to be Blame-worthy. The French in 
general take us for Beafts ; the Jefuits Brand us for impious, 
foolifh and ignorant Vagabonds. And to be even with you, 
we have the fame thoughts of you ; but with this difference, 
that we pity you without offering inve<5tives. Pray hear me, 
my dear Brother, I fpeak calmly and without paflion. The 
more I refledt upon the lives of the Europeans, the lefs Wifdom 
and Happinefs I find among 'em. Thefe fix years I have bent 
my thoughts upon the State of the Europeans: But I can't 
light on any thing in their Adtions that is not [140] beneath 
a Man ; and truly I think 'tis impoflible it fhould be other- 
wife, fo long as you flick to the meafures of Meum and Tuum. 



to North-hmznczL. 571 

I affirm that what you call Silver is the Devil of Devils ; the 
Tyrant of the French ; the Source of all Evil; the Bane of 
Souls, and the Slaughter-Houfe of living Perfons. To pre- 
tend to live in the Mony Country, and at the fame time to 
fave one's Soul, is as great an inconfiftency as for a Man to go 
to the bottom of a Lake to preferve his Life. This Mony 
is the Father of Luxury, Lafcivioufnefs, Intrigues, Tricks, 
Lying, Treachery, Falfenefs, and in a word, of all the mifchief 
in the World. The Father fells his Children, Husbands 
expofe their Wives to Sale, Wives betray their Husbands, 
Brethren kill one another, Friends are falfe, and all this pro- 
ceeds from Mony. Confider this, and then tell me if we are 
not in the right of it, in refufing to finger, or fo much as to 
look upon that curfed Metal. 

Lahontan. What ! is it poflible that you (hould always 
Reafon fo forrily! Prithee, do but liften once in thy life time 
to what I am going to fay. Doft not thou fee, my dear 
Friend, that the Nations of Europe could not live without 
Gold and Silver, or fome fuch precious thing. Without that 
Symbol, the Gentlemen, the Priefts, the Merchants, and an 
infinity of other Perfons who have not Strength enough to 
labour the Earth, would die for Hunger. Upon that lay, our 
Kings would be no Kings : Nay, what Soldiers fhould we then 
have ? Who would then Work for Kings or any body elfe, 
who would run the hazard of the Sea, who would make Arms 
unlefs 'twere for himfelf ? Believe me, this would run us to 
remedilefs Ruine, 'twould turn Europe into a Chaos, and create 
the moft difmal Confufion that Imagination it felf can reach. 



572 Some New Voyages 

[141] Adario. You fobb me off very prettily, truly, when 
you bring in your Gentlemen, your Merchants and your Priefts. 
If you were Strangers to Menm and Tunm, thofe diftin6Uons 
of Men would be funk ; a levelling equality would then take 
place among you as it now do's among the Hurons. For the 
firft thirty years indeed, after the banifhing of Intereft, you 
would fee a ftrange Defolation ; thofe who are only qualify'd 
to eat, drink, fleep and divert themfelves, would languifh and 
die ; but their Pofterity would be fit for our way of living. I 
have fet forth again and again, the qualities that make a Man 
inwardly fuch as he ought to be ; particularly, Wifdom, Reafon, 
Equity, &c. which are courted by the Hurons. I have made 
it appear that the Notion of feparate Interefts knocks all thefe 
Qualities in the Head, and that a Man fway'd by Intereft can't 
be a Man of Reafon. As for the outward Qualifications of a 
Man; he ought to be expert in Marching, Hunting, Fifhing, 
Waging War, Ranging the Forefts, Building Hutts and Ca- 
nows, Firing of Guns, Shooting of Arrows, Working Canows : 
He ought to be Indefatigable, and able to live on fliort Com- 
mons upon occafion. In a word, he ought to know how to go 
about all the Exercifes of the Hurons. Now in my way, 'tis 
the Perfon thus qualify'd that I call a Man. Do but confider, 
how many Millions there are in Europe, who, if they were left 
thirty Leagues off in the Forrefts, and provided with Fufees 
and Arrows, would be equally at a lofs, either to Hunt and 
maintain themfelves, or to find their way out : And yet you 
fee we traverfe a hundred Leagues of Forrefts without lofing 
our way, that we kill Fowl and other Beafts with our Arrows, 



to iVtfr^-America. 573 

that we catch Fifh in all the places where they are to be had ; 
that we [142] Dog both Men and Wild Beafts by their Foot- 
fteps, whether in Woods or in open Fields, in Summer or in 
Winter; that we live upon Roots when we lye before the 
Gates of the Iroquefe, that we run like Hares, that we know 
how to ufe both the Axe and the Knife, and to make a great 
many ufeful things. Now fince we are capable of fuch things, 
what fhould hinder you to do the fame, when Intereft is laid 
afide ? Are not your Bodies as large, ftrong and brawny 
as ours ? Are not your Artifans imploy'd in harder and more 
difficult Work than ours ? If you liv'd after our manner, all of 
you would be equally Matters ;• your Riches would be of the 
fame Stamp with ours, and confift in the purchafing of Glory 
by military Actions, and the taking of Slaves ; for the more 
you took of them the lefs occafion you would have to Work : 
In a word, you would live as happily as we do. 

Lahontan. Do you place a happy Life, in being oblig'd to 
lye under a pittiful Hutt of Bark, to Sleep under four forry 
Coverlets of Beaver Skins, to Eat nothing but what you Boil 
and Roaft, to be Cloath'd with Skins, to go a Beaver Hunting 
in the harfheft Seafon of the Year, to run a hundred Leagues 
on Foot in purfuit of the Iroquefe, thro' Marfhes and thick 
Woods, the Trees of which are cut down fo as to render 'em 
inacceffible ! Do you think your felves happy when you ven- 
ture out in little Canows, and run the rifque of being drown'd 
every foot in your Voyages upon the Great Lakes ; when you 
lye upon the ground with the Heavens for your Canopy, 
upon approaching to the Villages of your Enemies ; when 



574 Some New Voyages 

you run with full Speed, both days and nights without eating 
or drinking, as being purfued by your Enemies ; when you 
are fure of being reduc'd to the laft extremity, if [143] the 
Coureurs de Bois did not out of Friendfhip, Charity and Com- 
miferation, fupply you with Fire-Arms, Powder, Lead, Thread 
for Nets, Axes, Knives, Needles, Awls, Fifhing-Hooks, Ket- 
tles, and feveral other Commodities? 

Adario. Very fine, come, don't let's go fo faft ; the day is 
long, and we may talk one after the other at our own leifure. 
It feems you take all thefe things to be great hardfhips ; and 
indeed I own they would be fuch to the French, who like 
Beafts, love only to eat and to drink, and have been brought 
up to Softnefs and Effeminacy. Prithee, tell me what differ- 
ence there is between lying in a good Hutt, and lying in a 
Palace ; between Sleeping under a Cover of Beaver-Skins, and 
Sleeping under a Quilt between two Sheets ; between Eating 
BoiFd and Roaft Meat, and feeding upon dirty Pies, Ragou's, 
&c. drefs'd by your greafy Scullions ? Are we liable to more 
Diforders and Sickneffes than the French, who are accommo- 
dated with thefe Palaces, Beds and Cooks? But after all, 
how many are there in France that lye upon Straw in Garrets 
where the Rain comes in on all hands, and that are hard put 
to't to find Viftuals and Drink? I have been in France, and 
fpeak from what I have feen with my Eyes. You rally with- 
out reafon, upon our Cloaths made of Skins, for they are 
warmer, and keep out the Rain better than your Cloth; 
befides, they are not fo ridiculoufly made as your Garments, 



to North- America. 575 

which have more Stuff in their Pockets and Skirts, than in 
the Body of the Garment. As for our Beaver-Hunting, you 
take it to be a terrible thing ; while it affords us all manner 
of pleafure and diverfion ; and at the fame time, procures us 
all forts of Commodities in exchange for the Skins. Befides, 
our Slaves take all the Drudgery off our hands, (if fo be 
[144] that you will have it to be drudgery.) You know very 
well that Hunting is the moft agreeable Diverfion we have ; 
but the Beaver-Hunting being fo very pleafant, we prefer it 
to all the other forts. You fay, we have a troublefome and 
tedious way of waging War ; and indeed I muft own that a 
French Man would not be able to bear it, upon the account 
that you are not accuftom'd to fuch long Voyages on Foot ; 
but thefe Excursions do not fatigue us in the leaft, and 'twere 
to be wifti'd for the good of Canada, that you were poffefs'd 
of the fame Talent ; for if you were, the Iroquefe would not 
Cut your Throats in the midft of your own Habitations, as 
they do now every day. You infift likewife on the rifque we 
run in our little Canows, as an inftance of our Mifery ; and 
with reference to that Point, 'tis true that fometimes we can- 
not difpenfe with the ufe of Canows, becaufe we are Strangers 
to the Art of Building larger Veffels ; but after all, your great 
Veffels are liable to be caft away as well as our Canows. 'Tis 
likewife true, that we lye flat upon the open ground when we 
approach to the Villages of our Enemies ; but 'tis equally 
true that the Soldiers in France are not fo well accommodated 
as your Men are here, and that they are oftentimes forc'd to 



576 Some New Voyages 

lye in Marfhes and Ditches, where they are expos'd to the 
Rain and Wind. You object farther, that we betake our 
felves to a fpeedy Flight ; and pray what can be more natural 
than to flye when the number of our Enemies is triple to 
ours. The Fatigue indeed of running night and day without 
Eating and Drinking, is terrible ; but we had better undergo 
it than become Slaves. I am apt to believe that fuch extrem- 
ities are matter of Horrour to the Europeans^ but we look 
upon 'em as in a manner, nothing. [145] You conclude, in 
pretending that the French prevent our Mifery by taking pity 
of us. But pray confider how our Anceftors liv'd an hundred 
years ago : They liv'd as well without your Commodities as 
we do with 'em ; for inftead of your Fire-Locks, Powder and 
Shot, they made ufe of Bows and Arrows, as we do to this 
day : They made Nets of the Thread of the Barks of Trees, 
Axes of Stone ; Knives, Needles and Awls of Stag or Elk- 
Bones ; and fupply'd the room of Kettles with Earthen Pots. 
Now, fince our Anceftors liv'd without thefe Commodities for 
fo many Ages ; I am of the Opinion, we could difpenfe with 
'em eafyer than the French could with our Beaver Skins ; for 
which, by a mighty piece of Friendfhip, they give us in exchange 
Fufees, that burft and Lame many of our Warriors, Axes that 
break in the cutting of a Shrub, Knives that turn Blunt, and 
lofe their Edge in the cutting of a Citron ; Thread which is 
half Rotten, and fo very bad that our Nets are worn out as 
foon as they are made ; and Kettles fo thin and flight, that 
the very weight of Water makes the Bottoms fall out. This, 



to iVflr^-America. 577 

my dear Brother, is the anfwer I had to give to your Reflex- 
ions upon the Mifery of the Hurons. 1 

Lahontan. 'Tis well ; I find you would have me to believe 
that the Hurons are infenfible of their Fatigue and Labour ; 
and being bred up to Poverty and Hardfhips, have another 
notion of 'em than we have. This may do with thofe who 
have never ftir'd out of their own Country, and confequently 
have no Idea of a better Life than their own ; who having 
never vifited our Cities and Towns, fancy that we live juft as 
they do. But as for thee, who haft feen France, Quebec and 
New-England, methinks thy judgment and relifh of things are 
too much of the Savage [146] Strain ; whilft thou prefers the 
Condition of the Hurons to that of the Europeans. Can there 
be a more agreeable and delightful Life in the World, than 
that of an infinity of rich Men, who want for nothing ? They 
have fine Coaches, Stately Houfes adorn'd with Rich Hang- 
ings and Magnificent Pidures, Sweet Gardens replenifh'd 
with all forts of Fruit, Parks Stock'd with all forts of Animals, 
Horfes and Hounds and good ftore of Mony, which enables 
'em to keep a Sumptuous Table, to frequent the Play-Houfes, 
to Game freely, and to difpofe handfomely of their Children. 
Thefe happy Men are ador'd by their Dependants ; and you 



1 As the result of contact with Europeans, there was soon noticeable a great change 
in Indian customs and mode of living. The introduction from Europe of iron im- 
plements, fire-arms, utensils, clothing, and ornaments, profoundly affected our abori- 
gines, and rendered them thenceforth dependent upon traders for the very means of 
subsistence. Lahontan has here put into the mouth of Adario an illuminating although 
satirical reference to the process by which the American Indians were quickly con- 
verted by the fur-traders from a self-reliant people into a dependent class. — Ed. 
37 



578 Some New Voyages 

have feen with your own eyes our Princes, Dukes, Marefhals of 
France, Prelates, and a Million of perfons of all Stations, who 
want for nothing, and live like Kings, and who never call to 
mind that they have liv'd, till fuch time as Death alarms 'em. 
Adario. If I had not been particularly inform'd of the 
State of France, and let into the knowledge of all the Circum- 
ftances of that People, by my Voyage to Paris ; I might have 
been Blinded by the outward appearances of Felicity that you 
fet forth : But I know that your Prince, your Duke, your 
Marefhal, and your Prelate are far from being happy upon 
the Compaarifon with the Hurons, who know no other happi- 
nefs than that of Liberty and Tranquility of Mind : For your 
great Lords hate one another in their Hearts ; they forfeit 
their Sleep, and negledl even Eating and Drinking, in making 
their Court to the King, and undermining their Enemies; 
they offer fuch Violence to Nature in diffembling, difguifing 
and bearing things, that the Torture of their Soul leaves all 
Expreflion far behind it. Is all this nothing in your way ? 
Do you think it fuch a trifling matter to have fifty [147] 
Serpents in your Bofom ? Had not they better throw their 
Coaches, their Palaces and their Finery, into the River, than 
to fpend their life time in a continued Series of Martyrdom ? 
Were I in their place, I'd rather choofe to be a Huron with a 
Naked Body and a Serene Mind. The Body is the Apart- 
ment in which the Soul is lodg'd ; and what fignifies it, for the 
Cafe call'd the Body, to be fet off with Gold Trappings, or 
fpread out in a Coach, or planted before a Sumptuous Table, 



to North- America. 579 

while the Soul Galls and Tortures it ? / The great Lords, that 
you call Happy, lie expos'd to Difgrace from the King, to the 
detra&ion of a thoufand forts of Perfons, to the lofs of their 
Places, to the Contempt of their Fellow Courtiers ; and in a 
word, their foft Life is thwarted by Ambition, Pride, Pre- 
emption and Envy. They are Slaves to their Paflions, and 
to their King, who is the only French Man that can be calPd 
Happy, with refped to that adorable Liberty which he alone 
enjoys. There's a thoufand of us in one Village, and you fee 
that we love one another like Brethren ; that whatever any 
one has is at his Neighbour's Service ; that our Generals and 
Prefidents of the Council have not more Power than any other 
Huron ; that Detraction and Quarreling were never heard of 
among us ; and in fine, that every one is his own Matter, and 
do's what he pleafes, without being accountable to another, 
or cenfur'd by his Neighbour. This, my dear Brother, is the 
difference between us and your Princes, Dukes, &c. And if 
thofe great Men are fo Unhappy, by confequence, thofe of 
inferiour Stations muft have a greater fhare of Trouble and 
perplexing Cares. 

[148] Lahontan. You muft know that as your Hurons 
who are brought up in the way of Fatigue and Mifery, have 
no mind to be rid of it ; fo thefe great Lords being inur'd 
from their infancy to ambition, care, &c. can't live without it. 
As Happinefs lies in the imagination, fo they feed themfelves 
with Vanity, and in their hearts think themfelves as good as 
the King. That Tranquility of mind that the Hurons enjoy, 



580 Some New Voyages 

never car'd for croffing over to France, for fear of being con- 
fin'd to the little Religious Houfes. Tranquility of mind 
paffes in France for the Character of a Fool, of a fenfelefs, 
carelefs Fellow. To be happy, one muft always have fome- 
what in his view that feeds his Wifhes. He that confines his 
Wifhes to what he enjoys, muft be a Huron, which none will 
defire to be, if he confiders that Life would be a Scene of 
Uneafynefs, if our Mind did not diredt us every minute to 
defire fomewhat that we are not yet poffefs'd of; and 'tis this 
that makes a Life happy, provided the means imploy'd in the 
profecution of fuch Wifhes are lawful and warrantable. 

Adario. Is not that Burying a Man alive; to rack his 
Mind without intermiflion in the acquifition of Riches and 
Honour, which cloy us as foon as obtain'd ; to infeeble and 
wafte his Body, and to expofe his Life in the forming of 
Enterprifes, that for the moft part prove Abortive? As for 
your Allegation, that thefe great Lords are bred from their 
Infancy to Ambition and Care, as we are to Labour and 
Fatigue ; I muft fay, 'tis a fine Comparifon for a Man that 
can Read and Write. Tell me, prithee, if the repofe of the 
Mind and the exercife of the Body are not the neceffary 
Inftruments of Health, if the tofling of the Mind and the reft 
of the Body are not the means to deftroy it ? What have we 
[149] in the World that's dearer to us than our Lives, and 
ought not we to take the beft meafures to preferve 'em? The 
French murder their Health by a thoufand different means, 
and we preferve ours till our Bodies are worn out, our Souls 



to iVflr^- America. 581 

being fo far free from Paflions, that they can't alter or difturb 
our Bodies. And after all, you infinuate that the French haften 
the Moment of their Death by lawful means : A very pretty 
conclufion indeed, and fuch as deferves to be took notice of. 
Believe me, my dear Brother, 'tis thy Intereft to turn Huron, 
in order to prolong thy life. Thou fhalt drink, eat, fleep, and 
Hunt with all the eafe that can be ; thou fhalt be free'd from 
the Paflions that Tyrannife over the French ; thou fhalt have 
no occafion for Gold or Silver to make thee happy; thou fhalt 
not fear Robbers, Affaflins or Falfe Witneffes ; and if thou 
haft a mind to be King of all the World, why, thou fhalt have 
nothing to do but to think that thou art fo. 

Labontan. You cannot exped I fhould comply with your 
demand, without thinking that I have been guilty of fuch 
Crimes in France, that I can't return without running the 
rifque of being Burnt : For after all, I can't imagine a more 
unaccountable Metamorphofis, than that of a French Man into a 
Huron. How d'ye think I could undergo the Fatigues we 
talk'd of but now? D'ye think I could have the patience to 
hear the Childifh Propofals of your Ancient and your Young 
Men, without taking them up ? Is it feafible that I could live 
upon Broth, Bread, Indian Corn, Roaft Meat and Boil'd, 
without either Pepper or Salt? Could I brook the Larding 
of my Face like a Fool, with twenty forts of Colours? What 
Spirit muft I be of, if I drink nothing but Mapple-Water, 
and go ftark Naked all the Summer, [150] and eat out of 
nothing but Wooden Difhes ? Your Meals would never go 



582 Some New Voyages 

down with me, fince two or three hundred Perfons muft Dance 
for two or three hours before and after. I can't live with an 
uncivilis'd fort of People, who know no other Compliment 
than, / honour you. No, no ; my dear Adario, 'tis impoffible 
for a French-Man to turn Huron, but a Huron may eafily become 
a French-Man. 

Adario. At that rate you prefer Slavery to Liberty. But 
'tis no Surprifal to me, after what I have heard you maintain : 
Tho after all, if you happen'd to enter into your own Breaft, 
and to throw off your prepoffeffion with regard to the Cuf- 
toms and Humours of the French Nation ; I cannot fee that 
the Obje&ions you've now Started, are of fuch Moment as to 
keep you from falling into our way of living. What a mighty 
difficulty you meet with in bringing your felf to approve of 
our old Men's Counfel, and our young Men's Projects ! Are 
not you equally gravell'd, when the Jefuits and your Superiours 
make impertinent demands ? Why would not you choofe to 
live upon the Broth of all forts of good and fubftantial Meat? 
Our Partridges, Turkeys, Hares, Ducks, and Roe-Bucks ; do 
not they eat well when they're Roafted or Boil'd? What fig- 
nifies your Pepper, your Salt, and a thoufand other Spices, 
unlefs it be to murder your Health ? Try our way of living 
but one fort-night, and then you'll long for no fuch doings. 
What harm can you fear from the Painting of your Face with 
Colours? You dawb your Hair with Powder and Effence, 
and even your Cloaths are fprinkled with the fame : Nay, I 
have feen French Men that had Muftaches like Cats, cover'd 



to North-America. 583 

o'er with Wax. As for the M apple- Water, 'tis fweet, healthy, 
well-tafted, and friendly to the Stomach : [151] And I've feen 
you drink of it oftner than once or twice : Whereas Wine and 
Brandy deftroy the natural Heat, pall the Stomach, inflame 
the Blood, Intoxicate, and create a thoufand Diforders. And 
pray what harm would it do ye, to go Naked in warm Weather? 
Befides, we are not fo ftark Naked, but that we are cover'd 
behind and before. 'Tis better to go Naked, than to toil 
under an everlafting Sweat, and under a load of Cloaths heap'd 
up one above another. Where's the uneafynefs of Eating, 
Singing, and Dancing in good Company? Had not you 
better do fo than fit at Table moping by your felf, or in the 
Company of thofe that you never faw or knew before? All 
the hardfhip then, that you can complain of, lies in converfing 
with an unciviliz'd People, and being robb'd of the Pagean- 
try of Compliments. ' This you take to be a fad Affliction, 
tho' at the bottom 'tis far from being fuch. Tell me, prithee ; 
do's not Civility confift in Decency and an affable Carriage? 
And what is Decency ? Is it not an everlafting Rack, and a 
tyrefome Affectation difplay'd in Words, Cloaths and Coun- 
tenance ? And why would you Court a Quality that gives you 
fo much trouble? As for Affability; I prefume it lyes in 
giving People to know our readynefs to ferve 'em, by Careffes 
and other outward Marks ; As when you fay every turn, Sir, 
Vm your humble Servant, you may difpofe of me as you pleafe. Now, 
let's but confider to what purpofe all thefe Words are fpoke ; 
for what end muft we lie upon all occafions, and fpeak other- 



584 Some New Voyages 

wife than we think? Had not you better fpeak after this 
fafhion; Hot art thou there, tbou'rt welcome ', for I honour thee? 
Is not it an ugly fhow, to bend one's Body half a fcore times, 
to lower one's hand to the ground, and to fay every moment, 
/ ask your Pardon? Be [152] it known to thee, my dear 
Brother, that this Submiffion alone would be enough to un- 
hinge me quite, as to -your way of living. You've afferted 
that a Huron may eafily turn French ; but believe me, he'll 
meet with other difficulties in the way of his Converfion than 
thofe you fpeak of. For fuppofing I were to turn French out 
of hand, I muft begin with a complyance to Chriftianity, which 
is a Point that you and I talk'd enough of three days ago. In 
order to the fame end, I muft get my felf Shav'd every three 
days, for in all appearance I fhould no fooner profefs Galli- 
cifm, than I fhould become rough and hairy like a Beaft : And 
this inconvenience ftiocks me extreamly: Sure 'tis much better 
to be Beardlefs and Hairlefs ; and I'm equally fure you never 
faw a rough Savage. How d'ye think it would agree with me 
to fpend two hours in Dreffing or Shifting my felf, to put on 
a Blue Sute and Red Stockins, with a Black Hat and a White 
Feather, befides colour'd Ribbands ? Such Rigging would 
make me look upon my felf as a Fool. How could I conde- 
fcend to Sing in the Streets, to Dance before a Looking-Glafs, 
to tofs my Wigg fometimes before and fometimes behind me ? 
I could not ftoop fo as to make my Honours, and fall down 
before a parcel of Sawcy Fools, that are intitled to no other 
Merit than that of their Birth and Fortune* D'ye think that I 
could fee the Indigent languifh and pine away, without giving 



to North- America. 585 

'em all I had ? How could I wear a Sword without attacking 
a Company of Profligate Men who throw into the Gallys an 

infinity of poor Strangers, (*) that . . ^ . _ . f . 

. . ,. t, 1 , *The Algerines, Tripohns, 

never injur d any Body, and are M oors, Turks, Sec. who are 
carried, in a woful Condition, out taken in the Mediterranean, 
of their Native Country, to Curfe and are fent to Marfeilles 
in the [153] midft of their Chains, t0 the Gaileys ' 
their Fathers and Mothers, their Birth, and even the Great 
Spirit. Thus 'tis that the Iroquefe languifh, who were fent to 
France fome two years ago. 1 Can you imagine that I would 
fpeak ill of my Friends, carefs my Enemies, contemn the 
Miferable, honour the Wicked, and enter into Dealings with 
'em ; that I would triumph o'er my Neighbour's Misfortunes, 
and praife a naughty Man ; that I would a6l the part of the 
Envious, the Traitours, the Flatterers, the Inconftant, the 
Liars, the Proud, the Avaricious, the Selfifh, the Taletellers, 
and all your double Minded Folks ? D'ye think it poflible 
for me to be fo indifcreet as to boaft at once of what I have 
done, and what I have not done ; to be fo mean as to crawl 
like an Adder at the feet of a Lord, that orders his Servants 
to deny him ; and to take a Refufal tamely ? No, my dear 
Brother, no ; I can't brook the Character of a French Man ; I 
had rather continue what I am than pafs my Life in thefe 
Chains. Is it poflible that our Liberty do's not Charm you? 
Can you live an eafier life than what you may have in our way? 
When thou comeft to vifit me in my Hutt, do not my Wife 
and my Daughters withdraw and leave thee alone with me, that 

1 For this incident, and its effect upon the colony, see pp. 122-124, ante* — Ed, 



586 Some New Voyages 

our Converfation may fuffer no Interruption? In like man- 
ner, when thou mean'ft to pay a Vifit to my Wife or my 
Daughters, are not thou left alone with the party that thou 
comeft to See ? Are not you welcome to Command any Hutt 
in the Village, and to call for any thing of Eatables that you 
like beft? Did ever a Huron refufe another, either the whole 
or part of what he had catch'd at Hunting or Fifhing? Do 
not we make dividends of our Beaver-Skins, in order to fupply 
thofe who have not enough to purchafe fuch Commodities as 
they have occafion for? [154] Do not we obferve the fame 
Method in the diftribution of our Corn, to fuch as have not 
fufficient Crops upon their Fields for the maintenance of their 
Families? If any one of us have a mind to Build a Canow or 
a Hutt, we all fend our Slaves to forward the Work, without 
being ask'd. This is a quite different way of living from that 
of the Europeans, who would Sue their neareft Relations for an 
Ox or a Horfe. If the European Father asks Mony of his 
Son, or the Son of the Father, he replys he has none. If of 
two French Men who have liv'd twenty years together, and eat 
and drink at one Table every day; if of thefe two French 
Men, I fay, one fhould ask the other for Mony, the anfwer is, 
there's none to be had. If a poor Wretch that goes naked in 
the Streets, and is ready to dye with Hunger and Hardfhips : 
does but ask a rich Man for a Farthing, his anfwer is, 'Tis not 
for him. Now fince all this is true, how can you have the pre- 
emption to claim a free accefs to the Country of the Great 
Spirit? Sure, there's not a Man upon Earth that does not 
know, that Evil is contrary to Nature, and that he was not 



to iVtfr^-America. 587 

Created to do Mifchief. What hopes then can a Chriftian 
have at his Death, that never did a good A6tion in his Life 
time. He either muft believe that the Soul dies with the Body 
(tho' there's none of you that owns that Opinion) or elfe 
fuppofing the Immortality of the Soul, and fuppofing your 
Tenents of Hell, and of the Sins that waft Sinners to that 
Region, to be juft and true, your Souls will have a hot time 
of it. 

Lahontan. D'ye hear, Adario ? I find 'tis needlefs for us 
to Reafon longer upon thefe Heads; for all the Arguments 
you offer have nothing of Solidity in 'em. I have told thee a 
hundred times, that the inftance of a handful of wicked [155] 
Men concludes nothing upon the whole : You fancy that 
every European has his particular Vice, whether known or un- 
known ; and I may preach the contrary to you till to Morrow 
Morning and not Convince you when I have done. You make 
no difference between a Scoundrel and a Man of Honour ; and 
fo I may talk to you ten Years together and not unhinge you 
of the bad opinion you have of our Religion, our Laws, and 
our Cuftoms. I would give a hundred Beaver Skins that you 
could Read and Write like a Frenchman. Had you that 
Qualification, you would not fo fhamefully contemn the happy 
Condition of the Europeans. We have had in France fome 
Cbinefe and Siamefe who came from the remoteft parts of the 
World, and were in every refped: more averfe to our Cuftoms 
than the Hurons, and yet could not but admire our way of 
Living. For my part, I proteft I can't conceive the ground of 
your Obftinacy. 



588 Some New Voyages 

Adario, All thefe People have as crooked Minds as they 
have deform'd Bodies. I have feen fome of the Ambaffadors 
from the Nations you fpeak of, and the Jefuits at Paris gave 
me fome account of their Country. They obferve a divifion 
of Property as well as the French; and forafmuch as they 
are more brutifh and more wedded to their Intereft than the 
French, we muft not think it ftrange that they approv'd of 
the Cuftoms and Manners of a People who treated 'em with 
all the meafures of Frendfhip, and made 'em Prefents. You 
muft not think that the Hurons will take their Meafures from 
them. You ought not to take Exceptions at any thing that 
I have prov'd ; for I do not defpife the Europeans, tho' indeed 
I can't but pity 'em. You fay well in alledging that I place 
no difference between a Rogue and what you call a Man of 
[156] Honour. My Apprehenfion indeed is flat enough; 
but for a long time I have Convers'd with the French on 
purpofe to know what they mean by their Man of Honour. 
To be fure the Word can't be apply'd to a Huron, who is 
a Stranger to Silver, fince a moneylefs Man is no Man of 
Honour in your way. 'Twere an eafie matter to make my 
Slave a Man of Honour, by carrying him to Paris, and fur- 
nilhing him with a hundred Packs of Beaver Skins, to anfwer 
the charge of a Coach and ten or twelve Footmen. As foon 
as he appears in an Embroider'd Suit with fuch a Retinue, 
he'l be Saluted by every one, and Introduc'd to the greateft 
Treats, and the higheft Company : And if he does but regale 
the Gentlemen, and make Prefents to the Ladies, he paffes 
in courfe for a Man of Senfe and Merit: He'l be call'd the 



.J fit uf>catvr futntinq Spoltn 
of in l/ ' jo letter. 



//;•/, 



'W/ltc.< e Jttrpitsiny tAeer enemies lit fii/r itt/iq 



tJ .Vk' /ttiitt*meii cjmiing til a l>oi/y to meet eni 
y . ,/ iufL-t*./c tuActivrtJoner of tVi-ti- 
') ./ S.u tye surp/ ur 'ct anc/ Ait/c/m tAe acttoix 

/As fiorfuese ttiAni&ttjn /t'rtrio ti&oti & Canons 
air?Jr\-><viicse sAootz'ritv utjott if tomorvs that f/t/ . 
v m -fii/cj f/i/mg to their* SririoVi's 
**non'j of ' Aar£ 
. K '"/*/ 't ii/es /7 1 it to ft i'a /it 
^t\. n'omrnf/i/tna tz'tt/i their thi/i/r en 



A /it it for jo huntsmen 



f"i 



^ 



■M 

^ font'crs biithttAetr Acnnetr 



| J Ae /srecinct a/a hut/or ten huntsmen 
f fj/at'd 'in ty ' tntctctte 

'oo/or/ttt/e /ciAe in j ' miaCt ofivht'cA J 



Pat.?, 



r ss 




to TVar^-America. 589 

King of the Hurons, and every one will give out, that his 
Country is full of Gold Mines, that himfelf is the moft 
Puiffant Prince in America, that he is a Man of Senfe and 
talks moft agreeably in Company; that he is redoubted by 
all his Neighbours ; in fine, he'l be fuch a Man of Honour 
as moft of your French Footmen come to be after they have 
made fhift, by infamous and deteftable means, to pick up as 
much Money as will fetch that pompous Equipage. Ha ! 
my dear Brother, if I could but read, I could find out a great 
many fine things that now I do not know. You fhould not 
then get oflf for hearing me mention the few Diforders that I 
obferv'd among the Europeans; for I would then mutter you 
up a great many more, whether in Wholefale or Retail. I do 
not believe that there's any one Vocation or Rank of Men 
that would not be found liable to juft Cenfure, if examin'd by 
one that can Read and Write. And in my Opinion [157] 
'twere better for the French that they were Strangers to 
Reading and Writing : Every Day gives us frefh Inftances 
of an infinity of Difputes among the Coureurs de Bois upon 
the account of Writings, which tend to nothing but Litigiouf- 
nefs and Law Suits. One bit of Paper is enough to ruin a 
whole Family. With a flip of a Letter a Woman betrays 
her Husband, and concerts ways to have her turn ferv'd ; a 
Mother fells her Daughter, and a Forger of Writings cheats 
whom he pleafes. In your Books which are publifh'd every 
Day, you write Lies and impertinent Stories ; and yet you 
would fain have me to Read and Write like the French. No, 
my dear Brother, I had rather live without Knowledge, than 



590 Some New Voyages 

to Read and Write fuch things as the Hurons abhor. We can 
do all our Bufinefs with reference to our Hunting and our 
Military Adventures, by the help of our Hieroglyphicks. You 
know very well that the Characters which we draw upon the 
peel'd Trees in our Paffages, comprehend all the Particulars 
of a Hunting or Warlike Expedition, and that all who fee 
thefe Marks know what they fignifie. 1 Now, pray, what occa- 
fion have we for more ? The Communion of Goods among 
the Hurons fuperfedes the ufe of Writing. We have no Pofts 
nor no Horfes in our Forrefts for Couriers to ride upon to 
Quebec, We make Peace and War without Writing, and em- 
ploy only Ambaffadors that carry the Faith and Promife of 
the Nation. Our Boundaries are adjufted without Writing : 
And as for the Sciences that you ftudy, they would be of no 
ufe to us ; for, to inftance in Geography^ we have no mind to 
puzzle our Brains in the reading of Books of Voyages that 
contradict one another; and are not in the humour to abdi- 
cate our Country, which you know we are [158] fo minutely 
acquainted with, that the leaft Brook does not fcape our Cal- 
culation. Aftronomy would be equally ufelefs ; for we reckon 
the Years by the Moons, and fo many Winters ftand for an 
equal number of Years. Navigation would be yet lefs fervice- 
able, for we have no Ships : And Fortification can bring us no 
Advantage, in regard that a Fort of fingle Paliffadoes is to us 
a fufficient guard from the Arrows and the Surprifes of our 
Enemies, who are Strangers to Artillery. In a Word, confid- 



1 See pp. 512-515, ante. — Ed. 



to North- America. 591 

ering our way of living, Writing can do us no good. All that 
I value in the whole Circle of your Sciences, is Arithmetick : I 
can't but own that that Science pleafes me infinitely well, tho' 
at the fame time I am fenfible that thofe who are vers'd in it 
are not free from great Errors. There is no Trade or Pro- 
feflion among the French that I like, excepting that which runs 
in the way of Commerce; that indeed I look upon as a Lawful 
Calling, and that which is moft neceffary for our Welfare. 
The Merchants are welcome to us ; fometimes they bring us 
good Commodities, and fome of 'em being Men of Juftice 
and Probity are fatisfied with a moderate Gain: They run 
great hazards, they advance beforehand, they lend, they flay 
for their due ; in fine, I know many Dealers that have a juft 
and reafonable Soul, and have oblig'd our Nation very much. 
But at the fame time there are others who ad with no other 
view than to make an exorbitant Profit upon Goods that 
have a good fhew and are worth but little, particularly Axes, 
Kettles, Powder, Guns, &c. which we are not qualified to 
know. This makes it to appear, that in all the Ranks and 
Degrees of the Europeans there's fomething that ought to be 
diflik'd. This is a certain truth, that if a Merchant has not 
an upright Heart, and a [159] fufficient ftock of Vertue to 
withftand the various Temptations to which his Bufinefs lays 
him open, he violates every foot the meafures of Juftice, 
Equity, Charity, Sincerity, and true Faith. Are not they 
chargeable with flaming Wickednefs, when they give us forry 
Commodities in exchange for our Beaver Skins, which a blind 



592 Some New Voyages 

Man may deal in without being cheated ? I have done, my 
dear Brother, I muft now return to the Village, where I'll ftay 
for you to Morrow after Dinner. 

Lahontan. I am come, Adario ) to thy Apartment, to pay 
my Refpefts to thy Grandfather, who I hear lies very ill. 'Tis 
to be fear'd that the good old Gentleman may be long afflicted 
with the uneafiness he now complains of; one would think that 
a Man of his Age, who reckons upon Seventy Years, might 
refrain the (hooting of Turtle-Doves. I've obferv'd for a long 
time, that your old Folks are always in Motion and A6tion, 
which is the ready way to exhauft fpeedily the little Strength 
that's left 'em. I'll tell thee, Adario, thou muft fend one of 
thy Slaves for my Surgeon, who underftands Phyfick well 
enough ; for I'm morally affur'd that he'l give him eafe in a 
Minute : This Feaver is fo inconfiderable that it can't reach 
his Life, unlefs it reaches to a greater height. 

Adario. Thou knoweft very well, my dear Brother, that I 
have been a mortal Enemy to your Phyficians, ever fince I faw 
ten or twelve Perfons die in their Hands, through the tyranny 
of their Remedies. My Grandfather that you take to be 
Seventy Years old is full Ninety eight. He Marry'd at Thirty 
Years of Age ; my Father was Marry'd at Thirty two, and I 
am now Thirty five Years old. 'Tis true he is of a [160] 
ftrong Conftitution, and that this Age could not be attain'd 
in Europe, where People die earlier. One of thefe Days I'll 
fhew you fourteen or fifteen old Men that are turn'd of a 
Hundred, nay one of 'em a Hundred and twenty four. I 



to Nortb-America. 593 

knew another that dy'd fix Years ago at the Age of a Hun- 
dred and forty. 1 As for the reftlefs Life that you find fault 
with in our old Men, I can affure you on the contrary, that 
if they lay loytering upon their Mats in the Huts, and did 
nothing but Eat, Drink and Sleep, they would become heavy 
and dull and unfit for A6Hon; and for as much as their 
continuall reft would hinder the infenfible Tranfpiration, the 
Humours then recoyling would rejoin the Blood, and thus by 
a natural effedt their Limbs and Kidneys would be fo infeebled 
and wafted, that a mortal Phthifick would enfue. This is an 
Obfervation of long ftanding, that proves true in all the 
Nations of Canada. The Jugglers are to be here prefently to 
try their Skill, and to find out what Meat or Fifh is requifite 
for the cure of this Diftemper. My Slaves are now ready to 
go either a Hunting or Fifhing, and if you'l tarry an Hour or 
two with me, you fhall fee the apifti tricks of thefe Mounte- 
banks, whom we know to be fuch when we are well, and yet 
fend for 'em with great impatience .when any dangerous Dif- 
temper feizes us. 

Lahontan. You muft confider, my dear Adario, that in fuch 
cafes our Mind is fick as well as the Body. We in Europe do 
the fame thing by our Phyficians. When a Man enjoys his 
Health he hates and avoids the Phyficians ; but when he 
apprehends himfelf out of order, notwithftanding that he 
knows the uncertainity of their Art, he calls a Confultation 
of a Dozen : Some who have no other Illnefs than what Fancy 
fuggefts, [161] do melt down their Bodies by fuch Remedies 

*On the subject of Indian longevity, see p. 431, note 2, ante. — Ed. 



594 Some New Voyages 

as would kill a Horfe. I own, indeed, that you have no fuch 
Fools among you ; but to make the Parallel even, you take 
no care of your Health ; for you run at the Hunting ftark 
naked from Morning to Night ; you dance three or four 
Hours an end till you fweat again, and the playing at the 
Ball in a Company of fix or feven Hundred Perfons on a fide, 
to tofs it half a League one way or t'other, is an infinite Fatigue 
to your Bodies ; it infeebles the Parts, difperfes the Spirits, 
fowers the mafs of Blood and Humours, and breaks the union 
of their Principles. At this rate a Man that might otherwife 
have liv'd a Hundred Years is fweep'd off at Eighty. 

Adario. Suppofing all you fay to be true, what fignifies it 
for a Man to live fo long, fince Life is a fort of Death after 
that Age? Perhaps your Reafons may bear as to the French , 
the generality of whom being lazy and flothful, have an aver- 
fion to all manner of violent Exercifes. They are of the fame 
temper with our fuperannuated Perfons, that live in fuch a 
ftupid infenfible way ; that they never ftir out of their Huts 
but when they take Fire. Our Temperaments and Com- 
plexions are as widely different from yours as Night from 
Day : And that remarkable difference that I obferve between 
the Europeans and the People of Canada, upon all things in 
general, is to me an Argument that we are not defcended of 
your pretended Adam. Among us you (han't hear in an Age, 
of one that is Hunch-back'd, or Lame, or Dwarfifh, or Deaf, 
or Dumb, or Blind from their Infancy, and far lefs any that 
is One-ey'd ; for when a one-ey'd Creature comes into the 
World among us, we look upon it as a Prefage of the enfuing 



to North-America. 595 

Calamity [162] of the Nation, and have frequently experienc'd 
the truth of the Prophecy. A one-ey'd Creature is equally 
deftitute of Senfe and of an upright Heart; he is Malicious, 
Goatifh and Slothful to the laft degree ; he is more cowardly 
than a Hare, and never goes a Hunting for fear of running 
his one Eye againft the Branch of a Tree. As for our Difeafes, 
we know no fuch thing as your T)ropfies, Afthmas, Palfy's, Gout 
and Pox. The Leprofy, the Lethargy, External Swellings, the 
Suppreffion of Urine, the Stone and the Gravel, are Diftempers 
that we are not acquainted with ; to the great Aftonifhment 
of the French, who are fo liable to 'em. Fevers indeed reign 
among us, efpecially upon our return from any Warlike 
Expedition, and proceed from our lying in the open Air, our 
crofling of Marfhes, wading over Rivers, our falling two or 
three Days at a time, eating cold Vi&uals, &c. Sometimes 
Pleurijies prove mortal to us, when we heat our felves with 
running, whether in Military or Hunting Adventures, and 
then drink fuch Water as we are unacquainted with : And 
Colicks attack us now and then upon the fame occafion. We 
are fubjedt to the Meazles and the Small Pox, and that we owe 
to one of two Reafons. Either we eat fo much Fifh, that the 
Blood it produces is of a different temper from that proceed- 
ing from Meat, and thereupon boils in the Veffels with greater 
Violence, and throws out its thick and coarfe Particles upon 
the infenfible Pores of the Skin. Or elfe the bad Air pen'd 
up in our Villages for want of Windows to our Huts, makes 
fo much Fire and Smoak, that the difproportion between the 
Particles of the confin'd Air and thofe of our Blood and 



596 Some New Voyages 

Humours, gives rife to fuch Infirmities. Now thefe are the 
only Diftempers that vifit us. 

[163] Lahontan. This, my dear Adario, is the firft time I 
have heard thee reafon juftly fince the Commencement of our 
Conferences. I acknowledge, you are exempted from an 
infinity of Evils that lie heavy upon us, and the reafon of this 
Happinefs may be gather'd from what you offer'd t'other Day, 
namely, That the repofe of one's Mind is the greateft Ingredient of 
Health. The Hurons being confin'd to the bare knowledge 
of Hunting, do not fatigue their Spirits, and impair their 
Healths, in the purfuit of an infinity of fine Sciences, in 
watching unfeafonably, breaking their reft and toiling hard at 
the ftudious Anvil. With us, a Man bred to the Sword 
makes it his bufinefs to read and know the Hiftory of the 
Wars that have happened in the World, and to make himfelf 
acquainted with the Art of Fortifying, Attacking and Defend- 
ing Places : This ingroffes his whole time, which after all is 
too little to procure him the Accomplifhments he defires. A 
Man that takes to the Church plyes the Study of Theology 
Night and Day, for the good and intereft of Religion ; he 
writes Books to inftru6l People in the concerns of their Salva- 
tion, and Dedicating to God the Hours, the Days, the Months, 
and the Years of his Life, receives after this Life an Eternal 
Inheritance by way of Recompence. Our Judges apply them- 
felves to the knowledge of the Laws Night and Day, they 
examin Bills and Proceffes ; they give continual Audience to 
an infinity of Plaintiffs that teaze 'em without Intermiffion; 
in fine they can fcarce fpare leifure to Eat or Drink. Our 



to North-America. 597 

Phyficians purfue the Science of rendring Men Immortal, 
they run about from Patient to Patient, from Hofpital to 
Hofpital, in order to learn the Nature and the Caufe of dif- 
ferent Diftempers : They rack [164] their Brains in unlocking 
the Qualities of Drugs, Herbs and Simples, by a thoufand 
uncommon and curious Experiments. The Cofmographers 
and Aftronomers bend all their thoughts upon the difcovery of 
the Figure, Magnitude and Compofition of Heaven and 
Earth. The former can trace the leaft Star in the Firmament, 
they meafure its courfe, its diftance from the Ecliptick, its 
afcenfion and declination : The latter know how to diftinguifh 
Climates, and the various Pofitions of the Globe of the Earth ; 
they are acquainted with the Seas, Lakes, Rivers, Ifles, Gulfs ; 
they compute the diftances of one Country from another ; and 
in fine, all the Nations of the World are known to them, as 
well as their Religions, their Laws, their Languages, their 
Cuftoms, and their various Forms of Government. To wind 
up all into one Word, all the Profeffors of Sciences are very 
fenfible that they purfue their Studies with too much Appli- 
cation, and thereby murder their Health. For the animal 
Spirits are not ftrain'd out in the Brain, but in proportion to 
the fupplies of fine Blood that it receives from the Heart; 
and the Heart being a Mufcle can't fquirt out the Blood into 
all the parts of the Body without the Influence of the animal 
Spirits. Now, when the Soul is Serene and all Tranquility as 
thine is, the Brain fupplies all the parts of the Body with as 
much as they have occafion for in order to perform the Offices 
allotted 'em by Nature : Whereas in the cafe of a profound 



598 Some New Voyages 

Application to Sciences, the Soul being tofs'd and perplex' d 
with a croud of Thoughts, the Spirits are much exhaufted and 
difpers'd, both by long watchings and by the racking of the 
Imagination. In this cafe all the Spirits that the Brain can 
form are fcarce fufficient to recruit the parts employ'd by the 
Soul [165] in the precipitant Motions it calls for; and there 
being but a fmall Stock of Spirits in the Nerves, which convey 
'em to the parts that minifter to the Digeftion of what we eat, 
their Fibres have a languid drooping motion : And thus it 
comes to pafs that the Actions of the Body are lamely per- 
form'd, the Digeftion is imperfeft, the Serum flies off from 
the Blood, and by falling upon the Head, the Limbs, the 
Nerves, the Breaft and other parts, gives rife to the Dropfy, 
Gout, and Palfy ; and to all the other Difeafes you took 
notice of but now. 

Adario. At that rate, my dear Brother, it muft be only the 
Learned Men that fall into fuch Diforders : And upon that 
foot, I hope you'll own that one had better be a Huron than a 
Science-Hunter, confidering that Health is the mod valuable of 
all good things. But at the fame time, I know very well that 
thefe Diftempers have no refpeft of Perfons, but fall upon the 
Ignorant as well as thofe of a greater Chara&er. Not that I 
deny what thou fayeft, for I am fully convinc'd that Brain- 
Work infeebles the Body extreamly; and I have often won- 
dered how your Conftitution comes to be fo ftrong, as to keep 
up againft the violent Shocks of Difcontent and Fret, that you 
feel when things go crofs with you. I have feen fome French 



to i\f0r£&-America. 599 

Men tear their Hair, others cry and weep bitterly like Women 
Burning at a Stake, others again abftain from eating or drink- 
ing for two days, and fuffer fuch violent Sallies of Paflion as 
to dafti every thing in pieces that came in their way: And 
when all came to all, their Health did not appear to be affedted. 
Queftionlefs, their Nature muft be different from ours; for 
there's never a Huron in the World that would not die in a 
days time upon incountring the hundredth part of fuch Tran- 
fports. Ay, moft certainly, [166] you are of a different 
Mould from us ; for your Wines, your Brandy, and your 
Spices, make us Sick unto death ; whereas you can't live for- 
footh without fuch Drugs : Befides, your Blood is Salt and 
ours is not ; you have got Beards, and we have none. Nay 
farther; I have obferv'd that before you pafs the Age of 
thirty five or forty, you are Stronger and more Robuft than 
we ; for we can't carry fuch heavy Loads as you do till that 
Age ; but after that your Strength dwindles and vifibly de- 
clines, whereas ours keeps to its wonted pitch till we count 
fifty five or fixty years of Age. This is a truth that our young 
Women can vouch for. They tell you that when a young 
French-man obliges 'em fix times a night, a young Huron do's 
not rife to above half the number ; and with the fame Breath 
they declare, that the French are older in that Trade at thirty 
five, than the Hurons are at fifty years of Age. This intelli- 
gence given in by our good Girles, who are better pleas'd 
with your young Men's over-doing, than with the Moderation 
of our Youths ; This intelligence, I fay, led me to think that 



600 Some New Voyages 

your Gout, Dropfy, Phthifick, Palfy, Stone, and Gravel, and 
the other Diftempers above mention'd, are certainly occafion'd, 
not only by the immoderatenefs of thefe Pleafures, but by the 
unfeafonablenefs of the time, and the inconveniency of the 
way in which you purfue 'em ; for when you have but juft done 
eating, or are newly come off a fatiguing bout, you lie with 
your Women as often as ever you can, and that either upon 
Chairs, or in a Standing Pofture, without confidering the 
Damage that accrues from fuch indifcretion : Witnefs the com- 
mon practice of thefe young Sparks in the Village of Dojfenra, 
who make their Table ferve for a Bed. For the purpofe ; you 
are fubjedt to two Difeafes more, [167] that we are free from. 
The firft is that call'd by the Illinefe, the hot Diftemper, for that 
People are liable to it as well as thofe who live upon the 
Mijjifipi. This Malady goes by the Name of the Venereal 
Diftemper in your Country. The other is that you call the 
Scurvy^ which we Style, the cold evil^ with regard to the Symp- 
toms and Caufes of that Diftemper, that we have obferv'd 
fince the Arrival of the French in Canada. You fee therefore 
that you are liable to a great many Difeafes, and thofe fuch as 
are not eafily Cur'd. Inftead of retrieving your Health, your 
Phyficians murder you, by exhibiting Remedies calculated for 
their own Intereft, which fpin out the Diftemper and kill you 
at laft. A Phyfician would be ftill Poor if he cur'd his Patients 
fpeedily. The men of that Profeflion are cautious of approv- 
ing of our way of Sweating ; for they know the confequence 
of it too well, and when their Advice is ask'd upon the matter, 



to North- America. 60 1 

their Anfwer is to this purpofe. None but fools are capable of 
imitating fools ; the Savages have not the name of Savages for 
nothing; and their Remedies are as Savage as themfelves. If 'tis 
true that after Sweating, they throw themfelves into cold Water or 
into Snow y without prefent death; their good luck is owing to the 
Air of the Climate, and to their way of Feeding, which differs 
from ours. But notwithftanding this favourable Circumftance, fuch 
and fuch a Savage, that would otherwife have outlived a hundred 
years of age, was cut off at eighty by the ufe of that terrible Remedy. 
Such is the Language of your Phyficians, by which they mean 
to fcare the Europeans from the ufe of our Remedies : Tho' 
at the fame time, 'tis certain that if you had a mind to Sweat 
after our way now and then, you might do it with the greateft 
eafe and fafety in the World, and by that means all the evil 
Humours engendred in [168] your Blood by your Wine, your 
Spices, your intemperate Venery, your Unfeafonable Watch- 
ing and your other Fatigues, would be evacuated by the Pores 
of the Skin. Were this Method follow'd, you might bid an 
eternal Adieu to Phyfick, and all its Poifonous Ingredients. 
This, my dear Brother, is as manifeft as the Sun-Shine ; tho' 
'twill not go down with the Ignorant, who talk of nothing but 
Pleurifies and Rheumatifms, as the Confequents of this Cure. 
'Tis ftrange, methinks, they will not give Ear to the Anfwer 
we make to the Obje&ion Started by your Phyficians againft 
our way of Sweating. 'Tis an undifputed Truth that Nature 
is a good kind Mother, which defires to eternife our Lives ; 
and yet we plague and torment her fo violently, that fome- 



602 Some New Voyages 

times (he's brought to a low and weak condition, and is fcarce 
able to Succour us. Our Debauches and Fatigues create de- 
prav'd Humours, which Nature would throw out of the Body, 
if She had but Strength enough to open the Gates, viz. the 
Pores of the Skin. 'Tis true fhe expells as much as fhe can, by 
Urine and Stool, by the Mouth, Nofe, and infenfible Tranfpir- 
ation : But fometimes the quantity of the Serofities is fo over- 
bearing that they overflow all the parts of the Body between 
the Skin and the Flefh : And in that cafe 'tis our bufinefs to 
procure their egrefs the fpeedyeft and fhorteft way, for fear 
their longer ftay fhould give rife to this Gout, Rheumatifm, 
Dropfy, Palfy, and all the other Diftempers that fink a healthy 
State. Now, to compafs this end, we muft unlock the Pores 
by the means of Sweating ; and withal take care to fhut 'em 
foon after, left the nutritive juice fhould glide out by the fame 
paffage; which can be no otherwife prevented than by throw- 
ing our felves into cold Water, as we ufually do. [169] 'Tis 
the fame cafe as if Wolves were got into your Sheep Folds ; for 
then you would open the Doors that the mifchievous Animals 
might turn out ; but after they're once out of Doors, you 
would not fail to fhut 'em again for fear your Sheep fhould run 
after 'em. I own indeed that your Phyficians fay well, when 
they plead that a Man who has over-heated himfelf by Hunting 
or any violent Exercife, indangers his Life by throwing himfelf 
immediately into cold Water. That I take to be an uncon- 
tefted truth; for the Blood which in that Cafe is agitated 
and boils as it were in the Veins, would certainly congeal; 
juft as boiling Water congeals fooner than cold Water, when 



to iVan^-America. 603 

expos'd to the Froft or put into a cold Fountain. This is the 
Sum of my Thoughts upon that Head. As to what remains, 
I grant we are liable to Difeafes, that equally invade both us 
and the French ; namely, the Small-Pox, Fevers, Pleurifies, and 
fometimes to what you call the Hypochondriac Illnefs : For 
we have fome Fools among us who fancy they are poffefs'd 
by a little Manitou or Spirit of the bignefs of one's Fill ; which 
in our Language we call Aoutaerobi ; and affirm that this Spirit 
is lodg'd in their Body, and particularly in a certain Member 
that ails never fo little. This imaginary Diftemper proceeds 
from their Simplicity and weaknefs of Mind : For in fhort, 
we are not without ignorant foolifh Fellows among us, no 
more than you. You may fee every day fome Hurons, above 
fifty years of Age, who have lefs Senfe and Difcretion than a 
young Girl ; fome who are as Superftitious as your felves, in 
believing that the Spirit of Dreams is the Ambaffadour and 
Meffenger whom the Great Spirit imploys to acquaint Men 
with their Duty. As for our Jugglers, they are Mountebanks 
and Cheats of the fame form with your Phyficians; [170] 
only they content themfelves with the having of good Chear 
at their Patient's coft, without fending 'em to the other World 
in acknowledgment of their Feafts and Prefents. 1 

Lahontan. My deareft Adario, I honour thee beyond all 
expreffion, for now thou argueft juftly. You never fpoke more 
to the purpofe in your life time. Every word you have faid 



1 The feast was one of the chief ceremonies connected with the efforts of the medi- 
cine men to expel disease ; in this, the conjurer played the part of host. See Jes. 
Rel.y x, pp. 179, 183, 197; 1, p. 295.— Ed. 



604 Some New Voyages 

of Sweating is abfolutely true ; and I know it to be fo by 
experience, infomuch that while I live, I will never ufe any 
other Remedy than your way of Sweating. But at the fame 
time, I would not have you run down Bleeding, fo much as you 
did t'other day, when you endeavour'd by a multiplicity of 
Arguments to make out the neceffity of faving our Blood, as 
being the Treafure of Life. I do not difpute its being the 
Treafure of Life ; but I mud needs fay that your Remedies 
againft Pleurefies and Inflamations, take eflfedt only by chance, 
for out of twenty Sick People commonly fifteen die ; whereas 
Bleeding in fuch a cafe might Cure 'em all. I own that this 
method of Cure fhortens their lives, and that a man that has 
Bled often can't hold out fo long as another that has done it 
but feldom ; but a Man lying on a Sick Bed, wants to be 
cur'd at any rate, and thinks of nothing elfe but the prefent 
recovery of his Health ; tho' it fhould coft him the Subftrac- 
tion of fome years from his life, together with the lofs of his 
Blood. In fine, all the Remarks I have made on the Subject 
in hand, center in this ; that the People of Canada have a 
better Complexion than the Europeans, that they are more 
Indefatigable and Robuft, more inur'd to Watching, Fafting 
and other hardfhips, more infenfible of Cold and Heat ; info- 
much that they are not only exempted from the Paflions that 
tumble and difturb our Souls, but likewife fhelter'd from the 
Infirmities that we groan under. You are [171] poor and 
miferable, but at the fame time you have the benefit of perfedl 
health : But we who enjoy the Conveniences of Life and the 
Inftruments of Eafe, are forc'd either thro' Complaifance or 



to North-Pimtnca. 605 

by the occafional Adventures of life, to Murder our felves by 
an infinity of Debauches, to which you are never expos'd. 

Adario. My Brother, I come to Vifit thee, and am accom- 
pany'd by my Daughter, who is about to Marry, againft my 
Will, a young Man that's as good a Warriour as he's a forry 
Huntfman. She has a mind to't ; and that is enough in our 
Country : But 'tis not fo in France, where the Parents muft 
confent to the Marrying of their Children. I am oblig'd to 
comply with my Daughter's demands : For if I pretend to 
Marry her again, fhe'd quickly return upon me ; What do you 
think Father ! Am I your Slave ? Shall not I enjoy my Liberty ? 
Muft I for your fancy, Marry a Man I do not care for ? How can 
I endure a Husband that buys my Corps of my Father, and what 
value fhall I have for fuch a Father as makes Brokerage of his 
Daughter to a Brute ? And how can I have an affeSlion for the 
Children of a Man I cannot love ? If I jhould Marry him in 
obedience to you, and go from him in fifteen days time, as the Privi- 
ledges and natural Liberties of the Nation would allow ; youHl tell 
me f tis not well done ; and } twould trouble you, all the World would 
laugh at it, and perhaps I might prove with Child. Thus, dear 
Brother, would my Girl anfwer me, and it may be a great deal 
worfe, as it happened fome years ago to one of our old Men, 
who pretended to Marry his Daughter to a Man (he did not 
love, for in my Prefence Hie faid a great many harfh things by 
way of Reproach : Infinuating that a Man of Spirit ought not 
to expofe himfelf, in offering to advife a Perfon from whom 
he may [172] receive fuch affronts; neither ought he to 



606 Some New Voyages 

require fuch refpedls from his Children as he knows to be 
impracticable. She added then, 'twas true [he was his Daugh- 
ter ', and he might be fatisfied. He got her upon a Woman he loved 
as much as fhe hated the Husband her Father had provided for her. 
You muft know, we never have a Marriage contracted between 
Relations, let the degree be never fo remote. 1 Our Women 
never Marry again after they're forty years of Age, becaufe 
the Children they have after that Age are generally of a 
weakly Conftitution. Not that they are the more Continent 
for this : On the contrary, you'll find them more paffionately 
inclin'd than a Girl of twenty. And 'tis for this reafon that 
they entertain the French fo kindly ; nay, and fometimes give 
themfelves the trouble to follow them. However you know 
that our Women are not fo Fruitful as the French^ tho' they 
admit of more frequent Embraces ; which to me is very ftrange, 
for 'tis quite contrary to what might be expected. 

Lahontan. 'Tis for the fame reafon, my poor Adario, that 
they Conceive not fo eafily as ours. If they did not indulge 
themfelves too much in the frequency of Embraces, and 
receive 'em with an over-bearing Keennefs, the Matter cal- 
culated for the production of Children, would have time to 
affume the neceffary qualities for the bufinefs of Generation. 
It's the fame cafe with a Field that is Sowed continually with- 
out being fuffered to ly Fallow, for at laft it will produce 
nothing (as Experience plainly fhews;) on the other fide, if 
you forbear the Ground, the Earth regains its force, the 



1 Marriage between members of the same gens was forbidden among many of the 
Indian tribes, as such persons were assumed to be consanguine. — Ed. 



to North-America. 607 

Serene Air, the Rain and the Sun give it a new Sap, which 
makes the Seed to Sprout. But prithee, my dear Friend, 
fuffer me to ask thee one Queftion. What is the reafon that 
the Women-Savages, being fo rarely [173] Fruitful, have the 
Increafe of their Nation fo little in view, that a Woman fhall 
make her felf Mifcarry when the Father of the Child dies, or 
is kill'd, before fhe is brought to Bed? You'll tell me, Ihe 
do's it to fave her Reputation ; becaufe, without that Precau- 
tion (he would never have another Husband. But it would 
feem the Intereft of the Nation, which lies in its Increafe and 
Multiplication, is but little regarded by your Women. Now, 
it is not fo with ours, for, as you faid t'other day, our Coureurs 
de Bois and many others, find very often new Children in their 
Houfes, at their return from their Journeys : But they are 
not much diffatisfied, upon the confideration, that this adds fo 
many Bodys for the Nation, and fo many Souls for Heaven : 
Tho' after all, their Women undergo as much difgrace upon 
fuch occafions as yours do, and fometimes are Imprifoned for 
Life, while yours are allow'd to entertain as many Gallants 
as they pleafe afterwards. 'Tis a moft abominable piece of 
Cruelty for a Woman to make away with her Child : A 
Crime which the Author of Life will never pardon: And 
this is one of the greateft Abufes to be reformed among you. 
You ought to difcountenance Nakednefs too ; for the liberty 
which your Boys have of going Naked, makes a terrible 
Hurricane in the Minds of your young Girls ; as they are not 
made of Brafs, fo the view of thofe parts which decency 
forbids me to name, can't but call up the Amorous Fire, 



608 Some New Voyages 

efpecially when the young Wantons ftiew that Nature is 
neither dead nor untrue to the Adventures of Love. 

Adario. I take it, you account for the Barrennefs of our 
Women admirably ; for I perceive how that may come to pafs : 
And as for the Criminal Practice of our young Women in 
taking [174] Potions to make themfelves Mifcarry; I find 
your Reflections upon it are very juft. But what you fay of 
Nakednefs do's not ftand to Reafon. I allow that in a Nation 
where diftindlions of Property are acknowledg'd, you are very 
much in the right of it, to cover not only fuch parts as ought 
not to be nam'd, but even all the parts of the Body. What 
ufe would the French make of their Gold and their Silver, 
if they did not imploy it in providing themfelves with fine 
Cloaths? Since in your Country Men are valued according 
to their Drefs, is it not a great advantage to be able to cover 
any Defecfl in Nature with a handfome Habit? In earned, 
Nakednefs ought not to offend any but fuch as allow Prop- 
erty. A deform'd or decrepit Man among you has found 
the Secret of appearing Handfome or well Drefs'd, in a Beau 
Perriwig and fine Cloaths ; under which 'tis impoflible to dif- 
tinguifh Artificial Shapes from fuch as are Natural. Befides, 
'twould be a great inconveniency for the Europeans to go 
Naked ; for thofe who are well provided would then find fo 
much Imployment, and earn fo much Mony for good Services, 
that they would not dream of Marrying as long as they liv'd ; 
not to mention that the promifing Afpe<5t would tempt the 
Married Women to violate their Conjugal Vows. Now, thefe 
reafons can have no place among us, where every thing muft 



to iVflr^-America. 609 

fit, whether great or little, for the young Women taking a 
view of the Naked parts, make their choice by the Eye : And 
for as much as Nature has obferv'd the meafures of Propor- 
tion in both Sexes, any Woman may be well affur'd what ftie 
has to expedl from a Husband. Our Women are as Fickle 
as yours, and [175] for that reafon the moft defpicable Man 
here never defpairs of having a Wife ; for as every thing 
appears naked and open to fight, fo every Girl choofes ac- 
cording to her Fancy, without regarding the meafures of 
Proportion. Some love a well fhaped Man let a certain mat- 
ter about him be never fo little. Others make choice of an 
ill fhap'd forry like Fellow, by reafon of the goodly fize of I 
know not what ; and others again pick out a Man of Spirit 
and Vigour tho' he be neither well fliap'd nor well provided 
in [the] namelefs Quarter, 

This, my dear Brother, is all the Anfwer I have to give to 
your Charge upon the fcore of Nudity; which you know lies 
only againft the Youths ; for our married Men and Widows 
cover themfelves both before and behind with a great deal of 
Nicety. And, befides, to make fome Compenfation for the 
Nudity of our Boys, our Girls are Modeller than yours, 
for they expofe nothing to open view but the Calf of their 
Leg, whereas yours lay their Breafts open in fuch a Fafhion 
that our young Men run their Nofes into 'em when they 
bargain about the Beaver Skins with your handfom She- 
merchants. Is not this a Grievance among the French that 
wants to be Redrefs'd ? For I have it from very good Hands, 
that fcarce any French Woman can refift the temptation of an 



610 Some New Voyages 

objedl that's mov'd by her naked Breafts. A due reformation 
of this indecent Cuftom would be a means to preferve their 
Husbands from the Chimerical Diftemper of Horns, which 
you plant upon their Foreheads without ever touching or 
feeing them, and that by a Miracle I can't fathom : For if I 
plant an Apple-tree in a Garden it does not grow upon the top 
of a Rock ; and in like manner one would think your invifible 
Horns (hould take root only [176] in the place where their 
Seed is fown, and appear in the Foreheads of the Women, as 
being a juft reprefentation of the Husbands and the Spark's 
Tools. In fine, this whim of the Horns is a horrid piece of 
Indifcretion ; for why fhould you affront the Husband becaufe 
his Wife takes her Pleafure? If in Marriage a Man marries 
a Woman's Vices, then the French way of Marriage is an 
Oath that runs counter to right Reafon, or elfe a Man muft 
keep his Wife under Lock and Key to avoid the difhonour of 
her Vices. The Husbands that retain to the horned Lift 
muft needs be very numerous ; for I can't imagine that a 
Woman can brook the feverity of an eternal Chain, without 
having recourfe to fome good Friend to foften her Affliction. 
I fhould pardon the French if they made the Marriage to ftand 
only upon certain Conditions, that is upon the Provifo that 
the Woman have Children, and that both fhe and her Hus- 
band keep their Health, fo as to be able to difcharge the 
Marriage Duties as they ought to do. This is all the Regu- 
lation that can be made in a Nation that ftands to Meum and 

Tuum. You Chriftians have another impertinent Cuftom, 

which I can't but take notice of. Your Men glory in the 



to North- America. 6n 

Debauching of Women, as if yielding to the Temptations of 
Love were not equally Criminal in either Sex. Your young 
Sparks ufe their utmoft Efforts to tempt the Maids and mar- 
ried Women ; they fet all means at work to compafs their 
end ; and when Matters of their Wifties talk publickly of the 
Adventure ; upon which every body Cenfures the Lady, and 
cries up the Cavalier, whereas the former merits a Pardon, and 
the latter deferves to be Punifh'd. How d'ye think your 
Women fhould be Faithful to you, if you are Faithlefs to 
them? If the [177] married Men keep their Cracks, will not 
their Wives keep Company with other Lovers? And if a 
Husband prefers Gaming and Drinking to his Wive's Com- 
pany, will not his Wife Solace her felf in the Company of a 
Friend ? Would you have your Wives to be Wife and Dif- 
creet, and like ours, you muft Love 'em as your felves, and 
take care not to fell 'em ; for I know fome Husbands among 
you, that confent as fhamefully to the Debauching of their 
Wives, as fome Mothers do to the Proftituting of their 
Daughters, and in fuch cafes Neceffity obliges 'em to it. 
From hence it appears, that 'tis a great Happinefs for the 
Hurons that they are not reduc'd to the practice of fuch mean 
A6Hons, as Mifery occafions among thofe who are not inur'd 
to it. We are at all times neither rich nor poor, and our 
Happinefs upon this fcore goes far beyond all your Riches ; 
for we are not forc'd to expofe our Wives and Daughters to 
fale, in order to live upon their Drudgery in the way of Love. 
You'l fay our Wives and Daughters are foolifh and fimple ; 
and indeed I grant the Allegation, for they can't write Billet 



612 Some New Voyages 

dou y s to their Acquaintances as yours do ; nay, if they could 
write they have not the fenfe to fingle out by the Rules of 
Phyfiognomy a faithful old Woman that fhall carry their 
Love-letters, and obferve a profound Silence. 01 that curfed 
Writing ; that pernicious Invention of the Europeans who 
tremble at the fight of their own Chimera's, which they draw 
themfelves, by the ranking and difpofal of three and twenty 
fmall Figures, that are Calculated, not for the Inftrudtion but 
for the Perplexing of Men's Minds. According to your 
Notions of things, the Hurons are likewife foolifli in not 
minding the lofs of a Maiden-head in the Girls they take in 
Marriage, and in [178] condefcending to marry the very 
Women that their own Companions have turn'd off: But 
prithee tell me, Brother, are the French the wifer for fancying 
that a Girl is a Maid becaufe fhe cries and fwears 'tis fo? 
Nay, fuppofing her to be a true Maid, is the Conqueft the 
greater? No, fure, on the contrary the Husband is oblig'd 
to teach her a Trade that fhe'll pra&ife with others at a time 
when he is not in a condition to continue the daily Exercife. 
As for our marrying Women feparated from former Hus- 
bands, is not that the fame thing as marrying a Widow, with 
this difference only, that our Women have all reafon to be 
perfwaded that we Love 'em, whereas your Widows have 
reafon to believe that you marry their Riches rather than their 
Perfons. How many Families are reduc'd to diforder or 
Ruin by fuch Marriages with Widows? But after all you do 
not pretend to redrefs fuch diforders, becaufe the evil is incur- 
able as long as the Conjugal Tye lafts for Life. Once more, 



to North- America. 613 

I'll take the liberty to mention another piece of Madnefs 
praftis'd among you, which indeed is down right Cruelty to 
my Mind. Your Marriages are indiffolvable, and yet a 
Youth and a Girl that burn in the mutual flames of Love, 
can't marry without the confent of their Parents. Both the 
one and the other muft marry who their Fathers pleafe, in 
oppofition to their own Inclination, tho' their Averfion to the 
Perfon propos'd be fo great, that they hate him mortally. 
The inequality of Age, Eftate and Birth is the fource of all 
thefe Inconveniences ; they overrule the mutual Love of the 
two Parties that like one another. What Cruelty ! What 
Tyranny ! and that pra&is'd by a Father upon his own Chil- 
dren. Do you meet with fuch things among the Hurons ? 
Among them [179] every one's as Rich and as Noble as his 
Neighbour ; the Women are entitled to the fame Liberty with 
the Men, and the Children enjoy the fame Privileges with 
their Fathers. A young Huron may marry one of his Mother's 
Slaves, and neither Father nor Mother are impower'd to 
hinder him. This Slave by fo doing becomes a free Woman ; 
and fince her Beauty pleafes, why fhould not the Youth prefer 
her to the great General's Daughter that is not fo handfome? 
To continue the faults of your Conftitution : Is it not a piece 
of Injuftice among you who abhor a community of Goods, 
that a Nobleman or Gentleman fhould give his eldeft Son 
almoft all that he has, and force the other Brethren and Sifters 
to reft fatisfied with a Trifle, tho' perhaps that eldeft Son is 
not a Lawful Child, and all the reft are? The Confequence 
of this is, that they throw their Daughters into perpetual 



614 Some New Voyages 

Prifons, with a fort of Barbarity which is not fuitable to the 
Chriftian Charity that the Jefuits preach up. As for the 
other Sons, they are forc'd to turn Priefts and Monks, in 
order to live by the fine Trade of praying to God againft 
their will, of preaching what they do not praftife, and of per- 
fuading others into the belief of what they disbelieve them- 
felves. If any of 'em take up a Military Profeffion, they 
defign the pillaging the Nation more than the guarding off 
her Enemies. The French do not fight for the Intereft of 
their Country as we do ; 'tis their own Intereft and prefer- 
ment to higher Pofts that they have in view. The Love of 
their Country and of their Fellow-Citizens does not prevail 
fo much with them as Vanity, Ambition and Riches. In fine, 
my dear Brother, I conclude this Difcourfe in affuring thee, 
That the Chriftians Self-love is a piece of Folly that [180] the 
Hurons will ever condemn ; and that Folly which tindlures all 
your Adtions is remarkable in a diftinguifhing manner in the 
way of your Amours and Marriages ; which, I muft fay, is as 
unaccountable as the People are who fuffer themfelves to be 
catch'd in that Noofe. 

Lahontan. Adario, you remember I fet forth before, that 
the A6tions of Rogues are no Standard for thofe of honourable 
Men. I own the Juftnefs of your Cenfure as to fome Adions, 
which we alfo difallow of. I acknowledge that the diftindion 
of Property is the fource of an infinity of Paffions, of which 
you are clear'd. But if you take things by the right handle, 
efpecially our way of making Love and Marrying, the good 
order of our Families, and the Education of our Children, 



to Norths America. 615 

you'l find a wonderful Conduit in all our Conftitutions. 
That Liberty which the Hurons preach up occafions difmal 
Diforders. In their way the Children are Matters as well as 
the Fathers ; and Wives who ought naturally to be fubjedt to 
their Husbands are inverted with an equal Authority. The 
Daughters fcorn the Advice of their Mothers when there's a 
Lover in the cafe. In a Word, all this fcene of Liberty 
reduces the way of Life to a continued courfe of Debauchery, 
by granting to Nature, in Imitation of the Brutes, an unlim- 
ited fatisfa&ion to all its Demands. Your fingle Women 
place their Wifdom in concerting and concealing their lewd 

Adventures. To run with * a Match in * . _ . . . , 

* 1. e. to enter into a 

your Villages, is the fame thing as ftrolling Woman's Apartment 
after a Whore in ours. All your young in the Night time 
Men roll from Hut to Hut upon fuch with a Li * bu 
Adventures while the Night lafts. The Doors of every Girls 
Chambers are open to all Guefts, [181] and if a young Man 
comes that fhe does not like fhe pulls the covering over her 
Head, the meaning of which is, that (he is Proof againft his 
Temptation : But if another comes, perhaps (he fuffers him 
to fit down on the Foot of her Bed, in order to a dry Con- 
ference, without going farther ; that is to fay, fhe has a mind 
to make a fetter of this poor Fellow, that fhe may have feveral 
Strings to her Bow. In comes a third, whom fhe jilts with 
more refined Politicks, and allows to lye near her upon the 
Coverings of the Bed. But when this Spark is gone, in 
comes a fourth, to whofe Embraces fhe readily grants her 
Bed, and her fpreading Arms, for two or three Hours to- 



616 Some New Voyages 

gether; and tho' he is far from triffling away the time in 
empty Words, yet the World takes it to be fo. Behold, my 
dear Adario, the Lewdnefs of the Hurons, difguis'd with a 
Pretext of honeft Converfation, and that fo much the more 
that how indifcreet fo ever any of their Gallants may be to 
their Miftreffes (which rarely happens) the World is fo far 
from giving Credit to 'em, that they brand 'em with Jealoufie, 
which amongft you is a defamatory Affront. This being 
premis'd, 'tis no wonder that the Americans won't hear any 
thing of Amours in the Day time, upon the Plea that the 
Night was made for that purpofe. In France this way of 
Intreguing is term'd Cacher adroitment Son jett, dexteroufly to 
conceal ones Defigns. If there's any thing of Wantonnefs 
and Debauchery amongft our Wenches, there is at leaft this 
difference, that the Rule is not General, as it is amongft 
yours ; and befides they don't go fo brutifhly to work with it. 
The Amours of the European Women are Charming, they are 
Conftant and Faithful to Death, and when they are fo weak 
as to yield to a Lover the laft Favours, they have a greater 
[182] regard to their inward Merit than to an outward Ap- 
perance ; and 'tis not the gratifying of their own Paflion that 
they have fo much in view, as the defire of giving their Lovers 
fenfible Proofs of their Affe&ion. The French Gallants feek 
to pleafe their Miftreffes by Methods that are altogether 
agreeable, as by Refpedt, Attendance, and Complaifance ; 
they are Patient, Paflionate, and always ready to Sacrifice their 
Lives and Fortunes for 'em. They lye fighing a long time 
before they dare to attempt any thing, for they are refolv'd 



to North- America. 617 

to merit the laft Favour by long Services ; they are feen upon 
their Knees at their Miftreffes Feet, to beg the priviledge of 
kifling the Hand ; and as a Dog follows his Mafter, watching 
over him when he Sleeps, fo 'mongft us, a true Lover ne'er 
quits his Miftrefs, nor fhuts his Eyes, but that he may dream 
of her in his Sleep. If any one is found fo hot upon't as 
bluntly to Embrace his Miftrefs upon the very firft occafion, 
without any regard to her Weaknefs, he paffes with us under 
the Chara&er of a Savage, that is to fay, a meer Clown, that 
begins where others leave off. 

Adario. Ho, ho, my dear Brother; are the French e're a 
whit the wifer for calling this fort of People Savage? In 
truth, I did not believe that Word fignify'd with you, a Pru- 
dent thinking Man. Fm glad with all my Heart at this 
piece of News, not doubting but one Day you may give the 
name of Savage to all the French, who will be wife enough to 
follow exa&ly the true Rules of Juftice and Reafon. Now 
the Myftery is unriddled that prompts the cunning French 
Women to have fuch a Love for Savage Creatures ; they're 
not fo much to blame for't, for in my mind, Time is too 
precious to lofe, and Youth too fhort not to make the beft 
of the Advantages [183] it throws in our Laps. If your 
Wenches are Conftant in a continual change of Lovers, that 
may bear fome refemblance to the Humour of our Girls ; but 
when they faithfully yield themfelves to be Carefs'd by three 
or four at a time, that's altogether different from the Temper 
of the Hurons. May the French Gallants fpend their Lives 
in the Fooleries you fpoke of but now, to conquer their 



618 Some New Voyages 

Miftreffes ; may they fpend their time and their Eftates in 
purchafing a fmall Pleafure, ufher'd in by a thoufand Troubles 
and Cares. I (han't offer to blame them, becaufe I have play'd 
the fool my felf, in running the rifque of Traverfing, in fuch 
foolifh Veffels, the rough Seas that feparate France from this 
Continent, to have the pleafure of feeing the Country of the 
French. This obliges me to hold my Peace ; but reafonable 
People will fay, That your Amorous Crew are as foolifh as I, 
but with this difference, that their Love paffes blindly from 
one Miftrefs to another, and expofes 'em to the repetition of 
the fame Torments ; whereas I fhall never take another Trip 
from America to France. 



[185] AN 

APPENDIX. 

Containing Some New 

VOYAGES 

TO 

Portugal and Denmark. 



LETTER I. 

Dated at Lisbon, April 20. 1694. 

Containing a Defcription of Viunu, Porto a Porto, Aveiro, Coim- 
bra, Lisbon; together with a View of the Court of Portugal; 
and an Account of the Government, Laws, Cuftoms, Com- 
merce and Humours of the Portuguefe. 

SIR, 

I BEGIN my letter with that ancient faying; Una f aim viftis 
nullum fperare falutem ; my meaning is, that after the receipt 
of fome bad News relating to my bufinefs, I find I have Spirit 
enough to brave all the Jolts of Fortune. The Univerfe which 
Swallows and Jefuits [186] take for their Country, muft like- 
wife be mine ; till fuch time as it pleafes God to fend to the 
other World, fome Perfons that do him very little Service here. 



620 Some New Voyages 

I am glad my Memoirs of Canada pleafe you, and that my 
Savage Style did not turn your AffecfHon : Tho' after all, you 
have no reafon to criticife upon my Jargon, for both you and 
I are of a Country, where no body can fpeak French but when 
they are not able to open their Mouths : Befides, 'twas not 
poffible for me who went fo young to America, to find out 
in that Country, the Myftery of Writing Politely. That's a 
Science that is not to be learn'd among the Savages, whofe 
Clownifh Society is enough to faften a brutifti twang upon the 
Politeft Man in the World. Since you prefs me to continue 
my Accounts of what new things I meet with, I willingly 
comply with your defire ; but you muft not expecft thofe 
nice Defcriptions you fpeak of, for if I pretended to any 
fuch thing, I fhould expofe my felf to the Derifion of thofe 
to whom you may flhew my Letters. I am not fufficiently 
qualify'd to outdo the curious Remarks that an infinity of 
Travellers have publifti'd. 'Tis enough for me if I furnifh 
you with fome private Memoirs of fome things that other 
Travellers have Wav'd, as being beneath their regard : And 
for as much as thefe Memoirs treat of fuch Subje&s as were 
never yet handled in Print, you will meet with fome Satis- 
faction upon the fcore of their Novelty. With this View, I 
fhall be very punctual in Writing to you from time to time, 
from whatever corner of the World my Misfortunes may lead 
me to ; but upon this condition, that you fhall take an exacft 
care to let me have your Anfwers. In the mean time, I muft 
acquaint you that I can't undertake to Frenchify [187] the 



to Portugal and Denmark. 621 

Foreign Names ; and therefore fhall Write 'em as the People 

of the Country do, leaving it to you to pronounce 'em as you 

pleafe. 

You remember I Writ to you about ten Weeks ago, that 

upon laying down three hundred Piftoles to the Captain of 

the Ship that brought me from Placentia to Viana, I had the 

good luck to get a Shoar there ; and fo I fhall refume the 

thread of my Journal, from that place where I laft took leave 

of it. I had no fooner jump'd out of the Sloop, than ^French 

Gentleman, who has ferv'd the King of Portugal thefe four 

and thirty years fin the quality of a Captain 

of Horfe, came and offer'd me the ufe of his "•" Since Mon ' 
TT . r . , , , , if.* Jteur de Schom- 

Houie, for in that place there s no publick , , . 

Houfes but fuch as are Calculated for com- 
mon Seamen. The next day this old Officer advis'd me to go 
and wait upon Don John of Souza ) Governour General of the 
Province between the Douro and the Minho. He acquainted 
me farther, that every body gave him the Title of U Excel- 
lentia ; and that he gave the Title of Senoria only to the 
Gentlemen of the firft Rank, and * Merced to 
all the reft. When I heard this, I chofe in- *^ Title fime- 
ftead of fpeaking Spani/h to him, to make ufe , y 
of an Interpreter, who Metamorphos'd all the 
You's of my Compliment into a Portuguefe Excellentia. 

Viana lies five Leagues to the Weftward of Braga, and is 
inclos'd in a Right-Angle made by the Sea and the River 
Lima. Here I faw two Monasteries of Benedittine Nuns, which 



622 Some New Voyages 

were fo ill provided that they would Starve for Hunger, if 
their Relations and || Devoto's did not affift 
Wi.e.tbofewbo > em# Upon the Sea Side there ftands a very 
fo th N good Caftle, Fortified after Count Pagans way : 

'Tis covered [188] with feveral large Culver- 
ines, which guard off the Sallymen from Attacking the Veffels 
that lye at Anchor in the Road. In this Road, the Ships are 
Sheltered from the fourteen Points of the Wind, that lye 

* . , „ , between North and South, in by Eaft. The 

* i.e. A Port that a J 

Ship can't enter but Rlver 1S a hame de barre > or * Bar-Haven, 
at full Sea ; for fear which no Ship ventures upon without call- 
of touching the Sands i ng out Pilots, by a Signal of a Gun or a 

Z.?* at5 \ Bay0n V- Flag twifted round. The Ships come all 
Bilbao, Stona, Vi- . r 

ana, Porto, Aveirco, in at Hl g h Water, and when the Tide runs 

Mondego, and Lis- out are left dry, unlefs they Ride upon the 

bon, are all Havres Pit, which has always eight or ten Fathom 
de Barre. ^ j qw Waten 

Febr. 4. I hir'd two Mules, one for my felf and another 
for my Man, at the rate of three Spanifti Piafters or Cobs ; 
and put on fo briskly that I arriv'd that Night at Porto a Porto, 
which was twelve Leagues off. Thefe Creatures Amble both 
faft and fmoothly, without Stumbling or tyring the Rider. 
Your Cavaliers have the conveniency of refting themfelves 
when they will upon the Portmantles which are faften'd to 
two Iron Rings at the Pummel of the Saddle. The Saddles 
of that Country are too hard for fuch a Lean Man as me. 
The Road between Viana and Porto a Porto is Stony, but 
pretty good ; the Ground lies upon a Level, the Profpedt is 



>^,a. 



p So 



J J3,,r 

A Oxd ictll'd Coffe-tc 





n Air 



.4 J \tv age take* it i« H'jr and 
burnt h u /its £ i i^niiCj 




sf tvjincui t/iat condemns tc d cat it a 
prifoncr that u enven her 




to Portugal and Denmark. 



623 



pleafant, and the Sea Side is adorn'd with feveral large Vil- 
lages, the chief of which are Expofende, Faons, and Villa de 
Conde. When I arriv'd at Porto, my Guide carry'd me to an 
Englifh Inn, the only one that was fit to entertain Gentlemen. 
This City is cramm'd with French, Englijh and Dutch Mer- 
chants, [189] who croud thither upon the account of the 
Commerce ; tho' the latter have fuffer'd by't fufficiently, fince 
the beginning of the War, by vertue of the Civility of our 
Privateers, who make no fcruple to take their Ships. Porto 
ftands upon the declivity of a Steep Hill, the Foot of which 
is Wafh d by the River Douro, that falls into the Sea a League 
lower upon a fBarr. This Bar which 
lies in the Mouth of the Douro, is fo 
fufpe&ed by Sailors, that they never 
approach to it, but when the Weather 
is good, and when they have fome of 
the Pilots of the Country on Board ; 
for upon the Sand of the Bar there 
are Rocks, fome hidden and fome 
feen, which render it inacceffible to 
Strangers. A Ship of four hundred 
Tun may come over exa<5tly at high 
Water; which is punctually the time 
that any Ship ought to make this 
River. Here we fee a fine Key reach- 
ing from one end of the Town to 
the other, upon which every Veffel is 
Lafh'd over againft the owners Doors. 



*A Bar, properly fpeaking y 
is a Bank of Sand, which 
commonly runs acrofs the 
Mouth of the Rivers that 
have not afufficient Rapid- 
ity to throw back into the 
Sea the Sands that are caft in 
upon y em y when the Winds 
blow hard from the Main. 
JllBars may be caWd Banks 
of Sand; for I never heard 
of a Bar confifting of a ridge 
of Rocks. Now this Sand 
rifes nearer to the Surface 
of the Watery like a little 
Hill in a Plain , fo that 
Ships can y t get over it but 
at high Water. 



In this River, I had 



624 Some New Voyages 

the opportunity of viewing the Brafil Fleet, confifting of 
thirty two Portuguefe Merchantmen, the leaft of which carry'd 
two and twenty Guns. I faw likewife feveral Foreign Ships, 
and particularly five or fix French Privateers, that put in there 
to Buy Provifions and Ammunition. 

Porto is a Stately fine City, and well Pav'd ; but its Scitua- 
tion upon a Mountain is inconvenient, [190] in regard that it 
obliges one to be always upon the Afcent or Defcent. The 
Gallery of the Regular Canons of St. Auftin's is as curious a 
piece of Architecture for its uncommon length, as their 
Church is with refpedt to the roundnefs of its Figure, and 
the Riches of the infide. In this City they have a Parliament, 
a Bifhoprick, Academies for the Exercifes of young Gentle- 
men, and an Arfenal for the fitting out of the Men of War, 
that are Built every year near the Mouth of the River. I 
wonder that this Town is not better Fortified, efpecially con- 
fidering 'tis the Second City in Portugal. Its Walls are fix 
Foot thick, and at certain diftances fhew us the Ruines of old 
Towers that time has levell'd with the Ground. They were 
built by the Moors, and are the moft irregular piece of Work 
that thofe times produc'd : So that you may eafily guefs 
whether 'twould be any hard matter to take this Town at the 
firft Attack. 

'Tis well for the Portuguefe that this Province, which is one 
of the beft in Portugal, is almoft inacceflible to their Enemies 
whether by Sea or Land ; the Sea Side being guarded by 
Barrs, and the Land by impracticable Mountains. 'Tis very 



to Portugal and Denmark. 625 

Populous, and all its Valleys which are full of Towns and Vil- 
lages, afford great quantities of Wine and Olives, and feed 
numerous Flocks of Cattel, the Wool of which is pretty fine. 
This I Write upon the Information of fome French Merchants, 
who are perfectly well acquainted with this Province. I am 
told that 'tis impoflible to make the Douro Navigable, by 
reafon of the Water-Falls and Currents that run between the 
prodigious Rocks. This, Sir, is all I know of the matter; fo 
I hope you'll content your felf with it. 

[191] The 10th I fet out for Lisbon in a Sedan, which I 
Hir'd for eighteen thoufand fix hundred Reys, a number of 
pieces that are enough to frighten thofe who do not know 
that they are but Deniers. Since the Portuguefe State all their 
Accounts in this falhion ; I muft acquaint you that a Rey is 
nothing elfe but a Denier, or the I2tb part of a Penny; and 
that this numerous quantity of Pieces amounts to no more 
than twenty five Piaftres. My Litter-Man ingag'd for this 
Fare to fet me down at Lisbon, on the ninth day of March; 
tho' at the fame time, he was oblig'd to go two or three 
Leagues out of his way, to fatisfie the Curiofity I had to pafs 
by the way of Aveiro, where I arriv'd the next day. 

Aveiro is a paltry little Town Seated on the Sea Side, and 
upon the Banks of a little River, Guarded by a Bar, which the 
Ships that draw under nine or ten foot Water, crofs at High 
Water by the direftion of the Coafting Pilots. 'Tis Fortified 
after the Moorifli way, as well as Porto. In this place, there's 
as much Salt made as will ferve two or three Provinces. 'Tis 

40 



626 Some New Voyages 

adorn'd with a pretty Monaftrey of Nuns, who give proof 

, . A . ~, . n . of their ancient Nobility and Origin 

Ti. e. Ancient Chriftians, J & 

a great Title of Honour in from the t Chriftiaon Veilho. The 
that Country, by reafon of Country gives a mod pleafant Prof- 
its being uncommon. pz& f or t h ree Leagues to the Eaft- 

ward ; that is, to the great Lisbon Road, which is Hemm'd 
in by a ridge of Mountains from Porto to Coimbra. 

The i^tb I arriv'd at Coimbra ; and when I talk'd of Seeing 
the Univerfity, my Sedan Man told me that this piece of 
Curiofity would flop me for a whole day: So that I can 
only tell you that this Univerfity you find mention'd in fome 
Travels, is render'd Famous by the King of Portugal's [192] 
Efforts, ever fince his Acceflion to the Throne, to make all 
Sciences flourifh within its Walls. The Town affords nothing 
that's very remarkable, unlefs it be a double Stone Bridge, 
one above another, between which one may crofs the River 
without being feen ; and two fine Convents, one for Monks, 
and another for Nuns, lying at the diftance of fourty or 
fifty Paces from one another. Coimbra bears the Title of a 
Dutchy, and is Intitled to feveral confiderable Prerogatives. 
It ftands fix Leagues off the Sea, at the Foot of a Steep Hill, 
upon which you may fee the Churches and Monaftries, and 
two or three fine Houfes. The Bifhoprick of this place 
which is Suffragran to Braga, is one of the beft Bifhopricks in 
Portugal. The Road from Coimbra to Lisbon is Pleafant, and 
affords a pretty Profpeft ; the Country is pretty well Peopled. 
I arriv'd at Lisbon the Metropolis of this Country on the 
iStbj and was not near fo tyr'd as I was uneafy in making ufe 



to Portugal and Denmark. 627 

of that flow way of Travelling which can fuit none but Ladies 
and old Fellows. I had better have hir'd Mules, for then I 
might have gone through in five days time, and that for a very 
fmall Charge ; viz. thirteen Piafters for me and my Servant. 
In the mean time, give me leave to tell you by the bye, that 
your tender Sparks would never be able to bear the incon- 
veniency of the Pofada's (or Inns) upon the Road : They have 
fuch forry pitiful Accommodation, that the very Defcription of 
'em would be enough to fcare you from going to Lisbon, tho' 
you had never fo much bufinefs there. However I was as 
well fatisfied, as if they had been the beft Inns in France; for 
having fpent the whole courfe of my Life in Scouring the Sea, 
the Lakes, and the Rivers of Canada, and having liv'd for the 
moft part upon Roots and Water, [193] with a Bark Tent for 
my Canopy ; I eat heartily of all that they fet before me. 
You muft know, Sir, the Landlord conduits the Paffengers to 
a bye place that looks more like a Dungeon than a Chamber; 
and there you muft ftay with a great deal of patience, till he 
fends you fome Ragou's Seafon'd with Garlick, Pepper, Chib- 
bols, and a hundred Medicinal Herbs, the fmell of which 
would turn an Iroquefe's Stomach. To compleat the nicety of 
your Entertainment, you muft lye down upon Quilts or Mat- 
treffes fpread out on Planks, without either Straw or Cover- 
lets ; and thefe Mattreffes are no thicker than this Letter, fo 
that 'twould require two or three hundred of 'em to make 
your Bed fofter than Stones. 'Tis true, the Landlord finds 
you as many Quilts as you pleafe for a Penny a piece, and 
takes the pains to fhake 'em down, and beat off the Flea's, 



628 Some New Voyages 

Bugs, &c. But thank God, I had no occafion to make ufe of 
'em, for I ftill kept my Hammock, which was eafily hung up 
in any place I came to, by two large Iron Hooks. But after 
all, the account I now give you of the Portuguefe Inns, is all a 
Jeft in comparifon with the Spanijh, if we may credit Men of 
Reputation : And that I take to be the reafon that Travellers 
pay little or nothing for their Fare either in the one or the 
other. 

The next day after my Arrival at Lisbon, I waited upon the 
Abbot d'EJlrees ; whom the K. of Portugal has a great refpedl 
for, and who is fo much efteem'd by every body, that they 
juftly give him the Title of '0 Mais Perfeito dos Perfeitos 
Cavalheiros, i. e. The moft Accomplifh'd of the moft Accotnplifh'd 
Gentlemen. His Equipage is Magnificent enough, tho' he has 
not yet made his publick Entry. His Family is kept in excel- 
lent Order; his Houfe is very well Furnifh'd, and his [194] 
Table is nice and well ferv'd. Oftentimes he entertains the 
Perfons of Note, who would not vifit him, if he did not give 
'em the Precedency. This piece of deference would have 
feem'd ridiculous, if the King his Mafter had not order'd it 

to be fo in Mr. D'Opede's * time : For it 
* He was formerly Jm- looks yery odd tQ fee the meaneft £n- 

baffadour at this Court. 

lign in the Army take the Right hand 

of an Ambaffadour, who denys that Precedency to all the Min- 

ifters of the Second Rate. The Portuguefe Noblemen and 

Gentlemen are Men of Honour and Honefty, but they are 

fo full of themfelves that they fancy themfelves the Pureft and 

Ancienteft Stock of Nobility and Gentry in the World. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 629 

Thofe of diftinguifhing Titles expedt your Excellency for their 

Compellation ; and they are fo tender of their Dignity, that 

they never vifit any one that lodges in a publick Houfe. None 

but Perfons of an Illuftrious Birth are 

dignify'd with the Title of t Don ; for \ Tb ' Wo T rd " exa£ily .°{ 
° J the fame Importance with 

the moft honourable Pofts can't Intitle Meflire, and with the 
'em to that Venerable Chara&er; info- Spanifh, Sire or Sieur, 

much that the Secretary of State, who which the Coblers, &c. 

tr r > j r c ^i_ ^ n. n n claim as their due. 

is poliels d of one of the greateit rolts 

in the Kingdom, do's not pretend to affume it. 

The King of Portugal is of a large Stature, and well Made; 
he has a very good Meen, tho' his Complexion is fomewhat 
Brown. 1 'Tis faid, he is as conftant in his Refolutions, as in 
his Friendship. He is perfectly well acquainted with the 
State of his Country. He is fo Liberal and full of Bounty, 
that he can fcarce refufe his Subjects the Favours they ask. 
The Duke of Cadaval his firft Minifter and Favourite has 
potent Enemies; [195] upon the account that he appears 
more Zealous for his Mafter than the other Courtiers ; and 
at the fame time, more hearty for the French Intereft. 

The Situation and various Profpecfls of Lisbon would Entitle 
it to the Character of one of the fineft Cities in Europe, if it 
were not fo very nafty. It ftands upon feven Mountains, from 
whence you have a View of the fineft Land-Skip in the World, 
as well as of the Sea, the River Taio, and the Forts that guard 
the Mouth of the River. This Mountainous City puts the 



1 The king of Portugal was Pedro II of the house of Braganza ; born in 1648, he 
succeeded his brother as king in 1683, and reigned until his death in 1706. — Ed. 



630 Some New Voyages 

People to a great inconvenience, that are forced to walk on 
foot ; but this inconvenience affe&s Strangers and Travellers 
mod, whofe Curiofity is in fome meafure thwarted by the 
trouble of rambling ftill upon afcents and defcents ; for you 
can't have the accommodation of Hackny-Coaches, that are 
common elfewhere. Here we meet with Stately and Magnifi- 
cent Churches; the moft confiderable of which are La Ceu, 
Notre Dame de Loreto, San Vicente, San Roch, San Pablo, and 
Santo Domingo. The Benediftin Monaftery of St. Bento is the 
fineft and beft Indow'd Monaftery that the Town affords ; But 
laft Month part of its fine Fabrick was Burnt down by an 
unfortunate Fire ; and upon that occafion I faw more Silver 
Plate carried out of it than fix great Mules could carry. 

If the King's Palace were finifh'd, 'twould be one of the 
nobleft Edifices in Europe ; but the compleating of it would 
coft at leaft two Millions of Crowns. Strangers lodge for the 
moft part in the Houfes that Front the Taio. I know feveral 
French Merchants, fome Popifh and fome Proteftants, who are 
very confiderable Traders in this Country. The Popifh French 
Merchants are protected by France, and the Proteftants take 
Shelter under the Englijh and Dutch. Here we [196] reckon 
almoft Fifty Englijh Families, and as many Dutch, befides fome 
other Forreigners, who do all of 'em get Eftates in a very 
little time, by the great vent of the Commodities of the 
Country. The Englifli Baetas, or the Colchefter light Stuffs 
fell admirably well in this Place ; and there's great Profit 
got upon the French Linnen, the Tours and Lions Silk Stuffs, 



to Portugal and Denmark. 631 

French Ribbands, Lace and Iron Ware ; which are ballanc'd 
by Sugar, Tobacco, Indigo, Cacao Nuts, &c. 

The Alfandigua or Duty of Sugar and Tobacco is one of 
the beft Branches of the Royal Revenue, as well as that on 
Silk, Linnen and Woollen Cloath, which the Merchants are 
oblig'd to get Stamp'd upon the payment of a certain Duty 
proportionable to the value and quality of the Effeds. Your 
dry'd Cod pays almoft Thirty per Cent Cuftom ; fo that 
there's fcarce any thing got by Importing of them, unlefs it 
be when the firft Ships come in from Newfoundland. Tobacco, 
whether in Snufh or in Rolls, is fold by Retail at the fame 
price as in France ; for Snufh is worth two Crowns a Pound, 
and the other Tobacco is fold for about Fifty Pence. 'Tis 
eafie to evade the Cuftoms, if one has a right underftanding 
with the Guards, who are a parcel of Knaves that the found 
of a Piftole will make as flexible as you can wifh. No Portman- 
teau or Cloakbag can be carried into the City without being 
fearch'd by thefe doughty Gentlemen. Galloons, Fringes, 
Brocado's, and Gold or Silver Ribbands are Confiscated as 
Contreband Goods ; for no Perfon, of what Station foever, 
is allow'd to have Silver or Gold Thread either in his Cloaths 
or the Furniture of his Houfe. 

All Books, in what Language foever, are immediately laid 
before the Inquifition, and burnt [197] if they do not pleafe 
the Inquifitors. This Tribunal, of which a French Phyfician 
gives us a Pathetick Defcription, from the fad experiences of 
the Evils he underwent at Goa ; this Tribunal, I fay, which 



632 Some New Voyages 

belches out more Fire and Flames than Mount Gibel, is fo hot 
upon the Point that if this Letter came before 'em, both it 
and the Author would be in equal danger of being burn'd ; 
and 'tis upon this Confederation that I take care to hold my 
Peace, efpecially fince the very Grandees of the Kingdom are 
affraid to fpeak of this Sanctified Office. Some Days ago I 
had an Interview with a fenfible wife Portugefe, who after 
informing me of the Manners and Cuftoms of the People of 
Angola and Brafil, where he had liv'd feveral Years, took plea- 
fure to hear me recount the Fafhions and Humours of the 
Savages of Canada ; but when I came to the broiling of the 
Prifoners of War that fall into the Hands of the Iroquefe, he 
cry'd out with a furious Accent, That the Iroquefe of Portugal 
were yet more cruel than thofe of America, in burning without 
Mercy their Relations and Friends, whereas the latter inflidted 
that Punifhment only upon the cruel Enemies of their Nation. 
In former Times the Portuguefe had fuch a Veneration for 
the Monks, that they fcrupl'd to enter into their Wives 
Chambers, at a time when the good Fathers were exhorting 
them to fomething elfe than Repentance; but now a days they 
are not allow'd fo much Liberty: And indeed I muft own, 
that the greateft part of 'em live fuch lewd and irregular 
Lives, that their extravagant Debauches have fhock'd me a 
hundred times. They have Indulgences from the Pope's 
Nuncio to follow all manner of Libertinifm ; for that Papal 
Minifter, whofe Power is unlimited as to Ecclefiafticks, gives 
'em leave, [198] nothwithftanding the Remonftrances of their 
Superiors, to wear a Hat in the City, {i.e. to go about without 



to Portugal and Denmark. 633 

a Companion) to lie out of the Convent, and even to take a 
Country Journey now and then. Perhaps they would be 
wifer, and their number would be fmaller, if they were not 
oblig'd (as well as the Nuns) to make their Vows at 14 Years 
of Age. 

Moft of the Portuguefe Coaches are Chariots Imported 
from France. None but the King and Ambaffadors are drawn 
by fix Horfes or Mules within the City Walls ; out of the 
City, indeed, your Perfons of Quality may have a hundred 
if they will ; but within the Walls they dare not have more 
than four. The Ladies and the old Gentlemen are carried in 
Sedans or Chairs, fo that Chariots are only made ufe of by 
the younger Noblemen ; none are allow'd to make ufe of 
Coaches and Sedans but the Nobility, Envoys, Refidents, 
Confuls, and Ecclefiafticks ; fo that the richeft Citizens and 
Merchants muft content themfelves with a fort of Calalh with 
two Wheels, drawn by one Horfe, and driven by themfelves. 
The Mules that carry the Litters or Sedans are larger, finer 
and not fo broad Chefted as thofe of Auvergne. A Brace 
of 'em, generally fpeaking, is worth Eight hundred Crowns; 
nay fome of 'em will fetch Twelve hundred, efpecially if they 
come from the Country of the famous Don Quixot, which lies 
at a great diftance from Lisbon. The Coach Mules come 
from Eftremadura, and are worth about a hundred Piftoles a 
Pair. The Saddle and Carriage Mules, and the Spamfe, 
Horfes, are Cent per Cent dearer than in Caftile. When 'tis 
fair Weather the young Sparks ride up and down the City on 
Horfe-back, on purpofe to fhew themfelves to the Ladies, 



634 Some New Voyages 

who like Birds in a Cage [199] have no other Privilege than 

. „„. , . ¥ that of viewing through the * Chinks of 

* Windows with ^ ° , , ~, 

Grates, the Inter- J ealoufie the Creatures whofe Company they 

vals of which are wifh for in their Prifons. The Monks who 

no larger than are provided for by Indowments make no 

one's little Finger. V j fits Qn p^ {qv ^^ Convent keeps a 

certain number of Saddle Mules, which they make ufe of by 
turns : And 'tis wonderful Comical to fee the good Fathers 
patrol and wheel about the Streets with great long crown'd 
Hats like Sugar-loafs, and Spedlacles that cover three fourths 
of their Face. 

Tho' Lisbon is a very large City, and a place of great 
Trade, yet there's but two good French Inns or Ordinaries 
in the whole Town, where one may eat tolerably well for 
five and thirty Sous a Meal. Queftionlefs the number of good 
Ordinaries would be enlarged in courfe, if the Portuguefe took 
pleafure in Eating and Drinking; for then they would not 
contemn thofe who are follicitous to find out good Cheer. 
They are not contented with difdaining the Trade of an 
Innkeeper ; but the very name of a Publick Houfe is fo odious 
to them, that they fcorn to vifit any Gentleman that Lodges 
in thofe charming Quarters. For this reafon, Sir, you would 
do well to advife any Friend of yours, that has the Curiofity 
to Travel into Portugal, and means to make any flay in this 
Town, to go into a Penfion at fome French Merchants Houfe. 
One may feed very well in this Town, only 'tis fomewhat dear. 
The Alemteio Poultry, the St. Uhal Hares and Partridges, and 
the Algarva Butchers Meat eat admirably well. The Lamego 



to Portugal and Denmark. 635 

Bacon and Hams are nicer Food than thofe of Mayence and 

Bayonne; and yet that fort of Meat fits fo uneafie upon the 

Stomach of a Portuguefe, that, [200] if 'twere not for the Con- 

fumption in the Monks and Inquifitors Houfe, there would 

fcarce be any Hogs in all Portugal. The Portuguefe Wines are 

ftrong and have a good Body, efpecially the Red Wines which 

run very near to a Black Colour. The Aleguete and Barra a 

Barra Wines are the fineft and thofe of the thineft Body. 

The King never tafts Wine, and the Perfons of Quality 

drink of it but very feldom, no more than the Women. To 

fathom the reafon of this Abftinence we muft confider that 

Venus has fuch an Intereft in Portugal, that the Face of her 

Charms hath always kept Bacchus from any Footing in this 

Country. Here that Goddefs caufes fo much Idolatry, that fhe 

feems to difpute with the true God for a right to the Worfhip 

and Adoration of the Portuguefe, and that in the moft Sacred 

Places ; for the Churches and Proceffions make the common 

Randezvous where the Amorous Affignments *j r ort x g ra ~ 

are made. 'Tis there that the * Bandarro's, gadocio Bully's, of 

the Ladies of Pleafure and the Women of Don Quixot's 

Intrigue, take their Pofts ; for they never fail . ' „ a . ve 

to ' J no other Employ- 

to aflift at the Feftivals that are Celebrated at ment t ^ an t ^ at f 
leaft three or four times a Week, fometimes bunting after Ad- 
in one Church and fometimes in another, ventures. 
The fwaggering Adventurers have a wonderful Talent of dif- 
covering their Amorous Defires with one glance of the Eye to 
the Ladies who return 'em an Anfwer by the fame Signal ; and 
this they call Correfponding. This done, they have nothing to 



636 Some New Voyages 

do but to find out their Houfes, by following 'em Foot for 

Foot from the Church Door to their refpedtive Apartments. 

The conclufion of the Intrigue lies in marching ftraight on to 

the corner of the Street without looking about [201] for fear 

the Husband or Rivals fhould fmell a Rat. At the end of 

the Street they have fo much occafion for a large ftock of 

Patience that they muft ftand there two or three hours till a 

Servant Maid comes, whom they muft follow till fhe finds 

t ' A MefT e a handfome opportunity of delivering her 

or a watch Word t Recado fafely. The Adventurers muft truft 

in order to an In- thefe goodly Confidents, and fometimes run 

terview. ^ Q rifque of their Lives upon their Word 

and Directions ; for they are as cunning as they are true to 

their Miftreffes, from whom they receive Prefents as well as 

from the Suitors, and fometimes from the Husbands. 

In former times the Portuguefe Women covered their Faces 

with their || Manto } s, and expos'd nothing to 
II Veils of Taffitas . ^, . . n XTr , 

l- l yji.L view but one bye, as the bpaniln Women do 
which cover d both # J ' r j 

the Face and the to this Day; but as foon as they perceiv'd 
Body, and at the that the Sea Towns were replenifh'd with as 
fame time cloak' d f a j r Children as any are in France or En- 

their Intrigues, »»i ** 9 it 11 1 

gland, the poor Manto s were dilcarded, and 

forbid to approach the Face of a Lady. The Portuguefe have 

fuch an Antipathy and Horror for Afteon's Arms, that they 

had rather cut their own Fingers than take Tobacco out of an 

Horn-Box; tho' after all the Horn Commodity begins to 

take here, notwithftanding the repeated Difcouragements of 

Poyfon and the Sword. Almoft every Month brings us frefh 



to Portugal and Denmark, 637 

Inftances of fome Tragical Adventure of that Nature, efpe- 
cially when the Angola or Brafil Fleets are juft come in ; for 
the greateft part of the Seamen that go upon thefe Voyages 
are fo unfortunate, that when they return home they find their 
Wives lock'd up in [202] Monafteries inftead of their own 
Houfes. The reafon of their voluntary Confinement is this ; 
that they choofe thus to expiate and atone for the Sins they 
committed in their Husbands abfence, rather than be ftabb'd 
at their return. Upon this fcore we ought not to Cenfure 
thofe who reprefented the Ocean with a Bull's Horns, for in 
good earned almoft all that expofe themfelves to the brunts of 
the Sea make much fuch another Figure. In fine, Gallantry 
in the way of Amours is too ticklifh a Trade in this Place, for 
it runs a Man in danger of his Life. Here we find plenty of 
Whores, whofe Company ought by all means to be avoided ; 
for befides the danger of ruining one's Health, a Man runs 
the rifque of being knock'd on the Head if he frequents 
their Company. The handfomeft Whores are commonly 
Atnezada'd or hir'd by the Month by fome kind Keepers^ that 
have a watchful Eye over 'em ; but notwithftanding all the 
Keepers Precaution, they enjoy the Diverfion of fome wife 
Companions at the expence of fuch Fools. The Fools I now 
fpeak of lye under an indifpenfible Neceflity of keeping up 
and feeding with Prefents the pretended Love and Fidelity of 
the faid Lais*s, the Enjoyment of whom is unconceivably 
Chargeable. The Nuns receive frequent Vifits from their 
Devoto's, who have a warmer Paflion for them than for the 
Women of this World, as it appears from the Jealoufies, 



638 Some New Voyages 

Quarrels, and a Thoufand other Diforders that arife among 
the Rivals upon the fcore of Intrigue. Formerly the Parlours 
of the Monafteries were guarded only with a flngle Grate, but 
fince my Lord Grafton and fome of the Captains of his 
Squadron had the Curiofity to touch the Hands, &c. of the 
Nuns of Odiveta ; the King ordered all the Convents in the 
Kingdom to [203] have double Grates upon their Parlours. 
At the fame time he almoft ftiffled the Pretention of the 
Devoto's, by prohibiting any one to approach to a Convent 
without a lawful Occafion, tho' to frame an occafion is eafie to 
one that has the folly to be in Love with thefe poor Girls. 

The Portuguefe are a People of a quick Apprehenfion ; 
they think freely, and their Expreffions come up to the 
juftnefs of their Thoughts : They have able Phyficians and 
learned Cafuifts among 'em. The Celebrated Camoens was 
without difpute one of the moft Illuftrious Citizens of Par- 
naffus. The teeming variety of his excellent Thoughts, his 
choice of Words, and the politenefs and eafie freedom of his 
Stile, charm'd all who were fufficiently acquainted with the 
Portuguefe Language. 1 'Tis true he had the Misfortune of 
being rally'd upon by Moreri, and by fome Spanifh Authors ; 
who, when they could not avoid owning, that 'tis impoffible 
to furpafs the Genius of this unfortunate Poet, blacken'd his 
Character with the imputation of Infidelity and Profanity. 
A Catalan Monk falls foul upon a hundred Places of his 

1 Lahontan here shows his familiarity with Portuguese literature, and its greatest 
poet, Luiz de Camoens, who died in 1579. His genius went largely unrecognized 
during his lifetime, and, as our author indicates, he was subjected to petty perse- 
cutions. — Ed. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 639 

Laziadas Endechas Eftrivillas, &c. and brands him for an 
Impious Rattle-brain'd Fellow. To quote two Places that he 
Cenfures ; the firft is the Cadence of a Sonnet entituled Soneto 
Nuo Impreffo ; where after fome Refle&ions the Poet fays, 
Mais Melhor de tudo e crer en Chrifto ; i. e. After all, the 
fureft way is to believe in Chrift. The Second is the Conclufion 
of a Gloza, viz. Si Deus fe Bufca no Mundo nejfes olios fe achara. 
That is to fay, in fpeaking to a Lady, // we look for God in this 
World we } ll find him in your Eyes. 

The Portuguefe Pulpit-men cry up their Saints almoft above 
God himfelf ; and to exaggerate their Sufferings lodge 'em in 
Stables rather than [204] in Paradife. They conclude their 
Sermons with fuch Pathetick Cries and Exclamations, that the 
Women figh and cry as if they were in defpair. In this Coun- 
try the Title of a Heretick is accounted highly infamous; and 
indeed it bears a very odious Signification. The Priefts and 
Friars hate Calvin for Curtailing the bufinefs of Confeffion, 
as much as the Nuns efteem Luther for his Monaftical Mar- 
riage. In the City they make Proceflions from one end of the 
Town to the other, every Friday in Lent. I have feen above a 
hundred difcipline themfelves in the Streets, in an odd man- 
ner. They were clad in White, with their Face cover'd and 
their Back naked ; which they lafh fo handfomely, that the 
Blood fpurts in the Face of the Women who are fet upon 
the fides of the Streets, on purpofe to ridicule and vilify the 
leaft Bloody. Thefe were follow'd by others in Masks, who 
carried Croffes, Chains, and bundles of Swords of an incred- 
ible weight. 



640 Some New Voyages 

The Foreigners of this place are almoft as Jealous as the 
Portuguefe; infomuch that their Wives are afraid to fhew them- 
felves to their Husband's beft Friends. They affed the Portu- 
guefe Severity with fo much exa6lnefs, that thefe poor Captives 
dare not lift up their Eyes in the Prefence of a Man. But 
notwithftanding all their precaution, they fometimes meet with 
the Mifchief that they take fuch care to avoid. The City is 
Peopled with perfons of all Colours, fome Black, fome Mulat- 
to's, fome Swarthy, and fome of an Olive Complexion: But 
the Greateft part are Trigenho's, i. e. of the Colour of Corn. 
The medley of fo many different hues, do's fo mingle the 
Blood of the Nation, that the true Whites make but a very 
fcanty number ; and 'tis for this reafon, that if one were to fay 
in Portuguefe, I am a Man {or [205] a Woman) of Honour ; 
the nobleft expreffion he can find, is, Eu fou Branco } or Branca, 
i. e. I am a White. 

You may walk up and down Lisbon night and day without 
fearing Pickpockets. Till three or four a Clock in the Morn- 
ing) y ou have Muficians that play in the Streets on Guitars, 
and joyn to the Sweetnefs of that Inftrument, the mod moan- 
ful Songs that can be imagin'd. The way of Dancing among 
the ordinary fort of People is very indecent, by reafon of the 
impertinent Motions of their Head and Belly. The Inftru- 
mental Mufick of the Portuguefe is difagreeable at firft to the 
Ears of a Foreigner ; but at the bottom it has fomewhat in it 
that's fweet, and pleafes, when one is accuftom'd to it. Their 
Vocal Mufick is fo coarfe, and its difcordant Notes are fo 
unhappily link'd together ; that the chattering of a Crow is 



to Portugal and Denmark, 641 

more Melodious. Their Church Mufical Compofures are all 
in the Caflilian Language, as well as their Paftorals and moft 
of their Songs. They endeavour to imitate the Spanifh Cuf- 
toms as much as poflible ; nay, they are fo nice in obferving 
the Ceremonies of the Spanifh Court, that the Portuguefe 
Minifters would be very much difoblig'd if the leaft For- 
mality were lop'd off. The King and the Grandees wear 
much fuch another Habit as our Financiers or Receivers of 
the Royal Revenue. They have a clofe Coat with a Cloak of 
the fame colour ; a great Band of Venice Point, with a long 
Perriwig, a Sword, and a Dagger. They give the Title of 
Excellentia to Ambaffadours, and that of Senboria to Envoys 
and Refidents. 

The Port of Lisbon is large, fafe and convenient ; tho' the 
Entry is very difficult. The Ships Ride at Anchor between 
the City and the Caftle of Almada, at eighteen Fathom Water 
on a good [206] ftrong Ground. The Lisbon River is call'd 
by the Portuguefe, O Rey dos Rios, i. e. The King of Rivers. 
'Tis almoft a League broad where the Ships Ride; at which 
place the Tide rifes twelve foot perpendicular, and runs above 
ten Leagues farther up towards its fource. All Captains of 
Ships, whether Men of War or Merchant Men, Foreigners 
or Natives, are exprefsly prohibited to Salute the City with a 
Difcharge of Cannon, or fire a Ship Gun before it, upon any 
pretence whatfoever. The Confuls of France, England and 
Holland, have five or fix thoufand Livres a piece allow'd 'em 
yearly ; befides which, they make a fhift to get as much more 
by Trading. 

41 



642 Some New Voyages 

This, Sir, is all the account I can give you at prefent of 
this charming Country ; which to my mind would be a Para- 
dife upon Earth, if 'twere Inhabited by Peafants that had lefs 
of the Gentleman in their Conduct. The Climate is admir- 
ably fweet and agreeable ; the Air is clear and ferene, the 
Water of the Country is wonderful good, and the Winter is 
fo mild that I have felt no cold as yet. In this Country, the 
People may live for an Age without any inconveniency from 
advancing Years. The old Perfons are not loaded with the 
Infirmities that plague thofe of other Countries ; their Appe- 
tite do's not fail 'em, and their Blood is not fo difpirited, but 
that their Wives can vouch for their perfed health. Ardent 
Fevers make a terrible Havock in Portugal, and the Venereal 
Diforders are fo civil, that no body troubles his head for a 
cure. The Pox, which is very frequent in the Country, gives 
fo little uneafynefs, that the very Phyficians who have it, are 
loth to carry it off, for fear of going to the charge of repeated 
Cures. The Juftices and Peace-Officers are fawcy and unfuf- 
ferably [207] arrogant, as being authoris'd by a King that 
obferves the Laws with the utmoft Severity; for this incour- 
ages 'em to pick quarrels with the People, from whom they 
frequently receive very cruel Reprimands. Some time ago, 
the Count de Prado Son in Law to the Marfhal de Villeroy, took 

the pains to fend into the other World 

* \ ~ -f I I J ntendant an infolent * Corrigidor, that would will- 
and Civil judge, 

ingly have difpenfed with the Voyage. 

While that Gentleman was Riding in Coach with his Coufin, 

at the corner of a Street he met the Corrigidor^ who was 



to Portugal and Denmark. 643 

Mounted like a St. George, and to his Misfortune fo proud of 
his Office, that he did not daign to give the two Gentlemen 
a Salute. I've acquainted you already that the Portuguefe 
Gentlemen are the vaineft Men in the World ; and upon that 
fcore, you will not think it ftrange that thefe two Gentlemen 
alighted from the Coach, and made the Corrigidor fpring from 
his Horfe and Jump into the other World. A French Man 
will be ready to fay that the Intendant's Indifcretion did not 
deferve fuch rude ufage; but the Portuguefe Perfons of Quality 
that cover their Heads in the prefence of their King, will be 
of another mind. However, the two Chavalier's took Shelter 
in the Houfe of the Abbot d'Eftrees, who fent 'em to France in 
a Breft Frigot. 

It now remains to give you a Lift of the King of Portugal's 
Standing Forces. He has eighteen thoufand Foot, eight 
thoufand Horfe, and twenty two Men of War ; namely, 

4 Ships from 60 to 70 Guns. 

6 Ships from 50 to 60 Guns. 

6 Ships from 40 to 50 Guns. 

6 Frigats from 30 to 40 Guns. 
[208] You muft know that the King's Ships are light 
Timber'd, well Built and handfomely ModePd ; their Caulk- 
ing, Iron Work and Roundings is all very neat. Their 
Arfenals and Naval Stores are in great diforder, and good 
Sailors are as fcarce in Portugal as good Sea Officers, for the 
Government has negledted the Forming of Marine Nurferies 
and Navigation Schools, and a thoufand other neceffary 
things ; the difcuflion of which would lead me too far out of 



644 Some New Voyages 

my way. The Portugnefe are charg'd with being fomewhat 
dull and flow in Working their Ships, and lefs brave by Sea 
than by Land. 

The Captains of the King's Ships have commonly twenty 
two Patacas a Month; and a free Table while they are at Sea ; 
befides fome Perquefites. 

A Lieutenant's Pay is fixteen Patacas a Month. 

An Enfign of Marines has ten Patacas a Month. 

An Able Sailor has four Patacas a Month. 

A Captain of a Company of Foot has about five and 
twenty Patacas a Month, in Pay and Perquifites both in Peace 
and War. 

The AlufiereS) who are a fort of Lieutenants, have eight 
Patacas. 

A Common Soldier's Pay is about two pence half-penny a 
day of our Mony. 

A Captain of Horfe has in Pay and Perquifites, in time of 
Peace, about a hundred Pataca's a Month. 

A Lieutenant of Horfe has near thirty Patacas a Month. 

A Quartermafter fifteen Pataca 9 s a Month. 

A Trooper four Sous a day, and his Forrage. 

As for the General Land and Sea Officers, 'tis hard to tell 
exa&ly what their Incomes amount to : For the King grants 
Penfions to fome, and Commandries to others, as he fees occa- 
fion. The [209] Collonels, Lieutenant-Collonels and Majors 
of Foot, as well as the Maitres de Camp and the Commif- 
farys, have no fix'd Allowance : For fome have more and fome 



to Portugal and Denmark. 645 

lefs, in proportion to the advantage of the Place where their 
Troops are Quarter'd, and the number of their Men. 

The Portuguefe Troops are ill Difciplin'd. Neither Horfe 
nor Foot are Cloath'd after the fame manner ; for fome have 
a Brown Livery, fome Red, fome Black, fome Blew, fome 
Green, &c. Their Arms are very good ; and the Officers do 
not mind their brightnefs, provided they are in a good Con- 
dition. One would fcarce believe that thefe are the Troops 
that did fuch mighty Feats againft the Spaniards in the laft 
Wars. In all appearance they were better Difciplin'd in thofe 
days than they are now, and were not fo much taken up with 
their Guitars. 

To ftiew you the Species and Value of the Mony that's 
Current in this Country : 

A Spanifti Piaftre or piece of Eight, which the Portuguefe 
call a Pataca, is worth a French Crown ; and contains 7$oReys. 

The half pieces and quarter pieces are of a proportionable 
Value. 

A Rey is a Denier, as I intimated above. 

The loweft Silver Coin they have is a Vintaine or twenty 
penny piece, being 20 Reys. 

A Teftoon is worth 5 Vintaines. 

A Demi-Teftoon goes in a half proportion. 

An old Cruzada is near 4 Teftoons. 

The Mada d } ouro, a Gold Coin, is worth 6 Pataca's and 3 
Teftoons. 

The half and quarter Madams have a proportionable Value. 



646 Some New Voyages 

A Lowis d'or, whether Old or New, goes for four Piaftres 
wanting two Teftoons. 

[210] The half and quarter Piftoles go upon the fame pro- 
portion. 

A Spanipi Piftole, full Weight, goes at the fame rate for 4 
Piaftres, wanting two Teftoons ; fo that there's Mony got by 
fending 'em to Spain, where they're worth 4 Piaftres neat. 

No Species of Mony bears the King of Portugal's Effigies; 
and there's no diftindtion made in Portugal, between the Seville 
Piaftres and thofe of Mexico, or of Peru, as they do elfewhere. 

No French Coin paffes in this Country, excepting Crowns, 
half Crowns and quarter Crowns. 

The Portuguefe 128 pound is equal to the Paris 100 Weight. 
Their Calido is a Meafure that exceeds the Paris half Ell by 
three inches and a line ; fo that its juft extent is two French 
foot, one inch and one line. Their Bara is another Meafure, 
fix of which makes ten Calido's. The Portuguefe League is 
4200 Geometrical Paces, allowing five Foot to every Pace. 

As for the Intereft of the Portuguefe Court, I wave it on 
purpofe becaufe I have no mind to enter into Politicks. 
Befides, I have already acquainted you that I pretend to Write 
nothing elfe but fuch trifles as have not been yet took notice 
of in Print. If it were not that I had laid my felf under that 
Reftridtion, I could fend you a circumftantial account of their 
different Tribunals or Courts of Juftice, and fome Scraps of 
their Laws : I could give you to underftand that the Parlia- 
ment and Arch-Bifhoprick of Lisbon, make one of the greateft 
Ornaments of this Metropolis ; that the Ecclefiaftical Benefices 



to Portugal and Denmark. 647 

' are extream large ; that there are no Commendatory Abbeys 
in the Country, that the Friars are neither fo well indow'd nor 
fo well entertain'd as one might expert. I could inform you 
that the King's Royal Order is calPd Uhabito de Crifto, If 
[211] Madam d* Aunoy had not taught you fo much in De- 
ferring the admirable Inftitution of that Order ; and there- 
fore fhall content my felf in adding that the number of the 
Knights Companions of this Order runs far beyond that of 
its Commandries, which are worth very little. Here I muft 
make a halt and take leave of this Royal City, which 'tis 
poflible I may fee once more hereafter. I fet out immediately 
for the Northern Kingdoms of Europe; waiting patiently till 
it pleafes God that Monfieur Ponchartrain fhould either remove 
to Paradife, or do Juftice to him who fhall always be yours 
more than his own. 

Your Humble, &c. 



648 Some New Voyages 



LETTER II. 

Dated at Travemunde, 1694. 

Containing an Account of the Author's Voyage from Lisbon 
to Garnfey ; his Adventure with an Englifh Man of War 
and a Privateer : A Defcription of Rotterdam and Amfter- 
dam ; the Author's Voyage to Hamburg; the Dimenfions 
of a Flemi/h Sloop ; a Defcription of the City of Hamburg ; 
the Author's Journy from thence to Lubeck; and a De- 
fcription of that City. 

I SET out from Lisbon on the ^tb of April, having bargain'd 
with a Mafter of a Ship to Land me at Amfterdam for thirty 
Piajlres. At the [212] fame time, I had the precaution of 
taking a Pafs from the Dutch Refident, for fear of being 
ftop'd in that Country. I went in a Boat to a place call'd 
Belin, which lies about two Leagues below Lisbon. At this 
little Town all the Merchant Ships that go and come, are 
oblig'd to fhew their Cockets, Invoice, and Bills of Lading, 
and to pay the Duty for their Cargo. The 6th we got out of 
the Taio, and follow'd the Rake of a Fleet Bound for the 
Baltick Sea, and Convoy'd by a Swedifti Man of War of 60 Guns, 
Commanded by a Lubecker whofe Name was Crenger; and 
whom the King of Sweden had prefer'd to a Noble Dignity, 
notwithftanding that Originally he had been a Common 



to Portugal and Denmark. 649 

Sailor. We crofs'd the Barr by the way of the Great Channel 
or Pafs, between Fort Bougio, and the Cachopas ; the laft being 
a great Bank of Sand and Rocks, extending to three quarters 
of a League in length, and half a League in breadth, which 
Ships are apt to fall foul of in a Calm, by reafon of the Tides 
that bear that way. You muft know that if we had had Pilots 
that knew the Coaft, we would have pafs'd between that Bank 
and the Fort of St. Julian, which lies to the North or the 
Lisbon fide, oppofite to Bougio ; but we had no occafion to 
employ 'em, fince our Portuguefe Captain took the opportunity 
of following the run of the Baltick Fleet. As foon as we came 
into the Main, and fell into the middle of that North Country 
Fleet, the Brutilh Commodore made down upon us with all 
Sails aloft, and fir'd a Cannon with Ball in Head of our Ship ; 
after which he fent out his Lieutenant to acquaint our poor 
Matter, that it behov'd him to pay two Piftoles immediately for 
the Shot, and to Sheer off from his Fleet, unlefs he had a mind 
to pay a hundred Piaftres for his Convoy, which the Mafter of 
our Veffel refus'd very Gracefully. 

[213] But to drop this Subjedt; I muft acquaint you that 
the Barr of Lisbon is inacceffible while the Wind blows hard 
from the Weft and South- Weft ; which commonly happens in 
Winter. Add to this, that for eight Months of the Year the 
North and North-Eaft Winds prevail, and that moderately: 
By which means it came about, that our Paffage from the 
Mouth of the Taio to Cape Finifterre was longer than an 
ordinary Voyage from the Ifle of Newfound-Land to France. 
I never faw fuch conftant Winds as thefe ; however we got 



650 Some New Voyages 

clear of 'em, by Traverfing and Sweeping along the Coaft, 
which our Portuguefe Captain durft not leave for fear of the 
Sally-Rovers, whom they dread more than Hell it felf. At 
laft, after 18 or 20 days Sailing, we Weather'd Cape Finifterre ; 
and then the Wind Veering to the South-Weft, we made fuch 
way that in ten or twelve days we came in fight of the Ifle of 
Guernfey. I muft fay, that if it had not been for a French Pilot 
that conn'd the Ship, we had frequently fallen Foul on the 
Coaft of the Britifh Channel: For you muft know, the Portu- 
guefe have but little acquaintance with the Northern Seas, and 
the Lands that jut out into 'em ; and for that reafon are 
oblig'd to make ufe of Foreign Pilots when they are Bound 
for England or Holland. The fame day that we defcry'd 
Guernfey^ two great Englijh Ships gave us Chafe with full Sail, 
and in three or four hours came up with us : One of 'em was 
a King's Ship of fixty Guns ; and the other was a Privateer of 
fourty Guns, Commanded by one Cowper, who was naturally 
very well calculated for a Pickpocket, as you'll fee in the 
Sequel. As foon as they came up with us, we were forc'd to 
Strike and put out our Long Boat, into which I went in order 
to fhew the Captain, whofe name was Town/end, the Pafs I had 
receiv'd from the [214] Dutch Refident at Lisbon. This 
Captain treated me with all poflible Civility, in fo much that 
he affur'd me all my Baggage (hould be fecur'd from the 
Rapine of Captain Cowper, who purfuant to the Principles of 
his profeffion, pretended to Pillage me with as little Scruple 
as Mercy. However, our Ship could not be Search'd till we 
got into Guernfey Road, and for that reafon we were carry'd 



to Portugal and Denmark. 651 

thither the fame day; and after dropping Anchor the two 
Englijh Captains went a Shoar, and fent two Searchers on 
Board of us, to try if they could prove that the Wine and 
Brandy with which our Ship was Fraughted, was of the growth 
of France or Exported by Commiflion from French Merchants; 
which they could not poffibly make out, notwithftanding that 
they fpent fifteen days in fearching and rummaging, as I heard 
afterwards at Lubec. This troublefome Accident oblig'd me 

in five or fix days after, to Imbarque in 

t^ f 1- • ,. r * /"i. 1 • A Place in Holland, 

a Dutch l<rigat of * Lirczee ; having 

firft prefented Captain Town/end with fome Casks of Allegrete 

Wine, a Cheft of Oranges, and fome . A „ , _. 

' & ' 1 J Portuguefe City 

Difhes Carv'd at t Eftremos ; and that in that ftands almofton the 

acknowledgment of the kind Ufage and Frontiers towards Ex- 
good Entertainment that he gave me tremadura. 
both a Shoar, and on Board of his Ship. 

My Second Voyage prov'd more favourable than the 
former; for in three days Sailing I arriv'd at Circzee ; at 
which place I went on Board of a Paffage Smack, which fteer'd 
between the Iflands, and by vertue of the Winds and Tydes 
wafted me to Rotterdam. 

Rotterdam is a very large fine City, and a place of very 
great Trade. Here I had the Pleafure of viewing in two days 
time, the Maes College, the [215] Arfenal for Naval Stores, 
and the great Tower, which by the induftry of a Carpenter 
was Reinftated in its perpendicular Pofture, at a time when it 
bended and lhelv'd in fuch a monftrous manner, as to threaten 
the City with the Load of its Ruines. I had likewife the Satis- 



652 Some New Voyages 

fadtion of feeing the Houfe of the Famous Erafmus, as well as 
the Beauty of the Port or the Maes, the Mouth of which is 
very dangerous, by reafon of fome Shelves and Banks of Sand 
that fhoot out a pretty way into the Sea. The Trade of 
Rotterdam is very confiderable, and the Merchants of that 
place enjoy the conveniency of bringing their Ships up to 
the Doors of their Ware-Houfes, by the help of the Canals or 
Ditches, that interfedl this great City. Two days after my 
Arrival, I Imbarqu'd at five a Clock in the Morning in a 
Travelling Boat or Traff Scuyt for Amfterdam. This fort of 
Boats is cover'd with Ribs, being flat, long and broad ; and 
has a Bench or Form on each fide, that reaches from the 
Prow to the Poop. In this Conveniency, which one Horfe 
will draw, we travel a League an hour, for three Sous and a 
half per League. In all the Principal Cities of Holland the 
Scuyts fet out every hour, whether full or empty : But you muft 
know that you frequently fhift Boats, and for that end muft 
walk on foot thro' feveral Cities. In this fmall Voyage I 
walk'd thro' Delft, Leyden and Harlem, which appear'd to be 
large, neat and fine Cities. After I had TraveFd in thefe 
Boats twelve Leagues upon Ditches lin'd with Trees, Meads, 
Gardens, and moft pleafant Houfes, I arriv'd at Amfterdam in 
the Evening. 

When I came to my Inn, my Landlord order'd me a 
Guide, who in feven or eight days time fhew'd me all the 
Curiofities of this Flourifhing City; but I could have done it 
in three [216] or four days, if the City had afforded the Con- 
veniency of Hackney-Coaches, fuch as they have at Paris and 



to Portugal and Denmark. 653 

other Places. The City is large, neat and fine ; moft of its 
Canals or Graafs are deck'd with very pretty Houfes : But the 
Water Stagnating in thefe large Cifterns fmells very ftrong in 
Hot Weather. The Edifices are for the moft part Uniform, 
and the Streets are drawn as if 'twere by a Line. The Guild- 
Hall or Stadt-Houfe ftands upon Wooden Piles or Stakes ; 
tho' that vaft Mafs of Stone is extream heavy. This Noble 
Edifice is inrich'd with feveral fine Pieces of Sculpture and 
Painting, and adorn'd with rich Tapeftry. Here you may fee 
the fineft Marble, Jafper and Porphyry that can be : But this 
is nothing in Comparifon with the Mouldy Crowns that are 
hoarded up under the Vaults of this monftrous Edifice. The 
Admiralty-Houfe is likewife very fine, as well as the Arfenal. 
The Port which is little lefs than a large quarter of a League 
in Front, was covered all over with Ships, in fo much that 
one might eafily Jump from one to another. 

In this City I faw fome neat Churches, not to fpeak of 
a Synagogue of the true Jews, who out of regard to their 
Antiquity are allow'd the publick Exercife of their Venerable 
Religion. The Roman Catholicks, Lutherans, &c. are tolerated 
to Worfhip God in their way, without laying the Doors of 
their Meeting-Houfes open, or ringing Bells or Chimes. I 
was likewife entertain'd with a Sight of the Houfes for 
Widows and Orphans, and their Bridewells whether for the 
Punifhment of Rogues, or Female Sinners, who are forc'd to 
Work very hard to expiate their Peccadillo's. The Exchange 
is a piece of Architecture, large enough to contain eight 
thoufand Men : But the Statelieft thing I faw was [217] ten 



654 Some New Voyages 

or twelve Mufick-Houfes, fo calFd from certain Mufical Inftru- 
ments forrily Scrap'd upon, by the Sound of which a Gang of 
nafty Punks infnare fuch as have the courage to look upon 
'em without Spitting in their Faces. This gracious Tribe 
affembles in the Seraglio as foon as Night approaches. In 
fome of thefe Mufitk-Houfes you are entertain'd with the 
Sound of an Organ; in others with a Harpficord or fome 
other lame Inftrument. You enter into a large Room where 
the frightful Veftal Ladies fit, rigg'd with all forts of Colours 
and Stuffs, by the kind affiftance of the Jews who let out the 
Head-Dreffes and Suits of Cloaths, that have been kept for 
that ufe, from Father to Son, ever fince the Deftru&ion of 
Jerufalem. In thefe Seraglio's every body's Welcome for the 
Spending of ten or twelve Stivers, which he muft lay down at 
his firft entry, for a Glafs of Wine that's enough to Poifon 
an Elephant. Here you'll fee a Swinging Raw-Bon'd Sailor 
pop in with his Pipe in his Jaws, his Hair all glittering with 
Sweat, and his Tar Breeches Glew'd to his Thighs ; in which 
Pickle he makes SS's till he falls flat at his Miftriffes Feet. 
Next comes a Foot-Man half Muddled, that Sings and 
Dances, and Swills down Brandy to make himfelf Sober. 
After him the Stage is Trod by a Soldier that Swaggers and 
Storms, and makes the whole Palace tremble ; or elfe by a 
Company of Adventurers muffled up in their Cloaks, who 
come to play the Devil with three or four Rogues, and get 
themfelves knock'd on the Head by fifty that out-do Affes 
in Brutifhnefs. In fine, Sir, the whole Chorus is a Collection 
of nafty Mifcreants, who in fpite of the unfufferable Funk of 



to Portugal and Denmark. 655 

Tobacco and Smell of nafty Feet, continue in that Common 
Shore of Ordure and Nufance till two a Clock in the Morn- 
ing, without ever difobliging their Stomachs. [218] This Sir, 
is the whole of what I know in the matter. 

As I pafs'd thro' this famous City, I met with fome French 
Merchants of the Catholick Religion, the moft confiderable of 
which are the Sieurs d } Moracin, and d } Arreche; both Bayonne 
Men, and perfons of Merit and Probity, who have already 
purchas'd a great Eftate, and a very reputable Character. I 
was inform'd that there were a great many French Refugees 
in this City, who have fet up Manufactures that inrich'd fome 
and ruin'd others. This is to me a convincing Proof that the 
Refugee Trade has been favourable to fome and fatal to 
others ; nay, 'tis really true, that fome Refugees who brought 
Mony into Holland are now in want, and others who had not 
a Groat in France, are become Crcefus's in that Republick. 

There's no Country in the World in which good Inns are 
fo chargeable, as they are in Holland. There you muft pay 
for Bed and Fire, in proportion to your Meals, which coft 
you half a Ducatoon, or two and nine pence a time : So that a 
Gentleman and his Servant muft lie at the Charge of eight 
French Livres a day, for Supper, Dinner, Bed and Fire. 

As for the Dutch Mony, the Value of it is as follows. 

A Ducatoon is worth three Guelders, three Stuivers. 

A Rix Dollar paffes for fifty Stuivers. 

A Crown for 40 Stuivers. 

A Dollar for 30 Stuivers. 

An eight and twenty Stuck or Piece, 28 Stuivers. 



656 Some New Voyages 

A Guelder piece 20 Stuivers. 

A Stamp'd Scbelling 6 Stuivers. 

An Unftamp'd Scbelling, 5 Stuivers 4 Z)o/7j. 

[219] A Dubbelkie 2 Stuivers. 

A Stuiver 8 Doits; which makes a French Sol and a Liard ; 
for five French Sous make but four Dutch Stuivers ; and a French 
Crown of 60 Sawj value is no more than 48 Stuivers. 

A Gold Ducat is worth 5 Guelders 5 Stuivers. 

A Lowis D } or paffes for 9 Guelders 9 Stuivers. 

As for the Meafures of Holland, I can tell you with refer- 
ence to fome, that a League is near 3800 Geometrical Paces. 

An Ell is a French Foot ten Inches and a Line. 

A Pound is equal to our Paris Pound. 

A Pint holds much the fame quantity of Liquor with a 
Paris Chopine. 

This is all the account I can give you of Holland. 

When I fet out from Amfterdam to Hamburg, I chofe the 
eafyeft and cheapeft way of Travelling, (I mean by Water.) 
I had refolv'd indeed to Travel by Poft Waggons or Coaches ; 
but that refolution was prefently drop'd, when I was advis'd 
that in Travelling by Land, I might run the rifque of being 
ftop'd in the Territories of fome of the German Princes, who 
require Paffports of all Travellers. This wholefome Advice 
fpar'd both my Corps and my Purfe : For. to have gone Poft, 
it would have coft me for my felf and my Servant fourty 
Crowns, whereas it coft me but five by Water. There goes 
two Dutch Sloops from Amfterdam to Hamburg every Week, 
on purpofe to carry Paffengers, who may hire little feperate 



to Portugal and Denmark. 657 

Cabins, fuch being made in the Ship for the Accommodation 
of thofe who have a mind to be private. Thefe Sloops would 
be admirably well Calculated for Sailing up the South fide of 
the River of St. Laurence, from its Mouth to Quebec; and 
above all, from Quebec to Monreal. They are preferable to 
our Barques for that Service ; [220] which I'll make out by 
five or fix Reafons. In the firft place, they do not draw half 
fo much Water as our Barks of the fame Burden. In the 
next place, they'll tack to the four Quarters of the Wind ; 
they require lefs Rigging and a fmaller compliment of Hands 
than our Barques, and are Work'd with lefs Charge ; they'll 
turn their Head where their Stern was before in the twinkling 
of an Eye, whereas our Barques can't get about under five or 
fix Minutes, and fometimes will not tack at all ; they may rub 
upon Sand or Gravel without danger, as being Built of half 
flat Ribs, whereas our Barks being round, would fplit in 
pieces upon the leaft touch. Such, Sir, are the Advantages of 
thefe Flemifli Veffels beyond ours ; and fo you may fafely 
Write to the Rochel Merchants who Trade to Canada^ that 
they would find 'em very ferviceable in that Country : At the 
fame time, you may oblige 'em with the following dimenfions 
of that fort of Shipping, which I took from the Veffel I was 
on Board of, that was one of the leaft Size. It was fourty two 
Foot long from the Stern-poft to the Head ; the Hold was 
about eight Foot broad and about five Foot deep : The 
Cabin in the Fore-Caftle was fix Foot long, and had a Chim- 
ney with a Funnel and Vent at the bottom of the Cape-Stane. 
The Cabin Abaft was of the fame length, and its Deck was 

42 



658 Some New Voyages 

rais'd three Foot higher than the Fore-Caftle. The Helm of 
the frightful Rudder run along the Roof of the laft Cabin. 
The Ribs of this little Veffel, were, in good earneft, as flat as 
the Boats in the Seine. The Side was about a Foot and a half 
high; the Maft was 16 Inches diameter, and 30 Foot high; 
the Sail refembled a Redlangle Triangle in its Form. The 
Veffel was provided with lee-boards, or a fort of Wings which 
the Carpenters [221] know very well how to ufe. In fine, to 
inform your felf more particularly of the matter, you may 
Write to Holland for a Model of that fort of Shipping in 
Wood ; for a French Carpenter will never make any thing of 
the beft Verbal Defcription I can give. The cafe is the fame 
as with fome Mathematical Inftruments, of which the acuteft 
men can never form a juft Idea without feeing 'em. 

In Sailing from Amfterdam to Hamburg, we Steer thro' the 
Wat, that is, between the Continent and a ftring of Iflands 
that lye about two or three hours off the Terra Firma ; and 
round which the Tide ebbs and flows, as in other places. 
Between the Continent and thefe Iflands there are certain 
Channels, which are deeper than the other places on the right 
and left, for thefe are dry every Tide. Thefe Channels are 
eafily diftinguifh'd by the help of fome Buoys and Mails 
Planted upon the Flats. At half Flood you may weigh 
Anchor and Steer along the Channels, which make ftrange 
Windings and Elbows ; and if the Wind be contrary, you 
may eafily Board along by the help of the Current, till it is 
low Water, at which time you run a Ground upon the Sand, 
and are left quite dry. I faw above three hundred of thefe 



to Portugal and Denmark. 659 

Flemijh Veffels during the courfe of this Navigation, which I 
take to be as fafe as that of a River, abating for ten Leagues 
Sailing when we crofs over from the laft Ifland to the Mouth 
of the Elbe. The Tide rifes three Fathom perpendicular 
from the Mouth of this River to Aurenbourg, which lies ten or 
twelve Leagues above Hamburg; fo that great Ships and Men 
of War may eafily Sail up to Hamburg. 

The Paffage from Amfterdam to Hamburg is commonly 
accomplifh'd in feven or eight days ; for in thofe Seas the 
Wefterly Winds prevail for [222] three Quarters of the Year. 
But we were not above fix days in our Paffage, notwithftand- 
ing that the Mafter of our Ship was oblig'd to lofe a Tide in 
producing his Invoys and Bills of Lading at the Town of 
Stade, which lies a League off the Elbe, and where all Ships 
are oblig'd to pay Toll to the King of Sweden, excepting the 
Danes, who might have an equal Right to claim fuch a Toll, 
if they made ufe of the opportunity of Commanding the 
Paffage of this River with the Cannon of Glucflat. 

The Elbe is a large League over at its Mouth, and at 
Spring-Tides it has Water enough in the Channel for Ships 
of fifty or fixty Guns. The Entry of the River is very difficult 
and dangerous, by reafon of an infinity of moving Sands, 
which render it almoft inacceflible in a Fogg, as well as in the 
Night time ; notwithftanding the precaution of Light Houfes 
Built pretty far out at Sea. 

Hamburg is a large City, Fortified irregularly with Ram- 
parts of Earth. I pafs over in Silence the Democratical 
Government of this Hans Town and its Dependancies, pre- 



660 Some New Voyages 

fuming you are not ignorant of fuch things, fince the Geog- 
raphers have given ample Defcriptions of 'em: And fhall 
content my felf with informing you that the Trade of 
Hamburg makes it a confiderable place ; and confidering the 
advantage of its Situation, one might readily guefs fo much. 
It fupplies almoft all Germany with all forts of Foreign Com- 
modities, by the conveniency of the Elbe, which carries flat 
bottom'd Veffels of two hundred Tun above Drefden : And 
one may juftly fay that this City is very Serviceable to the 
Eledlor of Brandenburg, in regard that thefe Veffels go up to 
the Afpree, and fome other Rivers in his Territories. The 
Hamburg Merchants Trade to all parts of the [223] World, 
bateing America. They fend but few Ships to the Eaft-Indies, 
or the upper end of the Mediterranean ; but they fit out an 
infinity of Ships for Africa, Mufcovy, Spain, France, Portugal, 
Holland and England ; and two Fleets every Year for Arch- 
angel, where they arrive at the latter end of June, and the 
latter end of September. 

This little Republick keeps four Men of War of fifty 
Guns, and fome light Frigats that ferve for Convoys to their 
Merchantmen, Bound for the Streights, or for the Coaft of 
Portugal or Spain; where the Sally-Rovers would be fure to 
pick 'em up if they went without Convoys. The City is 
neither pretty nor ugly ; but moft of the Streets are fo nar- 
row, that the Coaches muft flop or put back every foot. It 
affords good Diverfion enough ; for commonly you have Plays 
A6ted by French or Italian Adors, and a German Opera; 
which for Houfe, Theatre and Scenes, may vye with the beft 



to Portugal and Denmark. 66 1 

in Europe. 'Tis true, the Habits of the Acftours are as irreg- 
ular as their Air and Meen; but then you muft confider 
that thefe two Suit one another. The Neighbourhood of 
Hamburg is truly very pretty in the Summer time, by reafon 
of an infinity of Country Houfes, adorn'd with excellent 
Gardens, and great numbers of Fruit-Trees, which by the 
affiftance of Art produce pretty good Fruit. But now that I 
am fpeaking of the Country round Hamburg, I can't difmifs 
the Subjed without acquainting you with one thing that is 
uncommon. In the Neighbourhood of Hamburg there are 
Fields of Battel, retaining to the Territories of Denmark and 
Lubeck; in which private Quarrels are adjufted before an in- 
finite number of Spectators, notice being given by the Sound 
of a Trumpet fome days before the Champions enter the 
Lifts. One remarkable Circumftance [224] is, that the Com- 
batants, whether on Foot or on Horfe-Back, implore the 
Mediation of two Seconds, only in order to be Judges of the 
thrufts, and to part 'em when four drops of Blood are fpilt ; 
fo that the Adventurers retire upon the leaft fcratch. If one 
of 'em falls upon the Ground, the Conqueror returns to the 
Territories of Hamburg, and makes a Triumphal Proceflion to 
that City, while the Air rings with acclamations of Joy from 
the Spectators. Thefe Tragedies are not unfrequent; for 
Hamburg being reforted to by an infinite number of Foreign- 
ers and Strangers, fome diforder or other always happens, 
which is redrefs'd that way. In former times, the Danes, 
Swedes and Germans, us'd to repair to the above mention'd 
Fields to adjuft the Quarrels they had in their own Countries, 



662 Some New Voyages 

where Duelling was prohibited under fevere Penalties. But 
the Soveraigns of thofe Countries have fince Stiffled fuch 
Pra&ices, by declaring that upon their return they fhould be 
as feverely punifh'd, as if the Adtion had been in their own 
Territories. 

After ftaying five or fix days at Hamburg, I took leave of 
that City and fet out for Lubec in a Poft Waggon, that goes 
thither every day. Each place in the Coach is a Crown and a 
half. We arriv'd that fame day at Lubec, and when we came 
to the Gates, were ask'd who we were ; upon which every one 
gave a true account of their Country and Profeffion ; but the 
fear of being ftop'd diffuaded me from being fo fincere. To 
be free with you, Sir, I plaid the Jefuit a little ; for having 
guarded my Confcience with a good meaning, I roundly told 
'em I was a Portuguefe Merchant, and fo got clear by fuffering 
the affront of being hooted at for a Jew. In fine, we were 
all fuffer'd to pafs without opening our Portmanteau's. 

[225] The City of Lubec is neither fo great nor fo popu- 
lous as Hamburg; but its Streets are broader and ftraighter, 
and its Houfes are much finer. The Ships that arrive in 
this Port are rang'd all in a row, upon a very pretty Key that 
extends from one end of the Town to the other ; and that in 
a River, that in my Opinion is deeper than 'tis broad. The 
greateft Commerce of this Place retains to the Baltick Sea, 
which is not above two Leagues diftant. The place from 
whence I now Write, is Seated exactly at the Mouth of this 
little River; which your great Ships can't enter, by reafon 
of a Bar that has not above fourteen or fifteen Foot Water; 



to Portugal and Denmark. 663 

even when the Wind Springing from the Main fwells this 
River after the fame manner as the Tides of the Ocean. To 
morrow I think to Imbarque in a Frigat that carries Paffengers 
from hence to Copenhagen, provided the Southerly Winds con- 
tinue. I have taken the great Cabin for two Ducatoons, which 
is not above four French Crowns. Ducats are the moft current 
and convenient Coin in all the Northern Countries ; for they 
pafs in Holland, Denmark and Sweden, and in all the Principal- 
ities of Germany: But a Traveller muft take care that they are 
full Weight, for otherwife the People will fcruple to take 'em, 
or at leaft cut off fome Sous in the Change. 

To conclude ; I have met with good Inns hitherto in all 
the Towns I pafs'd thro'; and drank good Bourdeaux Wine 
both in Hamburg and Lubec. The People of the Country 
drink likewife Rhenifh and Mofelle Wines ; but to my mind 
they are better to Boil Carp in than for any thing elfe. Adieu, 
Sir, I am now call'd upon to pack up my Baggage : I hope 
to fee Copenhagen the day after to morrow, if fo be that this 
Southerly Wind ftands our Friend, as much as I am, 

Sir, Tours, &c. 



664 Some New Voyages 



[226] LETTER III. 

Dated at Copenhagen, Sep. 12 1694. 

Containing a Defcription of the Port and City of Copenhagen, a 
View of the Danifh Court ; and of the Humours, Cuftoms, 
Commerce, Forces, &c. of the Danes. 

SIR, 

THE South-Eaft Wind that blew when I Wrote laft, wafted 
me into the Port of this good City of Copenhagen; after 
which it took leave of us, and purfued its courfe to the North- 
ern Countries of Sweden, where its thawing influence had been 
expe6led for fome days. This little Voyage, which was over 
in eight and fourty hours, afforded me diverfion enough ; for 
I had the pleafure of viewing to the Lar Board, or on the left 
hand, fome Danifh Ifles, which feem'd to be pretty Populous, 
if we may judge of that from the great number of Villages 
that I defcry'd upon 'em, when we Sweep'd along their Coaft 
in clear Weather with a frefh Gale. I take it, the croffing of 
this Sea muft be fomewhat dangerous in Winter, by reafon of 
the Banks of Sand that are met with in fome places : For the 
Nights being long, and the Winds high in that Seafon, no 
Precaution whatfoever would rid me of the fears of running 
upon the Sands, till I arriv'd at this City. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 665 

As foon as I fet my foot on Shoar, the Waiters came and 
view'd my Portmanteau's, in which they found more Sheets 
of Paper than Piftoles. [227] The next day after my Arrival, 
I waited upon Monfieur de Bonrepaux, who was then in the 
Country for the recovery of his Health : And for want of 
whom the Navy of France has fuftain'd an irreparable lofs. 1 
This done, I return'd to this City, which may juftly be lifted 
in the number of thofe that we in Europe call great and pretty. 
'Tis well and regularly Fortified, and 'tis pity 'tis not Wall'd 
with Stone, which is likewife a defed in the Cittadel that 
commands the Mouth of the Harbour. Copenhagen has one 
of the beft Harbours in the World, for both Nature and Art 
have confpir'd to ftielter it from all Infults. The City ftands 
upon a fmooth level Ground, the Streets are broad, and 
almoft all the Houfes are three Story high, and built of Brick. 
Here you may fee three very fine places; and amongft the 
reft, the King's Market, fo call'd from his Statue on Horfe- 
Back, which is there ere&ed. This Place is furrounded with 
fome fine Houfes, and Monfieur de Bonrepaux Lodges in one 
of 'em, which is very large ; and indeed that Ambaffadour has 
occafion for fo great a Houfe, considering the numeroufnefs 
of his Retinue. The Magnificence of his Table is fuitable 



1 Like Lahontan, Francois Dusson, Sieur de Bonrepaux, was of Gascon birth. 
By sheer ability he had raised himself from a humble position in the office of the 
marine to be chief of the French naval squadron. He was also a diplomatist of abil- 
ity, and had been sent on important missions to England (1685-87) ; from 1693-97 
he was French ambassador to Holland. As a patron of letters, he became interested 
in Lahontan, and endeavored to reestablish his credit at the French court. See 
Macaulay's brilliant characterization, in his History of England. — Ed. 



666 Some New Voyages 

to the Grandeur of his Equipage : And every body pays him 
the honours and efteem that his Character merits. But I'll 
infift no longer upon that Head. 

The City of Copenhagen is very advantageoufly Seated, as 
you may fee in the Map of the Ifle of Zealand ; and lies very 
conveniently for Merchantmen which come without any diffi- 
culty up to the Canals or Ditches that are cut thro' it. It 
contains very fine Edifices ; particularly the Churches of 
Notredame and St. Nicholas, which are both great and fine. 
The round Tower paffes for an admirable piece of Archi- 
tecture, and has [228] a Stair-Cafe upon which a Coach may 
drive up to the top. The Library which ftands in the middle 
of the round Tower is well Stocked with Books and valuable 
Manufcripts. The Exchange is an admirable Fabrick, in 
regard both to its length, and its Situation in the pleafanteft 
part of the Town. As for the Royal Palace, its Antiquity 
recommends it as much to me, as if it had been Built after 
the Modern way: For in the Maffy Fabrick of a Caftle, 'tis 
enough if the due Symmetry of Proportion be obferv'd. The 
Furniture and Pictures in this Caftle are admirably fine ; and 
the Royal Clofet is fill'd with an infinity of very curious Rari- 
ties. In the King's Stables there is now but a hundred Coach- 
Horfes, that is, thirteen or fourteen Set of different forts and 
fizes ; and a hundred and fifty Saddle-Horfes : But both the 
one and the other are equally fine. Chriftians-Fawe, the Second 
City, is fever'd from Copenhagen by a great Canal of running 
Water. The Royal Palace of Rozemburg, which ftands at one 
end of the City, is adorn'd with a charming Garden. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 667 

I come now to give you the Characters of the Princes and 
Princeffes at the Court of Denmark. 'Tis needlefs to take 
notice of the Valour and Vigilancy of the King, for the two 
chief Qualities of that Monarch are fufficiently known to all 
the World. 1 I fhall therefore only acquaint you that he is a 
Perfon of great Judgment and Capacity, and intirely Wrap'd 
up in the Interefts of his Subjects, who look upon him as their 
Father and Deliverer. He has all the Qualities of a good 
General, and is affable and generous to the laft degree. He 
fpeaks with equal facility, the Danifli, Swedifh, Latin, German, 
Englifli and French Languages. The Queen is the moft 
Accomplifh'd Princefs in the World ; and fo I have [229] 
faid all in all. The Royal Prince is a Son worthy of fo great 
a King for his Father, and fuch a good and vertuous Queen 
for his Mother ; as you have heard it proclaim'd by as many 
Tongues as there are Heads in France. He is a Mafter of 
Learning, and has a quick Apprehenfion joyn'd to a fweet 
Temper. His Manners are as Royal as his Perfon, and all 
that fee him wifh him that Profperity and Happinefs that his 
Phyfiognomy promifes. Prince Chriflian is a fweet lovely 
Prince, as well as Prince Charles his younger Brother: A 
certain Air of Affability fits upon their Foreheads and charms 
Mankind. Prince William the youngeft Brother is a very 
pretty Child. Princefs Sophia, who is commonly call'd the 
Royal Princefs, has truly a Royal Air: She is Handfome, 
Young, well Shap'd and Witty as an Angel : Which is enough 
to entitle her to a Preference before all the Princeffes upon 



1 For the king of Denmark, see p. 3, note 2, ante. — Ed. 



668 Some New Voyages 

Earth, not to mention a thoufand other good qualities, the 
Relation of which would prove too bulky for a Mijfive. Let's 
therefore call another Subject. 

One may live in this Country for almoft nothing, notwith- 
ftanding that good Fifh is fomewhat dear: In the beft Ordi- 
naries about Town you pay but fifteen or fixteen Sous a Meal. 
The Butchers Meat of this place is neither fo juicy nor fo 
nourifhing as that in France; but their Poultry, their frefh 
Water-Fowl, their Hares and their Partridges are exceeding 
good. The beft Claret cofts but fifteen Sous a Bottle. A 
Hackney-Coach may be hir'd for a Crown a day, and fixty 
Livres a Month. The Water of this place is muddy and 
heavy, and for that reafon we have recourfe to the Beer, which 
is clear and wholefome, and very cheap. The French Refu- 
gees in Copenhagen are allow'd the free exercife of their 
Religion, under the direction of Monfieur [230] de la Placette 
a Minifter of Beam, who has a very good Penfion from the 
Queen, for Preaching in a publick Church, of which her Self 
is Prote&refs. 

Commonly the King paffes the Summer at his Country 
Seats, fometimes at Yegresburg, fometimes at Fredericsburg, and 
fometimes at Cronenburg. There's fcarce any Prince in the 
World that has better Accommodation for Dear-Hunting, 
than the King of Denmark: For all his Parks are full of 
broad Roads for purfuing the Chace ; befides that, the Danifli 
Horfe have a long ftretch of a Gallop, which is very conven- 
ient for Hunters ; and the Dogs of that Country are fcarce 
ever faulty. The King's Table is as nobly Served up, as you 



to Portugal and Denmark. 669 

can well imagine : So that when he returns from Hunting he 
finds a frefh Pleafure in feeding on Angelical Fare. He is 
frequently imploy'd in reviewing his Troops, and vifiting his 
Forts, Magazines and Arfenals ; and fometimes he goes a 
Fowling with his Courtiers. About two Months ago I faw 
him Shoot about a quarter of a League out of Town : Upon 
which occafion a Wood Fowl as big as a Cock was plac'd 
upon the top of a Maft, and the King Shot at it firft and took 
away a piece of its Neck with his Ball ; after which his Court- 
iers Shot fo dexteroufly that there was nothing left but a little 
bit of the Fowl, which the King hit at laft, after a great many 
Sports-Men had attempted it in vain. 

Mod of the People in this place underftand French ; and 
perhaps the Gentlemen of the Royal Academy are not better 
Skill'd in the Purity and Delicacy of that Language, than the 
Countefs de Frizs; who by her Wit, Birth and Beauty is 
juftly accounted the Pearl and Ornament of the Court. The 
Danes are a proper fort of People ; they are civil, honourable, 
brave and adlive. They have fomewhat that's very ingaging 
[231] in their Carriage, and bears an Air of affability and 
complaifance. I take 'em to be a fenfible thinking fort of 
People, and free of that unfufferable affe&iation and vanity 
that gives a difrelifh to the AdHons of other Nations : At leaft 
'tis apparent that a difengag'd genteel Air fhines thro' all 
their Acftions. The Danifti Ladies are very handfome and 
lively ; generally they are very witty and brisk, and a fparkling 
gayety hangs very agreeably about 'em, notwithftanding that 
the nature of their Climate do's not promife it. The Danijh 



670 Some New Voyages 

Men complain that they are too haughty and nice in their 
Condutt ; and indeed they have reafon to charge 'em with a 
fcrupulous nicety ; but as for their Pride I know nothing of 
it. They receive almoft no vifits, and 'tis alleg'd that the 
reafon of this referv'dnefs proceeds not fo much from the 
defign of avoiding the occafion of Temptation, as from the 
fear of being Scandalis'd ; for Slander reigns in this Country 
as much as elfewhere. In fine, they have more Vertue and 
Wifdom than they fhould have, in bearing the Sighs of Lovers 
without being mov'd. One may fee 'em often enough at the 
Houfe of Mr. de Guldenlew, the King's natural Brother and 
Viceroy of Norway. That Gentleman, who indeed is one of 
the Statelieft Men in Europe, takes pleafure in keeping a 
Table every day for eighteen perfons, and regaling the Ladies 
and Perfons of Quality. After Dinner the Gentlemen make 
Matches to Game or Walk out with the Ladies. The fame 
Entertainment, and the fame fort of Company is to be met 
with at the Count de Revenclaw's, who is look'd upon as one 
of the mod Zealous and Capable Minifters that the King has. 
Thefe Dinners or Entertainments are fomewhat too long for 
me, who am accuftom'd to Dine Poft, I mean, to fill my Belly 
in five or fix [232] Minutes; for commonly they laft above 
two hours. The excellent Meffes which are then Serv'd up 
in great plenty, Feaft at once the tafte, the fight and the fmell. 
For ; in fine, there's no difference between thofe Tables and 
the beft about the French Court, unlefs it be that the former 
have great pieces of Salt Beef fet upon 'em ; and I truly think 
the Danes would be Guilty of an indifcreet A6tion in eating of 



to Portugal and Denmark. 671 

it fo heartily, if they did not take care to wafh the Salt out of 
their Throat with good Liquor. 

Among the different forts of Wine that are commonly 
drank at Copenhagen, the Cabers and the Pontac are the only 
Wines that fuit a French Man's Palate. It feems to be an 
inviolable Cuftom in all the Northern Countries, to fwill down 
two or three good Draughts of Beer, before they turn to 
Wine, which they value too much to fpoil it with Water. I 
am told that in former times they us'd to fit four or five hours 
at Meals, and drink briskly all the while, in fpite of the threats 
of the Gout. But now adays that cuftom is in difufe ; befides, 
the Glaffes are fo fmall and the number of the Healths fo 
moderate, that they rife from Table in very good order : Not 
but that fometimes upon extraordinary Solemnities, the Guefts 
lye under an indifpenfible Obligation to drink huge Bumpers 
in certain Wellcomes; which in ancient times were in ufe among 
the Grecians under the name of ayaO y SatVovos. I tremble when 
I call to mind thefe Bumpers, ever fince a fatal accident befell 
me about two Months ago in Mr. de Guldenlew's Houfe: 
That Gentleman regaPd fome eighteen or twenty Perfons of 
both Sexes, in Solemnifing the Birth of his Children ; and 
Fate would have it fo that I had the honour to be one of the 
Male Guefts, who were all oblig'd, excepting Mr. de Bonrepos, 
to drink two dozen of Bumpers to the Health of the prefent 
and abfent [233] Children. I proteft, I was very much out of 
Countenance, and would have almoft chofe to drink up the 
River of St. Laurence, rather than thefe Fountains of Wine ; 
for there was no poflibility of baulking a Glafs. 'Twas then 



672 Some New Voyages 

too late to reflect upon the ftrange Pofture I was in ; for as the 
Proverb goes, the Wine was drawn, and I was oblig'd to 
drink it ; I mean, I was oblig'd to do as the reft did. How- 
ever, towards the conclufion of Dinner they put round a great 
JVellcome that held two Bottles; and all the Gentlemen were 
oblig'd to drink it brim-ful, as a Health to the Royal Family; 
God knows, the defpairing Mariner never trembled more 
gracefully upon the difmal Profpeft of a Ship-Wrack, than 
I did upon the approach of the Bumper. In fine, I confefs 
to you, I drank it, but for the latter part of the Story I beg 
your Pardon ; for I have no mind to glory in the Heroick 
A&ion that I did in imitation of three or four more, who dif- 
charg'd their Confcience juft under the Table as gracefully as 
I. After that fatal blow, I was fo mortified that I durft not 
appear ; nay, I had a ftrong fancy to leave the Country out of 
hand, and would certainly have done it, if my Pot Companions 
and thofe who fhar'd the difgrace, had not diffuaded me by 
an infinity of German Proverbs that feem'd to applaud the 
generous Exploit ; among which the following had the greateft 
influence, viz. If we are afharn'd in taking too mucb y we ought to 
place our Glory in giving it up again. 

The Danijh Gentry live very handfomely upon their Land- 
Rents, and the Peafants want for nothing, no more than ours, 
unlefs it be for Mony. They have a fufficient Stock of Grain 
and Cattel, which ferves to maintain 'em in a grofs way, and 
to pay the Landlord's Rents. Is not it enough that they are 
well clad and well fed ? [234] I would fain know what advan- 



to Portugal and Denmark. 673 

tage the Dutch Boors reap from their Crowns, while they feed 

upon nothing but Cheefe and Butter- . __ ... 

r ° * rompermck is a fort 

fpread upon * Pompernick. If their of Bread) as black as a 

Crowns and Dollars ferve only to pay Chimney, as heavy as 

the Taxes of the Republick, they muft Lead, and as hard as 

be very Blind in hugging a Shadow of 

Liberty, which they purchafe at the expence of the Subftance 

that maintains both Life and Health. 

The beft thing the Danes ever did, was that of fetting their 
Kings upon the fame Foot as they now are. The Prince that 
fways the Scepter at prefent, exercifes an Arbitrary Power 
with as much Equity as his Predeceffor. Before their Gov- 
ernment was reduc'd to this happy lay, the Kingdom was 
overrun with factious Clubs and Civil Wars; the State and 
Society it felf was all in diforder; the Grandees crufti'd the 
inferiour Subjects, and even the Kings themfelves were oblig'd 
to ftoop (if I may fo fpeak) to the Laws of their Subje&s. 
In a word, their Eyes being dazled with that Phantafm of 
Liberty, which by a treacherous luftre impofes upon feveral 
other Nations ; they were thereby render'd Slaves to fo many 
petty Kings, who a6ted like abfolute Soveraigns without fear- 
ing the limited Power of their Monarchs. 

At prefent, the King of Denmark's Revenue amounts to 

five Millions of Crowns. This I know to be a juft and true 

State of his Treafury : He maintains near thirty thoufand Men 

of regular Troops, in good order, well difciplin'd and well 

pay'd ; befides the Militia who are always ready to March 
43 



674 Some New Voyages 

upon a call. Nay farther, he may raife fourty thoufand Men 
more, upon occafion, without difpeopling his Country. His 
[235] Officers are provided for at a reafonable rate, efpecially 
the Marine Officers who are not allotted, (as ours are in 
France,) any greater Pay than what bears a juft proportion to 
the poor Captains of Foot and Horfe, who are oblig'd to 
pinch hard to anfwer the Charges that the Sea Captains are 
exempted from. 'Tis faid, the King of Denmark finds his 
account in letting out his Troops to his Allies, not with 
regard to the Mony pay'd on that account, but in regard that 
by this means he keeps his Troops in exercife, inures 'em to 
the hardfhips of War, and makes 'em compleat Mafters of the 
Military Art ; in order to make ufe of 'em upon occafion. 
You muft know, Sir, his Danifh Majefty is above that ridicu- 
lous Scruple that moft other Princes make to imploy For- 
eigners or thofe of another Religion in their Service. The 
Meffieurs de Cormaillon, Dumeni, UAbat, and feveral others 
have confiderable Pofts in his Army, notwithftanding that they 
are French Men and Papifts. From hence it appears that this 
Monarch is convinc'd that Men of Honour will rather differve 
their Religion than a6t counter to the Fidelity due to their 
Matter : And to be plain with you, I believe the King is in the 
right of it : For fince the Foundation of all Religion confifts 
in the Fidelity we owe to God, to our Friend and to our Bene- 
factor ; nothing will be able to unhinge a Man of Honour, or 
to tempt him to a& contrary to his Duty. I will not pretend 
to meafure the a&ions of others by my own Standard ; but 
for my own part, I affure you if I had lifted my felf in the 



to Portugal and Denmark. 675 

Service of the Turks, with the liberty of continuing Popifh ; 
and if Orders were iffued forth for laying Rome in Afhes, I 
would be the firft Man to fet fire to it, in obedience to the 
Grand Seignior's Orders. But we have enough of that. 

[236] The Danifli Laws, contain'd in the Latin Book I 
now fend you, will appear to you fo clear, fo diftindt, and fo 
wifely Concerted, that they'll feem to have proceeded from the 
Mouth of St. Paul: You'll find by them that this Country 
do's not countenance Solicitors, Barrifters, and the reft of the 
litigious Tribe. I own indeed that the Law relating to Man- 
Slaughter is unreafonable ; for you'll find that by the Pen- 
alty therein enabled, a Man that kills his Enemy runs much 
the fame rifque as if he had fuffer'd himfelf to be kill'd. 

The Court of Denmark makes as good a Figure in pro- 
portion to its Greatnefs, as any other Court in Europe, The 
Lords and Courtiers have very magnificent Equipages ; and 
which is Angular, none but thofe of the Royal Family are 
allow'd to give a Red Livery. The time of appearing at 
Court is from Noon to half an hour after one, or thereabouts; 
during which time the King appears in a Hall fill'd with very 
fine Gentlemen. Here you'll fee nothing but Imbroidery and 
Lace after the neweft Fafhion. The Foreign Minifters make 
their appearance at the fame time, for the King do's 'em the 
honour of hearing them Talk with a great deal of Pleafure. 
There are but few Knights of the Order of the Elephant to 
be feen at Court, by reafon that the Dignity is beftow'd only 
upon Perfons of the firft Rank. This Order may juftly be 
call'd the nobleft in Europe, and lefs degenerate than the reft; 



676 Some New Voyages 

infomuch, that of thirty four Knights Companions, which 
make up the Compliment of the Order, three fourths are 

Soveraign Princes. The Order of * Dane- 
*Danebrouk fignifies b k j more common and confequently 
the White Order. . 

lefs confiderable; tho' after all, the Knights 

inverted with that Collar, [237] are intitled to feveral great 
Prerogatives and marks of Preheminence. 

The natural Sons of the Kings of Denmark, bear the Title 

of f Galdenlew and High Excellence, * and 
t Gujdenlew fignifies the j r Lad j es ^ d i ft i ngu yh'd by the Com- 
a Golden Lion. . 

pellation of High Grace. The prefent 

* Which is equivalent King has two natural Sons, whofe Merit 

to the German High- , n t? rr / i_ l* j ^ htl 

leaves all hxpremon far behind it. 1 he 
nefs. \ 

eldeft Serves in France with all imaginable 
Applaufe. The Second who is but fifteen years of Age and 
continues here, is a very promifing Youth : He has a wonder- 
ful deal of Senfe and Wit ; his Perfon is Handfome and well 
Shap'd ; he is poffefs'd of all the Qualities that ingage the 
tender Sex; his Meen is perfectly charming; in a word, he is 
one of the compleateft young Gentlemen I ever faw. He is 
nominated High Admiral of Denmark; and, which is very 
furprifing, he is better vers'd in the Mathematicks and the Art 
of Building Ships, than the ableft Mafters. In the King of 
Denmark' 's Dominions there are two Popifh Churches pub- 
lickly Tolerated ; one at Glucftat and the other at Altena. 

The Air of this Country is very wholfome for thofe who 
live foberly ; but it has a contrary effedl upon difcontented 
Perfons. The only Difeafe they complain of is the Scurvy ; 



to Portugal and Denmark. 677 

which the Phyficians impute to a foul nafty Air loaded with an 
infinity of thick and condenfated Vapours, which joyn their 
Forces upon the Surface of the Earth, and infinuate them- 
felves into the Lungs along with the Air : They plead that 
their Air thus polluted, joyns in with the Blood, and retards 
its Motion in fo much that it congeals, and fo gives rife to 
the Scurvy. But with the leave of [238] the good Doftors, 
I'll take the liberty to Vindicate the Air of this agreeable 
City, and beg 'em to confider that the impreflions of the Air 
upon the Mafs of Blood are lefs forcible than thofe of the 
Aliment. If the Scurvy took its rife from the unfavourable 
Qualities of the Air ; by confequence every body would be 
equally liable to it ; but this we find to be falfe, for that three 
quarters of the Danijh Nation are clear of that Diftemper. 
The Argument I now offer is grounded on the Obfervations 
I made upon all the Soldiers that dy'd of that Difeafe at the 
Forts of Frontenac and Niagara in the year 1687 (which I 
imparted to you in my * Letters Dated the * & , my LetUrs in 
next year.) In thofe Forts we have the the firft Volume, 
pureft and wholfomeft Air in the World; dated in 1688. 
and for that reafon it ftands more to reafon to attribute the 
Invafion of the Scurvy (which then reign'd) to the nature of 
the Aliment ; I mean, to the Salt Meat, Butter and Cheefe, 
as well as to immoderate Sleep and want of Exercife. This 
account of the matter will be back'd by all who have made 
long Voyages, when they confider the terrible havock that the 
Scurvy makes upon the Ship's Crews. I conclude therefore 
that the frequency of the Scurvy is owing to bad Vidluals, pur- 



678 Some New Voyages 

fuant to the Opinion of a very fenfible Gentleman whom I 
credit very much. This Gentleman reprefented one day, that 
fuch acid Food increafes the acidity of the Blood ; and fo it 
comes to pafs that the Blood of Scorbutick Perfons is defti- 
tute of Spirits ; or at leaft, its Spirits are fo thin and fcanty 
that they are eafily abforbed and invelop'd by the prevailing 
acids, and by that means put under an impoflibility of excit- 
ing Fermentations. As for the influence of immoderate 
Sleep and [239] long Reft, all the World knows that they 
have a great tendency to the obftru6Uon of the Inteftines, and 
promote the Generation of Crude Juices, in cramping the 
Senfible and wonted Evacuations, partly by the flower Mo- 
tion of the Spirits, and partly by the Infenfible Tranfpiration 
of the Sublimer Particles. From thefe Remarks I conclude, 
that frefh Meat, good Porridge, regular Sleep, and moderate 
Exercife (ad ruborem non ad fudorem) are Antidotes againft 
the Scurvy, and the beft Correctives of the Mafs of Blood, 
whether by Sea or Land. 

If this digrefllon, Sir, feems too long ; I would have you 
to impute it to my earned defire, of directing you how to 
ward off that ugly Diftemper, when you come to undertake 
any long Voyage. I would not have you think that I have thus 
interrupted the thread of my Difcourfe, with intent to prove 
that the Air of this Ifland is better than that of Portugal: 
That's a thing I know nothing of; for whatever Air I breath 
in, I am ftill equally well. 'Tis true, the inconftancy of the 
Weather might affed: me in fome meafure, if I were oblig'd 
to pafs the remainder of my life in Copenhagen ; for here we 



to Portugal and Denmark. 679 

have frequent inftances of the Weather's changing three or 
four times a day, and lhifting from cold to hot, from dry to 
wet, and from clear to cloudy. 

I had the honour to pay my profound refpe&s to the King 
of Denmark at his Caftle of Fredericksbourg, upon the occafion 
of his Inftalling fome German Princes by Proxy in the Order 
of the Elephant. That Ceremony which indeed was very 
pretty, drew thither a great confluence of perfons of a diftin- 
guifhing Chara&er ; particularly all the Foreign Minifters who 
were proud of aflifting at the Solemnity. Some days after 
that Prince went to take the Air at Cronengbourg, [240] which 
(lands dire&ly upon the fide of the ftreight call'd the Sund. 
This Caftle has a regular Fortification, being Wall'd with 
Brick, and cover'd with a great number of wide bore'd and 
long Culverines, which command the entry of the Streight, 
that I take to be the breadth of Three thoufand five hundred 
Geometrical Paces, that is to fay, a large French League. 
Here you have the pleafure of Seeing an infinity of Foreign 
Ships pafs to and again between the Ocean and the Baltick- 
Sea : And in regard that the Guns of Cronengbourg are the 
Keys of this Port, all Foreign Ships lye under an indifpen- 
fable neceflity of coming to an Anchor at Elfenor, to pay 
the Toll before they go farther. You may allege, perhaps, 
that a Numerous Fleet of Men of War might force their 
Paffage at the expence of a little Cannonading : and indeed 
I own the allegation to be juft ; but if the King of Denmark's 
Navy were at Anchor in the Streight, I am perfwaded they 
would be able to fecure the Pafs : and for that reafon you 



680 Some New Voyages / 

ought not to think it ftrange that his Danijh Majefty exadts a 
moderate Toll from the Merchantmen of all Nations, except 
the Swedes: At leaft I think he has a better Title to demand 
it, than the Grandfignior has in the Dardanelles. For moft of 
the Ships that fail to the Baltick, go to Trade with Lubeck, 
Brandenbourg, Dantzick, Prujfia, Courland, Livonia and Sweden; 
whereas thofe which pafs the Dardanelles are bound for the 
Grandfignior* s Ports, and Trade with none but his own Sub- 
jects. I would fain know whether the King of Spain would 
not make the like pretenfions to a Toll upon the Streight of 
Gibraltar, if fo be that Europe and Africa were fo friendly as 
to fit a little nearer together. Nay, put the impoflible fup- 
pofition out of the cafe, who knows but that Prince may make 
fuch a [241] demand, when he comes to have a Puiffant Naval 
Force? This Queftion is not fo Problematick as you think 
for. However, a great many people are of the opinion that 
they might eafily avoid the Toll of the Sund, if they did but 
fteer obftinately through one of the two Belts : But they are 
miftaken. 'Tis true indeed, the thing might take, if the 
Sands in the Sea were as fixt as they are in the Charts ; but 
that they are not ; for the former fhift in every Storm, whereas 
the latter ftand for ever in the fame Paper-ftation. Befides 
there's an infinity of cover'd Rocks, and irregular Currents, 

unknown to the experteft Pilots, notwith- 
* Books of Hydro- ftandi the affiftance of their Maps and 
graphical Charts. ° r 

* oea-Lbarts. 

To call up another Subjedl ; Suffer me to acquaint you 
that Denmark produces a great many Commodities which are 



to Portugal and Denmark. 68 1 

fold with great Advantage to the Englifh and Dutch ; partic- 
ularly Rye, Corn, Cyder, Mead, Apples, Oxen, Cows, Fat Hogs, 
Horfes, Iron, Copper, and all forts of Timber, efpecially Mails 
from Norway, which affords fome of one piece that are big 
enough for Noah's Ark. In Norway there are fome Silver 
Mines, which, 'tis faid, the King might get by, if he would 
be at the charge of Digging. The Norwegians fell likewife 
the Skins of Bears, Foxes, Martins, Otters and Elks; but they 
are not fo fine as thofe of Canada. 

To come to the King of Denmark's Naval Force ; his Fleet 
which is always kept in good order, as well as his Magazines 
and Arfenals, confifts of Twenty Eight Ships in the Line 
of Battle, Twenty Six Fregats and Four or Five Firefhips ; 

particularly 

8 Ships from 80 to 100 Guns. 

10 Ships from 60 to 80 Guns. 

10 Ships from 50 to 60 Guns. 

[242] 16 Fregats from 10 to 26 Guns. 
3 Bomb Veffels. 
He maintains 1800 Carpenters and 400 Gunners. The 
Sea Captains Pay is not always the fame. Some have Three 
Hundred, fome Four Hundred Crowns a Year. The Captain 
Commodores have five hundred, and the Commodores fix 
hundred : Befides thefe, there are twelve Marine Volunteers, 
call'd Apprentices, who have a hundred Crowns a Year. But 
after all, you'll be pleas'd to confider that thefe Allowances 
are not fo forry as you may think for ; for in Denmark a Man 
may live for thirty Crowns, better than for a hundred Crowns 
in France. 



682 Some New Voyages 

Befides the above mention'd Fleet, his Majefty may, upon 
occafion, call for twenty four Ships from 40 to 60 Guns, 
which his Subjects are oblig'd to fit out at his Pleafure, and 
which are otherwife imploy'd in Trading to Portugal, Spain, 
and the Mediterranean. 'Tis to be obferv'd by the bye, that 
a Danifli Ship of fifty Guns may fafely venture a Broad-Side 
with a French or Englifli Ship of fixty, by reafon that their 
Timber is very ftrong, and their Guns of a wide Bore. All 
the Dani/h Men of War are Built with half-flat Ribs, which 
occasions their heavy Sailing. Their Mafts are very thick and 
(hort ; Short that they may not bend under the Sails when 
they Weather Capes, Iflands, Rocks and Banks in a Storm ; 
and thick that they may bear the Sails tight, in doubling 
thefe Capes, Iflands, &c. when the Boifterous Winds furrow 
the Surface of the Baltick. The King of Denmark^ Sea Men 
are well entertain'd, and well pay'd, and have twelve Crowns 
Bounty-Mony over and above their Wages, as foon as the 
Fleet is laid up. But at the fame time, you muft know that 
three thoufand Sea Men are kept in conftant Pay, and lodg'd in 
[243] an uniform Row of Barracks in the Streets of this City. 

I ftiall conclude this Letter with a View of the Coin and 
Current Mony of the Kingdom. 

A Bank Rix Dollar is worth 50 Lubec Pence. 

A Danifli Rix Dollar goes for 48 Lubec Pence. 

A Shet Dal is worth 32 Lubec Sous. 

A Marc-lubs paffes for 16 Stuivers of Lubec. 

A Marc Danifli is worth 8 Lubec Stuivers. 

A half Mark Danifli is worth 4 Lubec Pence. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 683 

One Lubec Penny is worth two Danijh Pence, and two 
Danifh Pence are of the fame value with fourteen French 
Deniers, which is much the fame with an Englifli Penny ; and 
by this Standard you may reduce all the above mention'd 
Denominations. 

A Gold Ducat is worth two Danifh Rix Dollars and four- 
teen Pence ; fometimes 'tis two Pence under or over. A Rofe- 
Noble is two Ducats. A Silver Lowis or a French Crown 
paffes in Denmark for a Danijh Rix Dollar ; and the half and 
quarter Crowns obferve the fame proportion, as well as the 
Louis d } Ores. 

In the Ifland of Zealand the Leagues confift of 4200 Geo- 
metrical Paces ; the Norway Leagues are longer, and thofe of 
Holftein are of lefs extent. The Copenhagen Ell is an Inch and 
a half bigger than the French half Ell. 

/ am, 

SIR, 

Tours, &c. 



684 Some New Voyages 



[244] LETTER IV. 

Dated at Paris , Dec. 29. 1694. 

Containing a Journal of the Author's Travels from Copenhagen 

to Paris. 
SIR, 

I LEFT Copenhagen three days after the Date of my laft ; 
being accommodated with Mr. de Bonrepeau } s Coaches, 
who to avoid the fatigue of paffing between the two Belts, had 
gone before to Wait upon the King of Denmark at Coldinck. 
You muft know, that Prince goes thither Poft every Year, not- 
withftanding that his Retinue amounts to a thoufand or twelve 
hundred Persons. Upon that occafion, the Boors of the 
Villages adjacent to the Road, are oblig'd to bring their 
Horfes to certain Places at an appointed hour, in order to 
draw the Coaches and Waggons that contain that numerous 
Retinue, with their Baggage. Tho' thefe Horfes are little, 
yet they are ftrong, vigorous, tidy, infenfible of cold, and fo 
very light, that they'll go you a good Trott as faft as a 
Gallop. The Stages for (hifting the Horfes are two or three 
Leagues, as well as thofe for the Horfe-Guards which condudt 
the King from place to place, and are reliev'd every Stage. 

We fet out from Copenhagen Sept. 15. and after three hours 
Travelling, arriv'd at Roskild, which makes fix of thofe Leagues 



to Portugal and Denmark. 685 

of which twenty goe to a degree. We pafs'd fo fpeedily that 
we had only time to view the Tombs of the Kings of Denmark^ 
while the Boors put frefh Horfes in the [245] Coaches. 
These Marble Maufoleums are a finifli'd piece of Architecture, 
and adorn'd with Baffe Releivo's and Latin Infcriptions. The 
fine Marble of which they are Built, is very well Polifh'd, 
being that of Paros, and Africa, and that call'd Brocatelle, Ser- 
pentine and Cipellino. The Tombs are plac'd in the Chappel 
of an ancient Church, that belong'd to the Benedittins before 
Luther's Remonftrances. The fame very day we came to take 
up our night's Lodging in a Village near the great Belt; 
having enjoy'd the pleafure of viewing by the way, fome ad- 
mirable Land-Skips. Next day at eight a Clock in the Morn- 
ing, we arriv'd at the Town of Cortos, which ftands upon the 
Chops of the above mention'd Streight ; and is Fortified with 
Earth. 

As foon as we Imbarqu'd in the Yacht that lay ready for 
Mr. de Bonrepau, we fet Sail; but in crofling thefe four 
Leagues of Sea, the Wind was fo low and the Sea fo calm, 
that one might have drank Bumpers upon the Deck without 
fpilling. We no fooner landed at Nibourg, a little paltry 
place regularly Fortified, than we took Coach, and fet out for 
Odenzee, the Capital City of Fionia, where we lay that Night. 
Odenzee ftands in the middle of that Ifland, which is one of 
the moft fertile Territories of Denmark. The Cathedral 
Church is as handfome as 'tis large. In former times this 
City was the Refidence of the Kings of Denmark, and the 
Inhabitants were fo Barbarous as to murder one of their 



686 Some New Voyages 

Princes. The Nobility of the Ifland vye with thofe of Venice 

for Antiquity ; efpecially the Family of Trool, which fignifies 

Sorcerer, and which bears a Devil Sable upon a Field Gules for 

their Arms : From whence I conclude that this Leo Rugiens 

was more tradable and illuftrious in the 

, , . Primitive [246] times, than in thofe of the 
advances a tboufand 

idle Whims which * Author of the Seven Trumpets, or elfe the 
are enough to turn a Ancient Nobility would not have glory'd 
Woman's Brains. ; n placing him in their Coats of Arms. 

The iStb we fet out for Midelford, where we found a 
Barque that wafted us over from the farther fide of the little 
Belt, after halting two or three hours in vain, for the coming 
up of the Waggons with Mr. de Bonrepau's Domefticks and 
Provifions. As foon as we crofs'd over, we received Advice 
that they had mifs'd their way ; but we were fo pinch'd with 
Hunger that we were forc'd to go to a Farmer's Houfe, and 
drefs with our own Hands fome Broil'd Meat and Pan-Cakes, 
that we eat without drinking ; for our Landlords Beer was as 
Wretched as his Water. Some time after the Ambaffadour's 
Equipage Arriv'd ; but 'twas then fo very late that we were 
forc'd to tarry all night in that Houfe of Martyrdom. The 
next day we arriv'd at Coldinck, where the Magiftrate took 
care to provide Lodgings for the Ambaffador in one of the 
beft Houfes in Town. Three or four days after, the King 
arriv'd at the fame place. 

This little Town is Seated in the Country of Jutland, upon 
the Banks of a fhallow Gulf that is Navigable only by 
Barques : But at the fame time, 'tis very confiderable upon 



K>/. i 




~F^4 



1 A.* arms of t/ie Outaa ami's cctllc/ 

/JXCJ 




jlYic strnis of the Oittt/it/jours a/t'r, 
*Saittetirs 




^Ae .irrrts <?/ 



to Portugal and Denmark. 687 

the account of the Toll for Cattel that's pay'd at that place, 
and brings into the Royal Treafury near two hundred thou- 
fand Rix Dollars. The Caftle is an ancient Pile of Stone, 
that contains a great many Rooms : But 'tis Situated to great 
advantage, for it ftands on an Eminence that affords you a 
View of all the Country round. The Danes would have us 
believe upon their Word, [247] that an Angel was fent from 
Heaven to the great Hall of this Caftle, to acquaint Chriftian 
III. King of Denmark, that God was ready to receive him 
after three days. They add, that in order to perpetuate the 
Memory of this miraculous Vifion, the very place where this 
Heavenly Ambaffadour had Audience of the Prince, was took 
notice of, and a great Poft was fix'd in it, which I faw every 
time I went to Court; for 'twas in that very Hall that the 
King made his publick Appearance all the time he was at 
Coldinck. 

We took leave of Coldinck on the 24^, and Arriv'd on the 
2$th at Rensbourg, after paffing by feveral little Towns and 
Royal Seats, the Defcription of which would be too tedious. 
I fhall only tell you by the bye, we have a great deal more 
pleafure than fatigue in Riding Poft in this Country, whether 
in Coach or Waggon, by reafon of the evennefs of the Ground, 
which affords as few Stones as Mountains. As foon as the 
King Arriv'd at Rensbourg, he review'd the Fortifications of 
the Place, which may eafily be made one of the beft Forts in 
Europe. Then he review'd a Body of Foot and Horfe, and 
had a great deal of reafon to be fatisfied with their appear- 
ance. After fome days he fet out for Glucftat, a little Town 



688 Some New Voyages 

upon the Elbe ; almoft as regularly Fortified as the laft I fpoke 
of. In the mean time Mr. de Bonrepau, who could not follow 
that Monarch, by reafon of fome Bufinefs he had to adjuft 
with the Abbot Bidal at Renfbourg, gave me recommendatory 
Letters to feveral Perfons, who he thought would be able to 
influence Mr. de Ponchartrain : But he was miftaken in his 
Conjecture, as you'll fee prefently. 

After taking leave of the Ambaffadour, I went to Hamburg, 
where I was inform'd that Count Canijfec, the Emperor's 
Envoy extraordinary to [248] the Court of Denmark, follicited 
the Burgomafters to Arreft me. The Surmife feem'd to be 
not improbable, for I knew that fome time before he had 
taken up a Prejudice againft me at Fredericjbourg, upon the 
account of fome Illuminations that were made in that place ; 
which oblig'd me to flie with all expedition to Altena, and 
tarry there for a Paffport from the Duke of Bavaria, without 
which I had certainly been taken up in the Spanifli Flanders} 
I had no fooner receiv'd this intelligence, than I met with the 
favourable opportunity of a return Coach bound iorAmflerdam, 
where I found a place at an eafy rate, without being incom- 
moded with a Croud of Paffengers, for there was but four 
of us, viz. An old Englijh Merchant, a German Lady with 
her Chamber-Maid, and I. The Journey lafted eight days, 
and would have feem'd eight courfes of Eternity to me, if it 
had not been for the agreeable Converfation of that lovely 
Lady, who fpoke fuch good French, as to exprefs her felf 



1 Maximilien II was Duke of Bavaria (1679-1726). A firm ally of the Spanish 
monarch, his passport would secure a traveller in the realms of that ruler. — Ed. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 689 

very handfomely. You muft confider, Sir, that the Ways of 
Arabia Deferta are not fo bad as the Roads of Wejlphalia; 
at leaft 'tis certain they are not fo dirty. But the chief incon- 
veniency lies in the Inns ; for you muft know, all the publick 
Houfes upon the Road are downright Hofpitals; the Land- 
lords of which would Starve for hunger, if Foreigners had 
not the Charity to give 'em a Share of their Provifions, which 
they are forc'd to gather in from the Rich Farmers that live 
at a diftance one from another. In thefe wretched Retreats 
you muft reft fatisfied in lying upon Straw ; and all the Com- 
fort a poor Traveller has, confifts in this, that he may com- 
mand his Landlord and Landlady, and their Children, to go 
and run where he pleafes. If you find a Frying-Pan and a 
Kettle to drefs your Meat withal, you're a happy [249] Man. 
Wood indeed there's good Store of; and their Chimneys 
being Built fquare, and ftanding by themfelves, a hundred 
Perfons may fit and Warm themfelves at the Fire. 

In the mean time, I admir'd the Patience of the German 
Lady, who was fo far from complaining of the Hardfhips of 
the Journy, that fhe took pleafure in rallying upon the En- 
gli/h Merchant, her Maid and my felf, who were all mightily 
out of humour. I conje&ur'd from her air and carriage, that 
fhe was a Perfon of Quality ; and I found afterwards I was not 
miftaken, for fince we parted, I heard fhe was a Countefs of 
the Empire. She was fo well acquainted with the French 
humours, that I did not doubt but that fhe had been at Paris: 
But the thing that confirm'd me in that Opinion, was her 

talking fo accurately of the Perfons of the firft Quality about 

44 



690 Some New Voyages 

Court ; not to mention that fhe had an old French Servant, a 
Roman Catholick, that could fcarce fpeak a Word of High Dutch. 
The Lady was of a large Stature and well Made; fhe look'd 
brisk enough, and her Beauty was fo affedting that fhe us'd all 
her efforts in vain, to make me believe fhe was five and fifty 
years of Age. She could not endure to be anfwer'd, that her 
frefh and lively Complexion gave the lie to her Arithmetick ; 
this fhe took for an affront, alledging that the Charms of a 
Woman beyond fifty, are too much Shrivel'd to caufe Admira- 
tion. This, I take it, is a very fingular and uncommon thing, 
for the reft of her Sex are fcarce accuftom'd to that fort of 
Language, in regard that they'd rather their Vertue were 
attack'd than their Beauty : But whatever be in that matter, 
fhe feem'd to be mightily prepoffefs'd againft the French, in 
branding 'em for a light, giddy brain'd, indifcreet People, 
and ftill reflecting upon 'em for [250] thinking meanly of the 
Germans. " How comes it to pafs, faid fhe, that the French 
44 have the impudence to deny the Germans the Character of 
44 Witty, and to take 'em for a grofs heavy People ; inftead of 
44 acknowledging their juft Title to folid Senfe and Reflection, 
44 by vertue of which they dive judicioufly to the bottom of 
44 things? What is it, continued fhe, that the French require 
44 as effential to the Character of avoir de Vefprit? Muft we 
44 value our felves upon a livelynefs, and a falfe fparkling Wit 
44 that dazzles with a vain Splendor? Muft we mak't our 
44 bufinefs to procure a ready and fubtle imagination, in order 
44 to drefs idle Flams in Gilded Words ? No, no ; that nicety 
44 of expreflion is but Whip'd Cream : And to fpeak the juf- 



to Portugal and Denmark. 691 

11 tice of the matter, we ought to allow the French a preferable 
" Title to the Science of fpeaking well, and to the Germans a 
" juft claim of going beyond 'em in juft thoughts. But this 
was not all : For fhe attack'd the French Pride fo vigoroufly, 
that fhe made Prefumption and Vanity their ordinary and 
leffer Crimes. This fhews, fhe had been in France ; to which 
for a farther proof fhe added, that the French infulted the 
Germans with thefe ridiculous Proverbs ; viz. This Fellow's as 
foolijh as a German ; He pick'd a German Quarrel with me; he 
takes me for a German. Such a Woman would make a good Ger- 
man Woman, i. e. She is fimple and foolifh. At the fame time, 
I endeavour'd to diffuade her from fuch unfavourable thoughts, 
by remonftrating that fhe ought to make a wide diftin&ion 
between the fenfible People of France, and thofe who are fuch 
fools as to imagine themfelves a Standard for all other Na- 
tions. I intreated her to throw off her prejudicate Apprehen- 
fions, and to believe that the knowing part of our World have 
a profound [251] efteem for the Germans, and cry up their 
Merit, their Probity, their ftrong Senfe, and their inviolable 
Fidelity. In earneft, Sir, the Perfons of any Note in Germany, 
have a juft Title to all thefe good qualities; nay, the Ety- 
mology of the Word, (Alleman, i. e. a German) gives us fome 
light as to their Character : For All and Man imports that 
they are a People capable of any thing, like the Jefuits to whom 
fome give the Title of Jefuijla Omnis Homo, and who are there- 
fore faid to be Germans, by a Sophiftical way of Punning. But 
this is not all that may be offer'd on their behalf ; there are a 
thoufand things that fpeak the Merit of the Germans. We 



692 Some New Voyages 

are indebted to 'em for the difcovery of the property of the 
Load-Stone, without which the New World had never reach'd 
our knowledg ; for the Invention of Printing, which has taught 
us to diftinguifh Fabulous Manufcripts from Divine Writings; 
for the Invention of Clocks, of the Cafting of Guns, Bells, &c. 
This gives plain evidence of their diftinguifhing Induftry and 
Capacity. Add to all this that Germany has produc'd Soldiers, 
who by their Valour and Bravery made the Capitol to tremble, 
after defeating the Roman Confuls, and (landing the Brunts of 
all the Courage and Puiffance of the Roman Legions ; That it 
has been equally fertile in great Men, in the way of Learning, 
particularly Juftus Lipfius, Furftemberg, Mr. Spanheim, and Me- 
lantlhon} All this I reprefented to the Lady; but when I 
mention'd Melanfthon, (he interrupted me, and faid, fhe was 
furpris'd to find that the French twitted the Germans with the 
Vice of hard Drinking, fince th.emfelves ftood chargeable with 
Plato's Crime. I had almoft made anfwer, that if the French 
had the fame relifh of things with that Philofopher, their only 
view was to love Superannuated Ladies with as much Paffion 
[252] as he did his old Archeanaffa : But I contented my felf 
in replying, that the Germans being difoblig'd by having the 
Character of Hard Drinkers thrown upon 'em, made their re- 
prifals upon the French, by fattening upon them the imputation 



1 A group of German savants, of whom Justus Lipsius (1547-1606) was a great 
authority upon Roman antiquities ; the Prince von Furstemberg (1625-82) was arch- 
bishop of Strassburg, and a satellite of Louis XIV; Ezekiel Spanheim (1629-1710) 
was a Latin scholar, author of a History of the Casars, and a diplomat of the court 
of the Elector of Brandenburg ; Melancthon (1497-1560), the friend of Luther, was 
the principal scholar of the Reformation. — Ed. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 693 

of Hanetonic Love (Sodomy) with intent to render 'em odious 
to the fair Sex. I had no occafion to make any farther offers in 
juftification of the French, for the Lady feem'd to be fatisfied 
with what I faid. In fine, this Lady was fo comely and agree- 
able in fuch advanc'd Years, that if Balzac had feen her, he 
would not have offer'd to fay that he never faw a handfome 
old Woman in his life-time. 1 Queftionlefs, that Gafcogne Oracle 
underftood, by an old Woman, one of Seventy years of Age ; 
for I have feen three or four that were perfect Beauties at 
Sixty, without ever a Wrinkle on their Faces, or a grey Hair 
on their Heads ; and whofe Eyes made ftill a retreat for 
Cupid. 

As foon as I arriv'd at Amfterdam, I hir'd the Roof of the 
Night-Boat for Rotterdam ; which fets out every day at three a 
Clock at both places, in order to convey Paffengers to and 
again between thefe two Cities. It coft me a Crown, which I 
did not grudge ; for I had the conveniency of Sleeping very 
quietly all Night upon the Quilts that the Waterman is 
oblig'd to furnifh to all Paffengers, who take the Stern-Room, 
call'd the Roof. The next day after my Arrival at Rotterdam, 
I took Shipping for Antwerp on Board of a Hoy, which is a 
Veffel with flat Ribs, and Lee-boards or Wings. The paffage 
from Rotterdam to Antwerp is both fafe and eafy, and runs 
between the Terra Firma and the Dutch Iflands ; being favour'd 
by the Tydes. From Antwerp to Brujfels I made ufe of the 

1 Lahontan here refers to the litterateur Jean Louis Guezde Balzac (1597-1654), 
whose Letters and Dissertations did much to fix the forms of French prose. On his 
father's side he also was a Gascon, being descended from a good family of Langue- 
doc. — Ed. 



694 Some New Voyages 

common Paffage-Boat, which is only a great Boat drawn by a 
Horfe. At Bruffels I was advis'd to Ride Poft [253] to Lijle ; 
becaufe the High-way-men us'd to Rob moft of the Coaches 
and Waggons upon that Road. I comply'd with the Seafon- 
ably Advice, and am now convinced that if I had not done fo 
I had certainly been Rob'd. Two days after my arrival at 
Lifle, I took a place in the Coach which goes twice a Week to 
this good City of Paris; and arrived here laft Week, after 
being fufficiently Fleec'd by the Mercylefs Inn-Keepers upon 
the Road. Thefe impofing Dogs give as little quarter to a 
Traveller, that do's not bargain before hand for what he eats; 
as the Waiters of Peronne do to thofe who indeavour to run 
Goods. At Peronne, you muft know, they fearch fo narrowly, 
that they not only turn every thing out of a Cheft or a Port- 
manteau, but examine every body from top to toe. They 
fufpedt your Big-Belly'd Women moft; and examine 'em fo 
narrowly, that fometimes they Aide their Hand into a place 
that was appointed for fomewhat elfe. If any Traveller has 
either Snufli, Tea, Indian Stuffs or Dutch Books among his 
Baggage, the whole Cargo is Confifcated. 

Immediately upon my Arrival in this place, I repair'd to 
Verjailles to deliver Mr. de Bonrepau y s Letters : But the Per- 
fons to whom they were addrefs'd, us'd their utmoft Efforts 
to no purpofe, in folliciting Mr. de Ponchartrain to allow me to 
juftify my Conduct at Placentia. He anfwer'd 'em very coldly, 
that his Majefty's ftiff and inflexible Temper would never 
admit of any Juftification from an Inferiour in oppofition to 
his Superiour. This anfwer, which in fome meafure tarnifhes 



to Portugal and Denmark. 695 

the Shining Merit and Judicious Condudt of fo Wife a Prince ; 
gave me to know that the Severity of Mr. de Ponchartrain did 
not proceed fo much from a Principle of Equity, as from a 
Stiff Iroquefe Temper. In the mean time I [254] was like to 
die for Grief, nothwithftanding that all my Friends endeav- 
oured to folace me, in advifing me to raife my Mind above the 
Shocks of bad Fortune, till a change of Government hap- 
pen'd. They did not fcruple to counfel me to look out for 
fome Refuge, where I might be fhelter'd from the Fury of 
that Minifter, fo long as it pleafes God to vouchfafe him the 
benefit of life, in order to allow him time to be Converted. / 
delight not in the death of a Sinner, but would have him to be 
Converted, &c. This Paffage affords a fine Speculation, but 
I muft own it has but little influence on one who is oblig'd to 
wait fo long without any other relief than the Treafure at the 
bottom of Pandora's Box. Adieu, Sir ; I am to fet out im- 
mediately for my Province, where I (hall only pafs thro' like 
Lightning. Not to trouble you with what's behind, I con- 
clude with my plain Compliment, that 

/ am, 

SIR, 

Yours, &c. 



696 Some New Voyages 



[255] LETTER V. 

* Near Lahontan in t\ *. 1 *. * -n i > 1 e* 1 * 

Baffe Navarre. Dated at Erkuh > ^ 4 " l6 ^ 

Giving a View of the Superftition and Ignorance of the People of 
Beam ; their addittednefs to the Notions of Witchcraft, Appari- 
tions, &c. And the Author's Arguments againft that Delufion. 

SIR, 

DOUBTLESS you'l be mightily furpriz'd when you hear I 
am now in fight of a Country of which I retain no more 
than the bare Name ; but your furprizal will be yet greater 
when you're inform'd that all the recommendations of Perfons 
of the firft Quality about Court could not influence Mr. de 
Ponchartrain, whofe Prepoffeffion againft me is invincible. I 
left Paris with a melancholy Mind, and went to Solace my felf 
for fome Months in a certain Province of the Kingdom that 
you will eafily guefs at. From thence I made a trip ftreight 
to Rochel, where I went on board of a Veffel that commonly 
carries Paffengers to Tremblade. In that Paffage I fell into 
the Company of a White Friar, the Hiftory of whom is fo 
very uncommon that I can't pafs him in filence. 

He calls himfelf Don Carlos Baltafar de Mendoza, and is 
the Son of a rich Gentleman at Bruffels. He is about three 
and thirty or four and thirty Years of Age, and is at leaft as 
tall and as meagre as I am. He ferv'd the King of Spain 



to Portugal and Denmark. 697 

three or four Years in the quality of a Captain of [256] 
Horfe ; and for as much as he ftudy'd the purfuit of Sciences, 
more than the humouring of the Governour of the Nether- 
lands, his Catholick Majefty refus'd him a Regiment that his 
Father offer'd to raife at his own Charge. This denial 
oblig'd him to quit the Service : and foon after, being prefs'd 
by his Parents to Marry, he went to Germany and put on a 
Monks Habit, which he threw away fome time after. Thofe 
who gave me an account of him, affur'd me that he had taken 
up and laid down the Habit feveral times. But whatever be 
in that matter, he is certainly one of the moft Accomplifh'd 
Men of this Age. He is at once perfe&ly well acquainted 
with the fineft Sciences, and with the principal Languages of 
Europe. This Character was given him by the greateft Men 
in Bourdeaux, who pay'd him feveral Vifits that I was witnefs 
to, for we lodg'd together in that City. But the beft of the 
Story is, that the next Day after our arrival two Merchants 
of his own Country paid him a round fum of dry Louifd'ors, 
part of which he beftow'd upon the Soldiers in the Tronipet- 
Caftle, who would otherwife never have thought that an Eccle- 
fiaftick would be fo Liberal to Perfons of a Military Capacity. 
All the Divines, Mathematicians and Philofophers that vifited 
him, were fo charm'd with the extent of his Knowledge, that 
they affirm'd that the quickeft and fharpeft Man in the World 
could not acquire an equal flock of Learning in a courfe of 
fixty Years Study. We ftaid fifteen Days at Bourdeaux, and 
during that time he had the Curiofity to fee nothing but a 
little Church in the Neighbourhood of his Lodgings, and the 



698 Some New Voyages 

Trompet-Caftle. He Read and Wrote inceffantly ; and as 
for the Breviary I believe he had none about him, for he was 
neither Deacon nor Prieft. I never could [257] learn what 
Order he was of ; for when I ask'd him, his Anfwer was, / am 
a White Monk, and nothing more. 

Both of us took Places in the Bayonne Coach (for the Friar 
was bound for Spain;) when we came to Efperon we parted, 
and I took the Dax and Bayonne Road. I had no fooner 
arrived at the Country Houfe where I now am, than I receiv'd 
an infinity of Vifits that I could eafily have difpens'd with; 
for within thefe four Days they have fo fill'd my Head with 
Stories of Gardening, dreffing of Vines, Hunting and Fifhing, 
that I have fcarce a fufficient freedom of thought to difpatch 
this Exprefs, and to acquaint you with the Affairs that oblige 
me to defire an Interview with you. But that which troubled 
me moft, was the impertinent Folly of our wifer fort of Coun- 
try-men : For all of 'em, whether Priefts, Gentlemen or Peaf- 
ants, do nothing but teaze me from Morning to Night with 
Stories of Wizards and Witches ; and Inftance particularly in 
you, as being the only Man in the World that has fuftain'd 
moft harm from that fort of Cattle ; in fine, they ply me fo 
hot with their Chimera's, that I'm affrai'd I fhall turn Magi- 
cian. The whimfical Souls affure me in good earneft, that 
fuch and fuch a one is a Wizard ; nay, fome fwear the fame 
thing of themfelves, and others declare in Confcience that they 
once were of that Society, but had afterwards quited the 
Devils Sabbath. I ask'd feveral of 'em the Charms of that 
Sabbath, and receiv'd this Anfwer, That the Sabbath was a 



to Portugal and Denmark. 699 

Palace accommodated with the beft Wines, the niceft Food, the band- 
fomeft Women, and the moft agreeable Mufick in the World ; That 
in this Palace they Drink, Eat and Dance, and do with the fine 
Ladies, what they might do elfewhere without being Wizards. 
In fine, I verily believe, that [258] Beafts are not allow'd 
to be fo Brutifh as thefe Fools. Imagination can't reach 
their Folly ; for 'tis as ufual here to call one another Wizard, 
as to ufe the compellation of a Friend elfewhere. Every 
body believes the Wizards are fo numerous, that 'tis a 
Scandal for a Man not to pafs for one of the Gang; and 
fo every one glories in the venerable Title of a Wizard or 
Conjurer. 

Since I came to this place I am taken for an Atheift, becaufe 
I tire my felf in inculcating to the Priefts and Gentlemen, that 
none but fhallow Brains will entertain fuch idle Whims. But 
that which throws me into Difpair is the News that a Man of 
your Senfe fhould gulp down fuch monftrous Flams, notwith- 
ftanding all the Arguments that guard off fuch an Opinion. 
Be it known to you, Sir, you muft abfolutely deny the Omni- 
potence of God, if you eftablifh in this World, Sorcerers, Magi- 
cians, Soothfayers, Inchanters, Apparitions, Phantafms, Famil- 
iars, Hobgoblins, and a vifible Devil that brings up the rear 
of all thefe Chimera's. To believe that God makes ufe of 
Wizards and Magicians to afflicft Men, or blaft the Produdl 
of the Earth, fpeaks a want of Religion, Senfe and Wifdom. 
None but Europeans are capable to credit fuch Phantaftical 
Stories. In this Country every body takes pleafure in recount- 
ing his Vifions, and there's none but who has feen or heard 



yoo Some New Voyages 

fome Spirit or other in his Life-time. Few dive to the bottom 

of thefe popular Errors ; and mod People would fcruple to 

believe that thefe Errors are the Inventions of Idolatrous and 

Chriftian Priefts. The World entertains too favourable an 

Opinion of the Clergy to charge 'em with that Crime ; and if 

by chance one were found who being convinc'd of the Cheats 

of [259] the Priefts makes the Oracles promote the fpunging 

of Mens Pockets and Womens Thighs, an infinity of ignorant 

Souls would ftill disbelieve him. Believe me, Sir, I confine 

my Difcourfe to thefe Ancient Priefts, that I may not give you 

Offence by refleding on the Induftry of the Modern ; I have 

the Pope's Kettle too much in view to hinder it to Boil, for 

one Day it may come to be my laft Refuge ; and fo I ought 

to hold my Peace. This Subje6t would require a clear and 

diftinft Differtation, and perhaps I may prefent you with 

fome fuch thing one of thefe Days. 

In the mean time be pleas'd to know 
*By a ftrong Genius that a * ftrong Gen j us w j U neyer fuffer ; t 

ft and a° Man" bat feIf to belIeve the exIftence of Sorcerers, 
Fathoms the Nature of &c. efpecially confidering that they are 
Things; that believes a ll as poor as Church Rats ; for how can 

nothing but what is we imag i ne that thefe pretended Mif- 

maturely weighed by his t , , , _ n 

Reafon; and without creants ftould have the Courage to truft 

any regard to Prejudice themfelves to a Mafter who is fo far from 

makes wife Decifions difcovertng to 'em hidden Treafures, and 

upon fuch Heads as he a thoufand other things ; n the Commerce 

has clearly canvafs d. ^ ^^ ,..11 1 

of the World which might inrich em, that 

he fuffers 'em to be Hang'd and Burnt? Prithee, how can 



to Portugal and Denmark. 701 

we believe that God impowers thefe poor Wretches to raife 
Storms and overturn the Elements? 'Tis alledged that the 
Devil inveigles 'em by Promifes, and makes Contra&s with 'em 
under a private Seal ; but from thence 'twould follow that God 
inverted the Devil with a Power to feduce thofe poor Mortals ; 
which at the fame time he could not do without Authorizing 
Lies. To pretend that God Arms the Enemy of [260] Man- 
kind againft Humane Creatures, is a downright infulting of 
his Wifdom. None but airy Fools can entertain the Wicked- 
nefs of Sorcerers, the Cunning of Magicians, the Power of 
Conjurers, the Apparitions of Spirits, and the Soveraignty of 
the Devil, for Articles of Faith : For fuch Thoughts are only 
harbour'd by Fools and Bigots. The Vulgar feed themfelves 
with fuch Chimera's ; and the Parfons that preach 'em up 
find their account in all Countries. Do but mind what I fay, 
and you'l find I'm in the right of it. In former Times the 
Character of a Philofopher or Mathematician was a fufficient 
Qualification for a Sorcerer. The Savages believe that a 
Watch, a Compafs, and a thoufand other Machines are moved 
by Spirits ; for your ignorant and clownifh People form 
extravagant Ideas of every thing that furpaffes their Imagina- 
tion. The Laplanders and the Tartarian Kalmouks ador'd 
Strangers for playing Legerdemain Tricks. The Fire-eater at 
Paris pafs'd a long while for a Magician. The Portuguefe 
burnt a Horfe that did wonderful things, and his Owner had 
enough to do to make his efcape, becaufe they took him for a 
Conjurer. In Afia the Chymifts are look'd upon as Poyfoners. 
\xi Africa the Mathematicians bear the name of Wizards. In 



702 Some New Voyages 

America the Phyficians are branded for Magicians ; and in 
fome parts of Europe thofe who are well vers'd in the Hebrew 
Tongue are deem'd for Jews. 

But to return to the Cunning Men of our Country; What 
reafon have we to think that Men would bequeath their Souls 
for the imaginary Sabbatic Pleafure of poyfoning Cattle, blad- 
ing Corn with Storms and Hail, and railing fuch boifterous 
Winds as overturn Trees, and ftrip the Earth of its Fruits. 
One would think thefe [261] Difciples would rather ask 
Riches of him ; for if the Devil is capable of turning the Ele- 
ments topfy turvy, and interrupting the Courfe of Nature, 
why does not his Power extend to the pumping of Gold from 
the Mines of Perou, or engroffing the Treafures of Europe, in 
order to give Penfions to his Magical Votaries, who are as 
poor as Church Mice ? I know you'l anfwer, That pieces of 
Silver will turn into Oak-leaves in the Hands of the Devil: But 
that Allegation finks his Power of working fo many Miracles, 
and particularly that which he imparts to the Wizards. But 
fuppofing that he is not allow'd to work in Silver ; might not 
fo wife a Creature as he is reprefented to be, teach 'em the 
means to acquire it in the way of Commerce or Gaming? 
What fhould hinder him to condud 'em to hidden Treafures, 
or to fuch as are loft in Shipwrack, or at leaft to teach 'em the 
Secret that enabled the Paffetes Magician to recal into his 
Pocket all the Money he fpent ? You'l meet with fome who 
maintain, that the Devil us'd fuch Methods long before the 
Deluge, to precipitate Men into a Magical Idolatry : But if 
you trace fuch Doctors from Confequence to Confequence, 



to Portugal and Denmark. 703 

'twill follow that God was guilty of a flaming piece of Malice, 
which cannot be. I would not have you to be furpriz'd in 
finding that I deny Magicians as well as Sorcerers or Wizards ; 
for if we allow of the one, the other muft be acknowledg'd in 
Courfe. All the World takes Agrippa for the Prince of 
Magicians ; but at the fame time he was no more fuch than 
you. His Magick lay here. 1 Being one of the greateft 
Philofophers of his Age, and having given proof of his 
Knowledge before the Mob of Lions, the Women were fo 
charm'd with it, that almoft all of 'em employ'd him to cuckold 
their [262] Husbands, and at the fame time fome Rival 
Monks who pretended to defcribe the Devil's Art, plac'd him 
at the Head of the five Popes, that Berno the Schifmatick 
Cardinal had the Infolence to brand for Magicians. But 
Agrippa's Book made the fame Iuipreflion upon the Minds 
of Fools with the Conjuring Book and Heptameron of Appono. 
All thefe Chimera's fpring from the impertinent Writers of 
Conjuring, who have fill'd the World with their Illufions, 
either thro' Malice or Ignorance. I can't look upon the 
Books of John Nider de Vujer, of Niger, Sprenger, Platina, 
Toflat, and the two Jefuits Delrio and Maldonat, without curf- 
ing 'em for ever; for they advance Pofitions fo contrary to 
Reafon, and inconfiftent with the Wifdom of God, that all 
Chriftian Princes would do well to call in all fuch Books and 
have 'em burn'd by the Hand of the publick Executioner, 



1 Cornelius Agrippa, of Nettesheim, who attempted in the fourteenth century 
to mitigate the horrors of witchcraft superstition, and defended an accused witch. 
Lahontan refers to his book, Occulta Philosopbia. — Ed. 



704 Some New Voyages 

without {pairing Bodinus's Demonomania, the Mallet of Sorcerers, 
and the Seven Trumpets. 1 What reafon have we to believe that 
Eric King of the Goths was firnam'd Windy Hat, becaufe he 
becken'd to the Winds with his Hat, and made 'em fhift as he 
pleas'd ; That Paracelfus had an Army of Devils under his 
Command ; that Santaberenus fhew'd to Bafil the Emperor his 
Son alive after his Death ; That Michael the Scot foretold the 
Death of the Emperor Frederic II. That Pythagoras kill'd a 
Serpent in Italy by Vertue of fome Magical Words? And 
yet thefe Authors vent a thoufand Lies of that nature for 
uncontefted Truths : But what Gervais fays of Virgil's Brafs 
Fly Crowns the whole Work. 'Tis a Miracle to me that the 
Chancellor of the Emperor Otho fhould have thus expos'd 
himfelf in advancing a Falfhood accompany'd with many other 
Lies. From hence we may learn, the Dignity of a Chancellor 
has not the vertue to entail [263] Wifdom upon the Fools 
that brook it. Is it not commonly given out that the Devil 
run away with Prefident Pichon ? Who has not heard of 
Marfhal Luxemburg's Compad with the Devil? And does 
not the World blindly believe that the poor Curate of Loudun, 



1 Lahontan here cites a group of authors on the subject of magic. Nider, an 
inquisitor of the fourteenth century, published the Formicarius, a treatise on heresy. 
Sprenger, a German inquisitor, was the author of the manual Malleus Maleficarium 
(Mallet of Sorcerers), which was " the most portentous monument of superstition the 
world has produced." Platina, the learned author of Vita Pontificium (Lives of the 
Popes), relates many tales of witchcraft. Tostatus was a Spanish theologian of the 
fifteenth century, and Delrio, a Jesuit, whose Disquisitiones Magica went through 
frequent editions in the seventeenth century. Jean Bodin's Demonomanie des Sor- 
ciers was a compilation on witchcraft. For the entire subject consult Lea, History of 
the Inquisition in the Middle Ages (New York, 1888); White, History of Warfare 
of Science with Theology (New York, 1896). — Ed. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 705 

who was burnt by the Tyranny of Cardinal Richelieu, without 
any other Crime than that of incurring his Difpleafure ; Does 
not every one believe, I fay, that this poor Curate rais'd a 
hundred young Devils out of Hell to poffefs the Bodies of 
the Nuns of Loudun ? What impertinent and childilh Stories 
does John Schefer offer in his Hiftory of Lapland? Is not it 
very ftrange that the People fhould be allow'd to read fuch 
Books ? Are not fome fo foolifh as to credit thefe Chimera's 
as Articles of Faith? And is it poflible for you to difabufe 
'em, or to perfwade 'em that no Man can cure Wounds by 
the fpeaking of a few Words, or that the Men who deal in 
Characters do not perform all forts of Miracles by vertue of 
certain Phials, Garters, &c? No truly, Sir, you would never 
compafs your end if you offer'd to teach 'em a Do6lrine con- 
trary to thefe receiv'd Opinions ; they would hang you for a 
Heretick, or at leaft take you for a Magician that by fuch a 
cunning fetch mean'd to fcreen the whole Magical Fraternity 
from Profecution. 

Believe me, Sir, all that I now write is pofitively true. 
The Devil has not the Power to appear vifibly before our 
Eyes, and by confequence he can't engage us in his Interefts 
by a Magical or Witchcraft Contrad. Such a Suppofition is 
inconfiftent with the Goodnefs of God, who does not lay 
Snares for Men that are already apt to go aftray. You fee I 
do not deny the Exiftence of the Devil ; for I believe he is in 
Hell : But I deny that he ever remov'd from [264] the 
Regions below, to do mifchief upon the Earth. As for the 

Pafifages of Scripture, which you may take for an Objection, I 
45 



yo6 Some New Voyages 

anfwer ; That if all the Places of Scripture were to be under- 
ftood in a Literal Senfe, God would be fuppos'd to have 
Hands and Feet, and the Holy Ghoft to talk like an Iroquefe. 
You muft know, that before the coming of the Meffias, Dae- 
mons were the tutelar and benign Gods ; and the Word 
Satfiovviov fignifies nothing elfe but Good Genius ; but the 
Evangelifts have ftamp'd upon them an Infernal Character, by 
adding the Epithet, Ka/co, L e. Evil : And for that Reafon the 
good Devils have been ever fince reputed Evil Spirits, accord- 
ing to the Literal Senfe. Sir, you may perceive, I only infift 
againft the Exiftence of Sorcerers, Magicians, Inchanters, &c. 
which I am the more encourag'd to do, upon the Considera- 
tion, that the Interpreters of Holy Writ have given 'em Titles 
of AftronomerSt Chiromancers^ Aftrologers, &c. and in giving the 
Explication of thefe fynonimous Words, never alledg'd, that 
they were the Devil's Scholars. 

This Subject would require a large Differtation ; for 'tis 
truly a very nice Point, which I only pretend to glance upon 
by the Bye, without fpending more time in juftifying the 
Arraigned Criminals from the guilt of an Imaginary Crime, 
that 'tis impoflible for them to put in execution. Believe me, 
Sir, the Magicians are Rogues that cut a Purfe dexteroufly 
and unhinge a Door nimbly : Your Apparitions, Phantomes, 
Hobgoblins and Spirits are Rafcally Varlets, that in the Night 
time fteal Corn and Fruit, and kifs not only the Servant- 
Maids, but fometimes their Matters Wives : Your Inchanters 
are roving Fellows, and Lovers by Trade, who inveigle poor 
Girls under a Promife of Marriage. Your [265] Soothfayers 



to Portugal and Denmark. 707 

are the Cunning Ecclefiafticks, who knowing the Foible of 
fome Rich men, extort pious Legacies from 'em, with their 
wonted Dexterity. The Sorcerers are thofe Falfe Coiners, 
who abound fo much in our Country, and the Clippers, who 
pare the Piaftres and the Spanifti Piftoles fo cleverly ; for thefe 
Sabbatic Works are always performed in the Night-time, and 
in the obfcureft Places. All this I offer for your information ; 
and fo fliall leave you to believe what you pleafe. 

I know the Bearnefe are too much inclined to Superftition, 
and owe their Byas to the Ancient 

Members of their * Parliament, who * Held at Pau, the Cap- 
by a ftretch of Cruelty beyond that of If 
Nero, burnt fo many Innocent Wretches. 

If thefe Bigotted Counfellers are now in Paradife, moft cer- 
tainly neither you nor I will ever be fent to Hell : Believe me, 
Sir, the Man that's capable of giving credit to the Chimera's 
I now fpeak of, will not ftand to fwallow a thoufand other 
Fables that your Men of Senfe make a Jeft of. I do not pre- 
tend to undeceive the Ignorant Vulgar, for I know 'tis impof- 
fible ; 'tis you only that I want to inftrud ; for I'm told, you 
declare, that all the Cats in the Province have the honour to 
be animated by the Souls of the Ancient Wizards, whofe 
Afties have ferv'd for Lye to the Wafher-women of Pau thefe 
many Years. Our Salvation does not depend upon the belief 
of that Article, for I'm fure 'tis no Article of Faith. Some 
People are very ingenious in frightning themfelves, by con- 
ceiving that the Devil transforms himfelf into a Maftiff, a 
Sorcerer into a Cat, and a Magician into a Wolf; that a Soul 



yoS Some New Voyages 

retaining to Purgatory, affumes all forts of Shapes, in order to 
beg Prayers [266] of the Living, who have enough to do to 
pray for themfelves. After thefe Crotchets are once lodg'd 
in a Man's Brains, he's afraid to lie alone, and the noife of a 
Rat freezes the Blood in his Veins ; for a frighted Imagina- 
tion trembles at the Apprehenfion of its own Chimera's ; and 
befides the Injury done to himfelf, he does harm to others, 
by recounting his Impertinent and Rediculous Adventures: 
His Stories meet with a ready reception, from the weak and 
fimple fort of People, and have fuch a fearing influence upon 
the Women, that they are fore'd in their Hufbands abfence 
to get fome body to lie with 'em, that has the refolution to 
oppofe the Sorcerers, Magicians, Apparitions, &c. A Young 
Girl dares not empty a Tub of Water, unlefs a fturdy Foot- 
man accompanies her with a Link in his Hand. In fine, this 
Dodlrine of Sprights is the fource of a thoufand Inconven- 
iencies, which afford an opportunity to Robbers, Whoremafters 
and Profligate Fellows to compafs their Ends. 

As for my part, I folemnly declare, in all the Countries I 
have been in, I never faw or heard any thing fupernatural in 
the Night-time : I have us'd my Efforts to fee or hear fome 
News from the other World ; I have crofs'd Quebec Church- 
yard above a hundred times at Mid-night, in my way to the 
Lower City, but never met with any thing. But fuppofe I had 
had fome Phantome in my view (pardon the Suppofition) 
what d'ye think I would have done ? Why, I would e'en have 
walk'd on very fedately with my naked Sword over my Arm, 
if the Spright feem'd to be on one fide of me ; and if it had 



to Portugal and Denmark. 709 

been pofted before me juft in my way, I would have asked it very 
civilly, to give me leave to pafs by. You'll reply, perhaps, 
that Swords and Piftols are ufelefs in fuch cafes, and that I own 
to be true; but [267] then you muft confider, that if it had 
been a Spright, a Shadow and Vapour could not wound me 
no more than I could wound it; and if it had been fome 
Living Thing of a Monftrous Figure, my Arms would have 
ferv'd to punilh the Infolent Impoftor. Do but obferve, Sir, 
that in all the Stories of Apparitions, Sprights, Fantoms, Hob- 
goblins, &V. we never hear of the killing or wounding of any 
body. Now, if thefe pretended Infernal Ambaffadors have 
fuch tender Hands, why ihould we fear 'em more than the 
Lightning that ufhers in a Clap of Thunder? In fine, a Wife 
Man ought not to dread any thing but that which can annoy 
him either diredtly, or indireftly. 

You'll object, perhaps, that a Soldier, who has fignaliz'd 
his Courage and Bravery on feveral occafions, has been known 
to tremble, grow pale, and fweat for fear, upon the feeing or 
hearing of a String of Living Fantoms, that pretended to 
divert themfelves at his Coft. I acknowledge that fuch a 
thing may happen, but it proceeds from this ; that fuch peo- 
ple have entertain'd a Notion of Vifions from their Infancy, 
without giving themfelves the trouble to enquire into the 
poflibility of their Exiftence. In a word, they have believ'd 
what other Bigots believe of the Power of the Devil. Such 
men fear nothing but their own Imagination. But I have 
done ; time runs, and I am oblig'd to go about a little Bufinefs 
immediately : I wifh I may meet with no Pettyfogger in my 



7i o Some New Voyages 

way, for that Cattel is not fo eafy to deal with as Wizards and 

Phantoms. 

I defire an interview at Ortez: The Papers I now fend 

along with this Letter, will inform you of the Bufinefs I want 

to difcourfe. The Country I am now in is a very good 

Country, [268] but I do not find Mony ftirring among us, 

which in my troth I do not like, for among the Europeans one 

can't live without Money, as they do among the Hurons of 

Canada. I always think of that Countrey with regret, when 

my Pocket is at low water, and my Mind difquieted with Care 

and Anxiety, in contriving how to fill it with that precious 

Metal, that gives life and fpirit to the forrieft fort of Men, 

and infpires 'em with all Good Qualities. 

/ am, 

SIR, 

Tours, &c. 



to Portugal and Denmark. 711 



LETTER VI. 

Dated at Huefca> July 11. 1695. 

Containing an Account of the Author's wonderful Efcape; bis being 
taken up for a Huguenot, and examined by the Ignorant Curates. 

I'VE 'fcap'd for once, but 'twas a very narrow Efcape, as 
you may guefs by the Story of my Flight, which was in 
fhort thus. I was upon the point of meeting you according 
to agreement at Ortez, and for that Reafon had been at Dax 
to receive fome Papers which feem'd to be of ufe to me; 
when by a matchlefs piece of Good Luck, [269] I met with 
a Letter from a certain perfon at Ferfailles. I had no fooner 
read my Letter, than I march'd ftraight to my Lodging, to 
contrive within my felf fome way to get fafe out of the King- 
dom. You may be fure my Council was foon affembled, for 
fuch a Head-piece as mine does not ufe to fpend much time 
in Confultations. I determined to delude my Landlord, by 
defiring him to give me an Account in Writing of the Road 
to Agen ) where I pretended to have fome Bufinefs. The beft 
of the matter is, that I had already got of my Farmers near 
two hundred Piftoles, and a fine Horfe, which I was oblig'd to 
for my lucky deliverance. I got up by the break of day, and 
defir'd a Guide to conduct me out of one of the Gates of the 
City, that leads a quite different way from that I had in my Eye. 



712 Some New Voyages 

As foon as I got out of Town, I took the Road of Ortez, 
and avoiding all Villages, fteer'd upon Heaths, Fields, Vine- 
yards and Woods, following all By-paths, and lodging in the 
remoteft Houfes ; I had no other Guide but the Sun, and the 
fight of the Pyrenees, and ask'd every one I met upon the 
Road, which was the way to Pau. But not to detain you too 
long with the Particulars of my Journey, you muft know, I 
arrived at laft at Laruns, the laft Village of Beam, fcituated as 
you know, in the Valley of Ozao. I had fcarce entred this 
foolifh Village, when a Company of Peafants furrounded me 
on all fides : Judge you if I had not reafon to fear that the 
Grand Provoft was not far behind ; but I was miftaken, for the 
Rafcals ftop'd me for no other Reafon, but becaufe they 
fancied there was fomewhat in my Countenance that looked 
like Huguenotifm ; they gave me leave however to alight at a 
Tavern, which was fo dark and full of Smoak, that you would 
have took't [270] for the Antichamber to Hell ; and here, 
you muft know the Parfon was to come to examine me in 
Matters of Religion ; and that in a Country where the Priefts 
underftand as little what they believe as their Parifhioners : 
For after I had anfwer'd him upon all the Points he thought 
fit to mention, he fwore I was a Huguenot; and upon this, Sir, 
I was like to have loft all patience. But confidering I had 
Beafts to deal with, I thought my beft way was to ufe 'em as 
Beafts ; fo I offer'd to fatisfie 'em by reciting the Litany, and 
the Sunday Vefpers, but this Stratagem fail'd me, for they ftill 
continued obftinate, in propofing to carry me to Pau. Judge 
what a perplexity I was in, when the Infamous Rabble faid, 



to Portugal and Denmark. 713 

The Pfalms and the Litanies were the fir ft Prayers the Huguenots 
learn 9 d to cover their Defign of getting out of the Kingdom. It fig- 
nify'd nought to tell 'em, I was Mafter of the Horfe to Mon- 
fieur L } Abbee d } Eftrees, and that I was going to that Ambaffa- 
dor in Portugal ; that was Clamare in deferto. 'Twas to as 
little purpofe to threaten to fend immediately to the Inten- 
dant at Pau y to demand Juftice for the Affront, and for my 
being ftopt: All this did not move 'em. At laft, after a 
melancholly Reflection on the danger I was in, I refolv'd to 
try all ways to delude thefe Ignorant Creatures ; though this 
was no eafy task, for they are wholly govern'd by their Doc- 
tors. And here I think I ought to pray to God to blefs the 
firft Inventer of Snuff, for after I had fretted my felf two or 
three Hours in talking to thefe Varlets, I accidentally pull'd 
out my Snuff-box, without thinking of it, and as foon as I 
open'd it, one of the moft Civiliz'd Men of the Company 
defir'd to fee the Pidhire on the Infide, which reprefented a 
Court-Lady upon a Couch, all naked, with her Hair hanging 
loofe. As foon as he [271] had looked upon it, he fhow'd it 
to the reft, who faid to one another in their Bernoife Lan- 
guage, That it was a Mary Magdalene. At this Lucky Word, 
I rouz'd my Spirits, when all on a fudden the Parfon ask'd 
me, What the Meaning of the Pidture was? I made anfwer, 
} Twas a Saint that would take Vengeance of them for an Affront 
offered to one of her Devouteft Worfhippers : And fo fixing my 
Eyes upon the Naked Figure, I made a Prayer to that Saint 
with an Elogy; in which I attributed more Miracles to her 
than to all the Saints in Paradife. This, together with the 



714 Some New Voyages 

Exclamations I made, did fo blind the Company, that they all 
kifs'd the Head of the Pretended Saint with a wonderful 
Zeal, and from that time I was no Huguenot, for I ftill con- 
tinued to invoke the Saint that in Beam is known to be a 
worker of Miracles, with the fame fury and difpofition that I 
then feign'd. Every one ftrove to get my Prayers down in 
Writing, and all the Peafants now were at Emulation one with 
another who fhould guide me over the Mountains, or who 
fhould furnifh me with Mules. Such, Sir, is the diverting 
Hiftory of the ftrange Effe6ts of Snuff : If it is of ufe to others, 
to hammer out an Argument by gaining the time which is 
fpent in conveying it from the Fingers to the Nofe, 'twas of 
great ufe to me another way, without fo much as expecting it. 
What a Misfortune it is for an Honeft Man to be under a 
Neceffity of prophaning the Saints for the prefervation of his 
Life ! 'Tis true, my Meaning was good, and I have asked 
Pardon of God for it. This fhews that a well manag'd Lye 
can produce among Ignorant People even fuch Effe&s as the 
Naked Truth cannot compafs. What pity is it that a Parfon 
fhould not fo much as underftand his Catechifm, and at the 
fame time [272] fwallow down Idle Stories for Miracles ! But 
this is the Bifhop's Bufinefs, not mine. 

And indeed our Bifhops are much like our Officers, who 
are prefer'd more by Favour and Intereft than by Merit. 
The greateft part of them are more induftrious to pleafe their 
Sovereign than their God. But a man had as good pretend 
to drink the Ocean dry, as to attempt a Reformation of thefe 
Abufes* 



to Portugal and Denmark, 715 

To continue the Thread of my Adventure, you muft 
know, I hired two Mules, one for my Guide, another for my 
felf. My Horfe was fo tired with ftrugling to fave me, that 
Gratitude obliged me to ufe him with all manner of civility 
and mildnefs ; for 'twas no more than what he deferved by 
his fatiguing Services. In the mean time the Night, which 
feem'd as long to me as an Age, (fo much I dreaded the 
Provoft's Crew) gave me more leifure than enough to beg 
pardon of God for the Contrivance by which I faved my felf, 
in making ufe of the Names of his Saints. In this Condition 
I was continually peeping at the Window to look for the 
dawning of the Day, but this Village is fo fhut up among the 
Pyrenees, that 'tis a hard matter to difcern the Sun in his 
Meridian, or the tenth part of the Arch of the Heavens. At 
laft wearied with that uneafinefs, and quite fpent with the 
Fatigues both of Body and Mind, I tried to indulge Nature 
with one Hours fleep as a recompence for three Days waking, 
when all on a fudden I was alarm'd with a great Noife of 
Men and Horfes at the Inn-Gate ; the Knocks they gave, and 
their ftrange Hollowing, freez'd all the Blood in my Veins, 
for I thought all the Conftables in the Kingdom were upon 
my Back ; but my Fears prov'd abortive, for it was only fome 
Muliteers going to traffick in Spain. [273] By this time 
Day-light appear'd, and my Guide called upon me, upon 
which we fet out, and join'd in with thefe Travellers : That 
Day we went as far as Salient, the firft Town in Spain, feven 
Leagues diftant from Laruns ; having pafs'd a Houfe which 
the Spaniards call Aigues Candes, that is, the Hot-waters, or 



716 Some New Voyages 

a Bath which cures a world of Difeafes. When we were got 
to Salient, they fhewed us to an Inn, fo dark, that it feem'd 
fitter for a Vault to lodge Dead-Carcafes in, than to entertain 
Paffengers ; my Spirits were then fo exhaufted for want of reft, 
that I fell afleep immediately, and flept (landing in a manner; 
the Beds looking like a Magazine of Lice, I made them 
fpread me fome Straw upon the Boards, where I laid my felf 
down, after having order'd my Guide to provide for himfelf 
what Cheer he lik'd beft, upon the Provifo that he fhould not 
wake me. I flept in this Pofture from Nine a Clock at Night 
till Noon next Day without waking ; after which we fpent the 
reft of the Day in finding out a forry Meal of Meat : The 
next Day after we put on very fmartly, and came to an Inn 
where we found good ftore of Fouls and Pigeons, and upon 
thefe we made reprifals for our former 111 Fare. In fliort, we 
arriv'd laft Night at this City, which ftands upon a flat low 
Ground, at the diftance of Two Leagues from the Mountains. 
All I can tell you of the Country, is; That from Laruns to 
this Place, we have two and twenty Leagues diftance ; and 
upon that Road we do nothing but climb up and defcend 
narrow Paths, upon which, if the Mule did but ftumble, 
there's an unavoidable neceffity of tumbling down a Difmal 
Precipice. My Guide [274] told me, That the Road through 
the Valley of Afpe, is the pleafanteft, fhorteft and mod con- 
venient ; but the way which leads by St. John de Pied de Port 
has this advantage, that there's only Eight Leagues of Moun- 
tains between Roncevaux and the Plains of Navarre. Upon 
the whole, I wonder much that Hercules did not fplit thefe 



to Portugal and Denmark. 717 

Mountains for the Accommodation of Travellers, as well as 
thofe of Calpe and Abila for the Conveniency of Sailers. I 
fet out to morrow by the break of Day, in order to reach 
Saragoza at Night. 

/ am, 

SIR, 

Tours, &c. 



7i 8 Some New Voyages 



LETTER VII. 

Dated at Saragoza, O&ob. 8. 1695. 

Containing a Defcription of Saragoza ; a View of the Government 
of Arragon, and an account of the Cuftoms of the People. 

SIR, 

I HAVE been three Months in this good Town of Saragoza, 
during which time, I've receiv'd feven or eight Letters, 
charging me with Careleffnefs in not fatisfying your Curi- 
ofity: But the fault lies at your own Door and not at mine; 
[275] for if you had not been fo negligent as to delay the 
fending of what I receiv'd this very day, my Pen had not 
trac'd the uneafynefs of my Mind, inftead of purfuing the fol- 
lowing Relation. 

Saragoza is the Capital City of the Kingdom of Arragon : 
And I can't tell whether I ought to call it only pretty, or very 
pretty. However, I'm fure 'tis a very great City; the Streets 
are broad and well pav'd; the Houfes are for the moft part 
three Story high, tho' fome of 'em have five or fix ; and all of 
'em are Built after the old Fafhion. The Market and publick 
Places are not worth fpeaking of. In the City there are a 
great many Convents, which are generally very pretty; as well 
as their Gardens and Churches. The Cathedral Church call'd 
La Ceu is a huge and very Stately Edifice. The Church of 



to Portugal and Denmark, 719 

Nueftra Seniora de V Pilar is but very ordinary as to its Archi- 
tecture. The Chappel indeed where that Seniora ftands is 
Curious, upon the account that 'tis under Ground. The 
Spaniards pretend that the Subftance of which 'tis Built is 
unknown to all Mankind; but if 'twere not for their affertion, 
I fhould have took it for Walnut-Tree. This Chappel is thirty 
fix Foot long, and twenty fix Foot broad. 'Tis fill'd with 
Lamps, Banifters and Silver Candle-Sticks; and befides a 
great Altar, contains a great quantity of Feet, Hands, Hearts 
and Heads, which the Miracles of that Virgin drew to the 
Sacred Place : For you know the Virgin Works Miracles every 
day that furpafs imagination. But the moft folid thing about 
her, is an infinity of precious Stones of ineftimable value, with 
which her Gown, Crown and Niche are Garnifh'd. Befides 
thefe, there are two Churches here which were Built by the 
GothS) and are both Strong and Beautiful ; having very pretty 
Vaults, which fhew [276] that that People were perfe&ly well 
acquainted with Stereometry. 

Saragoza is Seated on the River Ebro, which is as broad as 
the Seyne at Paris. It ftands upon fmooth level Ground, and 
incompafs'd with a Wall that's Ruinous in feveral places. The 
People of Arragon put a mighty value upon a Stone-Bridge 
that's over that River; becaufe they never faw many better: 
But they have more reafon to value the Wooden-Bridge that 
lyes a little lower, for indeed 'tis one of the fineft in Europe. 
This City affords Academies for the exercife both of the Body 
and the Mind ; and above all, a fine Univerfity that may be 
call'd the beft in Spain next to Salamanca and Alcala des He- 



720 Some New Voyages 

nares. The Students are generally Cloath'd like Priefts, that is, 
with a long Cloak. 

The Duke de Jovenazo is Viceroy of this Kingdom ; and as 
I take it, that triennial Dignity is more Honourable than Bene- 
ficial, for it does not bring in above fix thoufand Crowns a Year. 
The Arch-Bilhoprick is worth twenty thoufand Crowns ; 
but the prefent Arch-Bifhop being a very good Man, diftrib- 
utes one third of his Revenue among the Poor. Tho' his 
Birth was obfcure, yet he was Prefident of one of the Councils 
of Spain, which perhaps occafion'd that natural Antipathy to 
the French, that he fhews upon all occafions. The Canons of 
his Cathedral and thofe of Notre dame de Pilter, make a hun- 
dred Crowns a Month of their Canonfhips. The Minifter 
call'd * Ell juflicia, receives Appeals from 
* His place is much all the Courts of Arragon. 'Tis from his 
like that of a Chan- TT , . L . JZ . r a - 

„ Hands that the Kings of Spain receive a 

cellour. to r 

drawn Sword, when they take the Oath to 
maintain the Privileges of the Kingdom, upon their Acceflion 
to the [277] Throne. This Ceremony is perform'd in the 
Deputation-Houfe, which indeed is a wonderful Edifice. The 
Salmedina is a fort of Lieutenant-General, both Civil and Mili- 
tary. This Office, which bears both the Gown and the Sword, 
is Triennial as well as that of his Deputy. The 
t Audiencia confifts of feveral Counfellours, 
who are as nice a fort of Men as our own. Befides thefe, there 
are five Sheriffs or Jurates, who hold their troublefome Pofts 
but two years, and are properly the Civil Judges that take 
care of the Government of the City. In fine, I fhould never 







•»^»^_6_6 



Wig^^jP^IQ ri 



<T> <T> & 




* $ * 



^ ^*4Si^r* <£ £ 



@©e©@©©© 




to Portugal and Denmark. 721 

have done, if I offer'd to give a particular Lift of all the Offices 

in this Kingdom. 

Bread, Wine, Fowl, Partridges and Hares are very cheap 

in this place ; but Butchers Meat is very dear, and good Fifh 

is a rarity. The Strangers that Travel this way, are oblig'd 

to Lodge in certain Inns calPd by the Spaniards, Me/on; in 

which the Inn-Keeper furnifties nothing to his Guefts but a 

Chamber, a Bed, a Stable, || Straw and 

Barley. 'Tis true, the Servants buy " rh ' r ' s nether Ha * 

, 1 r /• iir- nor Corn in Spain. 

what you pleale for you, and drels it 

as you order 'em, provided you require nothing but plain 
Boiling and Rolling. The Arragon Wines are fweet and 
ftrong, efpecially the Black fort, for the White is neither fo 
ftrong nor fo fweet. In the Summer time they have no other 
Diverfion but Walking, and that towards the Evening, when 
the Gentlemen walk out of Town, as well as the Ladies, 
apart : But 'tis not the frefh Air fo much as the warm breath- 
ing that they have in view. In Winter, they are entertain'd 
with Plays, which the Priefts and Friars frequent without any 
Scruple. Every Night there's an Affembly or Meeting at 
the Houfe of the Duke [278] of Jovenazo, where they Game, 
and Difcourfe and drink Chocolate or other Liquors : And 
the Perfons of the firft Rank are almoft always there. They 
are honeft and affable to the laft degree. As for my own 
part, I have receiv'd very fenfible Marks of their Friendship, 
particularly that of being regal'd in their Houfes; which 
difcovers to me that they are not fo unfociable as they are 
reprefented to be. 'Tis true, that in publick the Smile never 



46 



722 Some New Voyages 

unfurles their Brow, and no familiarity of Joy can oblige 'em 
to relent in their affedled Gravity : But in private Converfation 
they are the heartieft People in the World ; I mean, they are 
the briskeft and merryeft Companions that can be. 

Almoft all the People of Arragon are as lean as I am, and 
fo, Sir, you may eafily judge what a fort of Meen they have. 
They allege for the caufe of their Leannefs, that their Tranf- 
piration is great, that they Eat and Sleep but little, that their 
Paflions are fprightly and violent ; and in fine, that they difli- 
pate their Spirits by exercifes which the French do not follow 
fo often. Their Complexion is as pale as mine ; which per- 
haps is owing to thefe very exercifes ; at leaftwife, 'tis Ovid's 
Opinion in faying [Palleat ommis amor ; Color hie eft aptus 
amanti.'] Their Stature goes fomewhat beyond the middling 
Standard. Their Hair is of a dark Chefnut colour, and their 
Complexion is as fair as that of the Bearnefe. 

All I have faid of the People of Arragon, may be apply'd 
in particular to the Women as well as the Men ; tho' indeed 
the former are not quite fo lean as the latter. They can't be 
call'd handfome, but at the fame time one can't avoid owning 
that they are agreeable and lovely. If Nature has been ftingy 
and penurious in Forming their Throat and Fore-Head, fhe 
has been prodigal [276, i.e. 279] of her Gifts in giving 'em 
great fparkling Eyes, fo full of Fire that they burn without 
mercy from top to toe all that approach to 'em. They are 
very much oblig'd to Tbeano, Pytbagoras's Wife, for teaching 
'em that their Sex was Born for no other end than for the 
agreeable Trade of loving and being lov'd. This foft Moral 



to Portugal and Denmark. 723 

fuits their Complexion perfectly well ; and accordingly they 
pra&ife it to a Miracle : For in the Morning they run to 
Church, with intent to purchafe Hearts rather than Paradife ; 
and Dinner is no fooner over, than they go to Vifit their She- 
Friends, who do mutual Services to one another in the way of 
Intrigue, by favouring the entry of their Lovers into one 
another's Houfes, and that with a great deal of artifice and 
cunning. Contrivance is all in all in this Country; for the 
vertue of the Women lies in playing their Cards handfomely 
and dextroufly, difguifing the Intrigue, more than elfewhere. 
Their Husbands are plaguy Sharp-fighted, and if their 
Intrigues take but the leaft Air, they run the rifque of taking 
a Journey to the other World, unlefs they flie to a Convent. 
'Tis not above a Month and a half fince I faw a Girl Stabb'd by 
her own Brother at Church, at the very foot of the Altar, for 
having entertain'd an amorous Correfpondence. He had made 
a Journey from Madrid on purpofe to do this mighty Exploit ; 
for which he was Punifh'd with two Months Imprifonment. 

There has not been above eighteen or twenty defign'd 
Murders and Affaflinations committed fince I came hither; by 
reafon that the Nights are as yet too ftiort : But I am told 
that in Winter there never paffes a Night without two or 
three fuch inftances. 'Tis true, 'tis only the poor miferable 
Wretches of two Parifhes in the City, who infult [280] one 
another at that rate ; and are drove to that extremity by Feuds 
of ancient ftanding. The frequency of fuch diforders is owing 
to this, that a Man can't be condemn'd to die without great 
Evidence upon the matter, and that the Condemn'd Criminals 



724 Some New Voyages 

make ufe of the privileges of the Kingdom, to put off the 
Execution from Term to Term : By which means they get off 
at laft for being turn'd over to the Galleys, which there are a 
thoufand ways to get clear of : So that unlefs the Judge is 
Sollicited againft them by a ftrong Party, they always 'fcape 
the Gallows. 

As for Robbing in the Streets, they know nothing of it ; 
and the Murders that happen have no relation to any inten- 
tion of that Nature. I have frequently Walk'd home all alone 
at Midnight from the Viceroy's Houfe, without meeting with 
any affront. 'Tis true, I difcontinued that pra&ice after the 
Perfons of Quality advis'd me to go always in Company, left 
the Affaflins fhould miftake me for another. However, Per- 
fons of Note or Character have nothing to fear, unlefs they be 
imbarqu'd in fome Amorous Intrigue ; then indeed they run 
the rifque of being Stabb'd in the Streets at Noon : So that a 
Man muft either have his Wits about him, or elfe have recourfe 
to common Whores, if he means to avoid fuch a fatal Exit. 
Now of thefe two Expedients the firft is the beft, becaufe it 
preferves at once his Pocket and his Health. 

The Nobility of Arragon is tolerably Rich ; but they might 

be Richer if the Peafants of Arragon Work'd as hard as ours 

do. Thefe idle Fellows imploy the 

t An Epithet they give -f Qavachos (with whom Spain is plagued ) 

to the French, which at ^ ** ^ - r> j j^c 
. , r .~ , to Manure their Grounds, and to Sow 
the bottom figntfies noth- 
ing at all an d Reap. The Vulgar People [281] 

are of the Opinion that France is the 

worft Country in the World, becaufe the French exchange it 



to Portugal and Denmark. 725 

for theirs : And indeed 'tis true, that the Labourers, the 
Reapers, the Fellers of Wood, and all forts of Tradefmen, 
without mentioning the Coach-men, Foot-men and Water- 
bearers, come for the moft part from Beam, Languedock, and 
Auvergne. Here we meet with fome Beam Merchants who 
have inrich'd themfelves by Trading to France : For notwith- 
ftanding the War, an open Commerce is ftill maintain'd. If 
the People of Arragon had their Wits about 'em, and had a 
mind to inrich their Country, they might eafily compafs 
their end. 

The River of Ebro is Navigable from Tortoza to Miranda 
d } Ebro, by great flat bottom'd Boats, fuch as we have in the 
Seyne. A great many Perfons who have come down the Ebro } 
have affur'd me that 'tis three Foot deep in the Shalloweft 
places, and that its Current is very gentle : So that the only 
difficulty lies in finding a Road upon the Banks of the River, 
in order to drag up the Boats when they want to ftem the 
Stream. The French bring hither a great many Mules and 
little Nags, upon which they gain Cent per Cent, all Charges 
difcounted. Thefe Mules are made ufe of to draw the 
Coaches and * Galeras : For the Eftra- 

madura Mules are very dear, and do * Great Carts drawn by 
..... ^ f 1f . eight Mules, which hold 

not thnve in this Country fo well as in ^ ^^ ^.^ 

the Southern Countries of Spain. As 

for the little Galloway's, they commonly fell beft in the King- 
dom of Valencia, where the Peafants imploy 'em for different 
ufes. The Coaches of that Country are much of the fame 
Form with our Travelling-Coaches in France ; and they go fo 



726 Some New Voyages 

very flowly that they would not drive round the Town in the 
longeft Summer's day. The cuftom [282] of Vifiting upon 
Horfe-Back, prevails here as well as in Portugal. The Gentle- 
men and Officers are drefs'd after the French way ; for they 
find the Spanijh Habit unfufferable, by reafon of the Golilla, 
or a fort of Collar, in which the Neck is fo lac'd up, that they 
can't turn or bow the Head. 

The Women's Garb feems ridiculous to Strangers, tho' at 
the bottom 'tis not fuch. I am already convinc'd that 'tis 
infinitely preferable to ours. The Spanijh Women can't cover 
any defedt of Nature ; for they wear neither Hoods, Heels, 
nor Whale-bone Bodice. Were the French Ladies oblig'd to 
go in this fafhion, 'twould not be in their Power to deceive fo 
many Men by their artificial Towers, their Shooe-Heels and 
their falfe Hips. 'Tis true, the Spanijh Women may be cen- 
fur'd for difcovering their Shoulders and half their Arms : 
But at the fame time, the French muft not go uncheck'd for 
expofing to open eye two parts that are at once more fenfible 
and more tempting ; for if it be alleg'd that the former give 
offence backwards, by the fame juftice it may be reply'd that 
the latter fcandalife before. In fine, as the Women of this 
Country lye under reftraints, fo they have the fatisfa&ion of 
being very much refpe&ed ; for when they pafs along the 
Streets either in Coach or on Foot, with their Face uncover'd, 
every body ftops to make 'em a Bow, which they anfwer by 
bowing the Head without bending the Knee. Their Gentle- 
men-Ufhers, who are always old Fellows paft the reach of 
Sufpicion, give 'em their bare hand ; for fuch is the Spanijh 



to Portugal and Denmark. 727 

way : And thefe are the only priviledg'd Perfons that have 
the benefit of touching their hands; for when a Cavalier 
happens accidentally to be near the Holy Water while a Lady 
offers to come to it, he [283] fhakes his Beads in the Water, in 
order to prefent 'em to her. The fame is the cafe in Dancing, 
which do's not happen often: For the Gentleman and the 
Lady come no nearer than the two ends of a Handkerchief, 
by which they hold ; and fo you may guefs how Buffing would 
go down in this Country. 

I muft tell you, the Spaniards are not fo ftern and unfo- 
ciable as they are reprefented ; which you'll perceive from a 
(lender account of their way of Entertainment. A Gentleman 
that I met frequently at the Viceroy's, and act the Academies, did 
me the honour to Vifit me ; and I return'd his Compliment in 
the fame way. When I came to return the Vifit, he receiv'd 
me at the Stair-Head, and condufted me to a Hall, where we 
convers'd for half an hour ; after which I ask'd how his Lady 
did, and he made anfwer, that he believ'd (he was fo well as to 
receive us in her Chamber. This done, the Chocolate and Bif- 
kuyts began to appear ; upon which the Gentleman rofe and 
introduc'd me to his Lady's Chamber. The Lady flood up 
till we made our Honours, and fate down upon her Sofa, 
while Chairs were fetting for us. I told her I was infinitely 
oblig'd to her Husband for procuring me the honour of 
Saluting her. She made anfwer ; that he look'd upon me as a 
Spaniard. After that we drank fome Chocolate, and fhe ask'd 
me if I lik'd it, and whether the French Ladies us'd to drink 
it. This Interview lafted but half a quarter of an hour, for 



728 Some New Voyages 

being affraid of infringing upon the Spanifli Formalities, I 

rofe, and after taking leave walk'd out of the Room with her 

Husband, who invited me to Dinner. We walk'd till Dinner 

time in the Garden, and after the Gentleman had (hewn me 

his Horfes, we went up again to the Hall, where the Table 

Cloath was laid : In [284] a moment in came the Lady, and 

Saluting us after her way, took her place on one fide of the 

Table, as we did on the other. Firft of all, they ferv'd up 

Melons, Raifins, Nectarines , and Figs; then every one had his 

Commons fet before him, (like a Monk's Mefs) confiding of 

a Breft of Mutton Roafted in the firft Service, a Partridge 

and a Pigeon Roafted in the fecond, and a Rabbet Pye in the 

third, a Fricaffee of Foul in the fourth, 

*A fort of Mujhrooms * Oronges furrounded with little Trouts 

on e upper ji e, ^ ^ bignefs of one's Finger in the 
and yellow underneath. ° # ° 

fifth, and an Appricock Tart in the 

fixth: And after all, we had a fort of Soupe as yellow as 

the Saffron with which 'twas cram'd. This, Sir, was the juft 

Bill of Fare for every one's Mefs. In the mean time, we 

talk'd of nothing but the French Ladies. The Lady alleg'd 

that in France, the great Liberty allow'd to the Men in vifiting 

the Ladies, and Playing or Walking with 'em, expos'd the 

Wifeft and moft Vertuous Women to the affronts of indifcreet 

and detracting Perfons, who to make themfelves pafs for 

Men of happy Intrigues, defame the Ladies that refill 'em. 

In fine, after we had rail'd againft the Husbands that tamely 

put up fuch affronts, inftead of refenting 'em, we rofe from 



to Portugal and Denmark. 729 

Table: So ftie took leave after the ufual way, and retir'd to 
her Chamber. When I came to take leave of the Gentleman, 
he walk'd before me to the Head of the Stairs, where he ftop'd 
on the left hand, leaving me the right while I bid him Adieu. 
There he ftood till I got at the foot of the Stairs, upon which 
he gave me his Hat once more, and fo we loft fight of one 
another. 

[285] I thought it proper to give you the Hiftory of this 
Adventure, that you may thereby know how the Spaniards treat 
their Friends. If a hundred Gentlemen had regal'd me at fo 
many feveral times, there would have been no difference, unlefs 
it be as to the goodnefs of the Cheer ; for the Ceremony is the 
fame in one Houfe that you have in another. So that by this 
defcription, you know all that's ufual in Spain upon fuch 
occafions. I believe I have acquainted you that the Spanifh 
Women look upon us as an indifcreet fort of People, and per- 
haps they are not much out in their thoughts; for all the 
Women of Europe fpeak of us at the fame rate. I'll prefent 
you with fome Spanifh Verfes that a foolifti fort of a Poet made 
upon that Head above fifty years ago. 

Los Difcretos Efpanoles 
A Los Maridos Zelozos 
Hazen en Callados Gozos 
Orejus de Caracoles; 
No fan Tales les francezes 
Tan to no pueden Cubrir 
Antes Mas quieren Mil Fezes. 
No hazer que no dejtr. 



730 Some New Voyages 

That is to fay in good Profe. The difcreet Spaniards ajjift the 
Women to cuckold their Husbands by fecret Imbraces ; whereas the 
French can conceal nothing, for they'd cboofe a thoufand times rather 
to be without the Adventure, than not to /peak of it. 

This, Sir, is much of a piece with the Argument of that 
Huron, who alledges that we glory in requiting a Lady's Favour 
with a piece of Ingratitude, that tarnifhes her Reputation to 
all intents and purpofes. This caution may teach the Women 
not to confide in rattle brain'd Fellows. A Woman of Senfe 
will eafily find out the Character [286] of a Man, when (he 
has a mind to give her felf the trouble of infpe&ing his con- 
duct. Tho' our young Sparks are Fools, yet the Ladies 
choose 'em before wifer Men ; becaufe Wifdom do's not take 
place till Nature begins to run low. 

The indifcreet Tongue of a young Cavalier, do's a con- 
fiderable injury to his Miftrifs : But at the fame time, your 
Chamber-Maids and Confidents, are not lefs guilty. We have 
frequent inftances of Women that lofe themfelves by neglect- 
ing a due Precaution with reference to their Domefticks. I 
call that Woman a Wife Woman that knows how to cover her 
Folly handfomely. Now, this is one of the firft Accomplifh- 
ments of your Spanijh Women, who by that means oblige their 
Husbands very much ; for tho' the Adventure makes the 
Cuckold, 'tis the Noife that makes the Horns. With this 
Lucky Word I conclude my Letter, intreating you would 
Write to me to Bilbao, for I defign to go thither with the firft 
opportunity. From thence I intend to Sweep (either by Sea 



to Portugal and Denmark. 731 

or Land) along the Maritime Coaft, as far as Portugal \ in order 
to view the Ports and Havens, I have fo often heard of. I 
fhall take more pleafure in that difcovery, than in feeing the 
fineft Cities of the World: And thus you fee there's no dif- 
puting a Man out of his relifti. 

I am, 

SIR, 

Yours, &c. 



[287] A Short 

DICTIONARY 

Of the moft Univerfal 

LANGUAGE 

OF THE 

SAVAGES. 



I COULD eafily have fent you a compleat Dictionary of all 
the Savage Words, without excepting one, and of feveral 
curious Phrafes : But I confider'd 'twould be of no ufe to you, 
it being fufficient to fee the common Words that are every 
Moment in their Mouths. This is enough for any Man that 
defigns for Canada^ for if he does but learn in his Paffage 
thofe I have fet down, he will be able to Converfe with the 
Savages, after frequenting their Company two or three 
Months. 

There are but two Mother Tongues in the whole extent 



Algonkin Language. 733 

of Canada, which I confine within the Limits of MiJJifipi 1 ; but 
beyond that River there's an infinity of other Languages that 
few Europeans could yet learn, by reafon of the little Corre- 
fpondence they have with the Savages of thofe Parts. The 
two Mother Tongues I [288] fpeak of, are the Huron and the 
Algonkin. The firft is underftood by the Iroquefe y for the dif- 
ference betwixt the Huron and the Iroquefe Language is not 
greater than that between the Norman and the French : And 
fome Savages on the Confines of New Tork fpeak a Language 
that is very near the fame. The Andafloguerons, Torontogueron- 
ons, Errieronons, and feveral other Savage Nations whom the 
Iroquefe have totally deftroy'd, fpoke likewife the fame Tongue, 
and underftood one another perfectly well. 2 The Second, 
namely the Algonkine, is as much efteem'd among the Savages, 
as the Greek and Latin is in Europe; tho' 'twould feem that 
the Algonkins, to whom it owes its Original, difgrace it by the 
thinnefs of the Nation, for their whole number does not exceed 
two Hundred. 



1 From the inception of their endeavors to convert the American tribes, the study 
of Indian linguistics necessarily occupied much attention on the part of the Jesuit mis* 
sionaries of New France. Their narratives abound in descriptions of the native 
tongues, and the difficulties connected with acquiring them. They early recognized 
as the fundamental basis of their studies, the two stocks which Lahontan here describes. 
Different fathers devoted themselves to researches and compilations in each division of 
the great task. Brebeuf and Le Jeune, in particular, were authorities upon the Huron- 
Iroquois ; Andre, upon the Algonquian tongue. In 1653 it was declared in the 
Relations that grammars and dictionaries were available for both of these linguistic 
types — Jes. Rel., xxxix, p. 121. How far Lahontan was indebted to the Jesuits for 
his knowledge, and how far it was based solely on personal contact with the aborigines, 
is not clearly to be determined. His facility in the languages of the savages is evident 
throughout his narrative. — Ed. 

2 For these tribes, see p. 320, note 1, ante. — Ed. 



734 ^ Dictionary of the 

You muft know that all the Languages of Canada, except- 
ing the Huron and thofe which retain to it, come as near to 
the Algonkine, as the Italian to the Spanifli ; and 'tis for that 
reafon that all the Warriours and ancient Counfellors of fo 
many different Nations affedl to fpeak it with all manner of 
nicety. 'Tis fo neceffary to Travellers in that Country, that 
in fpeaking it one is certain of making himfelf to be under- 
ftood by all forts of Savages in whatfoever place he comes to, 
whether in Acadia or Hudfon's Bay, or upon the Lakes, or 
even among the Iroquefe, among whom a great many have 
learn'd it for Reafons of State, notwithftanding that it differs 
from theirs more widely than Night from Day. 1 

/ The Algonkine Language has neither Tone nor Accent, nor 
fuperfluous dead Letters ; fo that 'tis as eafie to pronounce it 
as to write it. 'Tis not Copious, no more than the other 
Languages of America; for the People of that Continent are 
[289] Strangers to Arts and Sciences, they are unacquainted 
with the Laws of Ceremony and Complement, and an infinity 
of Words that the Europeans ufe to imbellifh their Difcourfe. 
Their Speech is only adapted to the Neceffities and Conven- 
iences of Life, and there is not one ufelefs or fuperfluous Word 
in the whole Language. Farther, this Tongue makes no ufe 

v either of F or V Confonant. 2 



1 On the widespread utility of the Algonquian language, especially in its Chippewa 
form, which is considered the oldest and purest, see "J. Long's Voyages, " in 
Thwaites, Early Western Travels, ii, pp. 28-30. — Ed. 

2 For the Algonquian tongue, and the early studies thereof by English colonists, 
see the works of John Eliot, Roger Williams, and Jonathan Edwards as indicated in 
Pilling, Bibliography of the Algonquian Languages (Washington, 1891). — Ed, 



Algonkin Language. 735 

To the end of the Dictionary I have added the four Tenfes 
of the Indicative of the Verb, / love. The Indicative is form'd 
from the Infinitive, by adding the Perfonal Note ni, which 
fignifies me or /. Thus, Sakia fignifies to love, and Nifakia, I 
love. The fame is the cafe with all the other Verbs. 

'Tis an eafie matter to conjugate the Verbs of this Lan- 
guage after one has learn'd the Prefent Tenfe of the Indicative 
Mood. To the Imperfed Tenfe they add Ban, as Sakiaban, 
I lov } d ; to the Perfedt Tenfe they add ki after the perfonal 
mark, as ni kifakia, I have lov } d, and to the Future ga in like 
manner, as nigafakia or nin gafakia, I [hall love. All the other 
Tenfes of the Verb are form'd from the Prefent of the Indica- 
tive, for Example, Ningafakiaban, I would love, Ninkifakiaban, I 
fhould have lov y d. In a Word, when the Prefent of the Indica- 
tive, and the additional Particles for the other Tenfes, are 
once known, the whole Language may be learn'd in a very 
little time. As for the Imperative 'tis form'd by prefixing A 
to the Infinitive, as Afakia, love thou, and the Plural, let us love, 
is form'd by fubjoyning Ta to the Infinitive, as Sakiata, let us 
love. It remains only to (hew the Perfonal Notes, viz. 

[290] I or Me, Nir, You, Kiraoua. 

Thee or Thou, Kir, You and We, Kiraoueint. 

He or Him, Ouir. They or Them, Ouiraoua. 
We, Niraoueint. 



736 



A Dictionary of the 



A Bandon or forfake, I aban- 
^ ^ don, Packitan. 
Above, Spimink. 
Admirable, 'tis admirable (the 

Savages fpeak it by way of 

Derifion) Pilaoua. 
Afterwards, Mipidacb. 
All, Kakina. 
All of 'em, Miffoute. 
All in all, Alouch bogo. 
Always, Kakeli. 
Amifs, that's amifs, 'tis good 

for nothing, Napitcb Mai- 

atat. 
And, Gaye or Mipigaye. 
Arrive, I arrive, Takoucbin. 
Afhes, Powder, Duft, Pingoe. 
Affift or Aid, Maouineoua. 
Ax, a great Ax, Agackouet. 
A little Ax, Agackouetons. 

B 

TDAg, a Tobacco bag, Caf- 
*~* pitagan. 
Ball, Alouin. 
Barrel, Aoyentagan. 



Beat, I beat, Packite. 

A Bear, Mackoua. 

A little Bear, Makons. 

Beard, Mtfcbiton. 

Beaver, the Animal, Amik. 

Beaver-Skin, Apiminikoue. 

to Be or reft, Tapia. 

Becaufe, Miouinch. 

to Believe, Tilerima. 

Belly, Mifchimout. 

Black, Markate. 

Blood, Mifcoue. 

Body, Tao 

Bottle, Cbicbigoue. 

Brother, Nicanicb. 

Brandy, the juice or Broth of 
Fire, Scoutiouabou. 

Brave Soldier, Simaganis. 

Bread, Pa-bouchikan. 

Brech, Mifcoafab. 

[291] Breeches, a circumlocu- 
tion for the covering of the 
Brech, Kipokitie Koafab. 

Broth or Juice, Ouabou. 

Buck, Ouaskech. 

Buckler, Pakakoa. 

Build, to build Veffels or Ca- 
nous, Cbimanike. 



Algonkin Language. 



737 



D 



/^All, to call or name, Tic hi- 

^* nika. 

Candle, to fnuff the Candle, 

to ftir up the Fire, Ouafa- 

colendamaoua. 
Canou, Chiman. 
Captain, Leader, Okima. 
to Carry, Pitou or Pita. 
Caldron, Akik. 
Change, I change, Mifcoutch. 
Child, little Children, Bobi- 

loucbins. 
Coat, Capotiouian. 
Cold, I am cold, Kikatch. 
Come on, Mappe. 
to Come, Pimatcha. 
Comrade, at my Com- 
rade's Houfe, Nitche, Nit- 

chikoue. 
Concerned or difquieted, Tal- 

imijfi. 
Corn, Malomin. 
Covering, a white Woollen 

Covering, Onabiouian. 
Country, Endalakian. 
Courage, I have Courage, 

Tagouamifli. 
C * Maskimout. 
Cup made of Bark, Oula- 

gan. 



A 



Dab, Malamek. 
Dance, I dance, Nitni. 
Dance of the Savages to the 

Sound of Gourds, Chichi- 

koue. 
Dart, I dart, Patchipaoua. 
Day, to day, Ningom. 
One day, Okonogat. 
Dead, Nipouin. 
Devil, Evil Spirit, Matchi 

Manitou. 
Die, I die, Nip. 
Difh of Maple Wood, Soule 

Mickoan. 
Dog, Alim. 
Little Dog, Alimons. 
Do, I do, Tocbiton. 
Done, 'tis done, Cbaye. 
Doubtlefs, Antetatouba. 
Drefs Meat : I do the Kettle, 

(a Phrafe) Poutaoue. 
Drink, I drink, Minikoue. 
Drunken, a Fool, Oufkouebi. 
Duck, Chicbip. 



[292] 



E 



EL 



^Ach or every one, Pepeg 
Earth, A eke or Ackouin. 



47 



738 



A Dictionary of the 



to Eat, Ouiflin. 
Elfewhere, Coutadibi. 
Englifh, Ouatfakamink, Dach- 

irini. 
Enough, 'tis enough, Mimilic. 
Equal or like one another, 

Tabifcoutcb. 
Efteem, I efteem or honour, 

Napitelima. 
Eyes, Ouskinebic. 



r All, to fall, Pankifin. 

Far off, Ouatfa. 

Fall, to go faft, Ouelibick. 

Fat, Pimite. 

Father, my Father, Noufce. 

Fatigued, I am fatigu'd, Tak- 

oujji. 
Few or little, Me Mangis. 
Fields fown, Kitteganink. 
to Find, Nantouneoua. 
Fire, Scoute. 
to ftrike Fire with a Stone, 

Scoutecke. 
Firelock, Scoutekan. 
Fish, Kikons. 
White Fifh, Attikamec. 
Fork, Najfaouakouat. 
Formerly, Piraouigo. 
Fort or Fortrefs, Ouackaigan. 



Fortify, I make Forts, Ouac- 
kaike. 

Forwards in the Wood, Nope- 
menk. 

A Fowl, Pxlt. 

France, the Country of the 

French , Mittigoucbiouek, En- 

dalakiank. 
The French, term'd Builders 

of Ships, Mittigoucb. 
to Freeze, KiJJin. 
It freezes hard, Kijfina Magat. 
Full, Mouskinet. 
Fufee, Paskifigan. 



Tlrle, Ickoueffens. 

Give, I give, Mila. 

Glafs, a Looking-glafs, Oua- 
betno. 

Go by Water, Pimifca. 

God of Heaven, Mafter of 
Life ; Great Spirit ; the un- 
known Being, Kitchimanitou. 

Good, Kouelatch. 

Govern, I Govern, Tiberima. 

[293] Governor General of 
Canada, Kitchiokimafi magan- 
icb, i. e. great Captain of 
War. 

Grape, Cboemin. 



Algonkin Language. 



739 



Great in the way of Merit, 
Valour, Courage, &c. Kitcbi. 
Great in Stature, Mentitou. 
Greedy, Safakiffi. 
Gut, Olabicb. 



tt 



H 



L Air, Liffis. 
Hair of Beafts Piouel. 
Half, Nabal. 

Handfome, Proper, Safega. 
Hare, Ouapous. 
Hart, Micheoue. 
Hate, I Abhor, Cbinguerima. 
Have, to have, Tindala. 
Head, Oufticouan. 
Heaven, the upper Earth, 

Spiminkakouin. 
Herb, Mijask. 

Here, Achonda or Acbomanda. 
Hidden, Kimoucb. 
Home, at my Houfe, Entayant. 
To Honour, Mackaouala. 
Hot, Akichatte. 
How, Tani. 
How many, Tanfou, or Tani- 

milik. 
Hungry, I am hungry, Packate. 
Hunt, I hunt, Kiouffe. 
Hurons, the People, Nadouck. 
Hut, Ouikiouam. 



I. 

TEfuit, Black Gown, Mackate 
** ockola. 
Ifland, Minis. 
Immediately, Ouibatcb. 
Impoftor, MalatiJJi. 
Indian Corn, Mittamin. 
Intirely, Napitch. 
Iron, Piouabick. 

Iroquefe, in the Plural Num- 
ber, Matchinadoaek. 



K, 



K. 



^Eep, I keep, Ganaouerima. 
Kettle, Akikons. 
King of France, the Great 

Head of the French, Mitti- 
goucb Kitchi Okitna. 
Knife, Mockoman. 
A Crooked Knife, Coutagan. 
[294] Know, I know, Kikeritna. 
To know, Kikerindan. 



T Ake, great Lake, Kitcbi- 

• L ' gamink. 

Lame, KakikatL 

Land Carriage, Cappatagan. 

To Laugh, Papi. 

Lazy, Kittimu 



740 



A Dictionary of the 



To Leave, Packitan : 
Letter, Mafignaygan. 
Liberal, Oualatifli. 
Life, Noucbimouin. 
Light, fplendor, Venclao. 
Little, Ouabiloucbeins. 
To Live, Noutcbimou. 
Long fince, 'tis long ago, 

Cbacbayi. 
Lofe at play, I lofe, Packilague. 
Love, to love, Sakia. 
To ly down, Ouipema. 

M. 

jVlAle, Nape. 

Malicious, cheating, one that 

has an 111 Heart, Malatchi- 

tebe. 
Man, Aliftnape. 
March, I march, Pimoujfe. 
Marry, I take a Woman, 

Ouiouin. 
Marryed Man, Napema. 
Meat, Ouias. 
A Med'cine, or Potion, Mas- 

kikik. 
To meet Nantouneoua. 
Merchandize Goods, Alokat- 

cbigan. 
Miftrefs, or She-Friend, Niri- 

moufens. 



Moon, the Star of the Night, 
Debikat Ikizis. 

to Morrow, Ouabank. 

The Day after to Morrow, 
Oufouabank. 

A Mortar of Wood for beat- 
ing Indian Corn, Poutagan. 

Much, Nibila. 



N, 



N 



I Ations, People, Irini. 
Near, Pecbouetcb. 
Needle, a fewing Needle, Cba- 

bonikan. 
Never, Kaouicka. 
News, Tepatchimou-kan. 
I bring News, Tepatchimou. 
Night, Debikat. 
No, Ka. 

No body, Kagouetcb or Kaouia. 
Nofe, Tacb : 
Not at all, Kamamenda or 

Kagouetcb. 
Not yet, Ka mafcbi. 
Nothing, Kakegou. 



a 



[295] o 



'AR, Appoue. 
Old, Kioucheins. 
One-Eyed, Paskingoe. 



Algonkin Language. 



741 



Original, Elk, Mons. 

A young and little Elk, Man- 

ichich. 
Other, Coutac. 
Otter, Nikik. 



"DAP, or the juice of the 
A Meal of Indian Corn, Mit- 

aminabou. 
Part, in what part, Tanipi. 
Partridges, Pilefioue. 
Pay, I pay, Tipabam. 
Peace, Peca. 

to make Peace, Pecatechi. 
Peninfula, MiniJJin. 
Perfuafion, Tirerigan. 
Pike, Filh, Kinonge. 
Pipe, Calumet, Poagan. 
to Pifs, Minfi. 

Pity, to take pity, Cbaouerima. 
to Play, Packigoue. 
to Pleafe one, I pleafe, Marou- 

erindan. 
Porcelain Beads, Aouies. 
Powder, Gunpowder, Pingoe, 

Mackate. 
To pour out, Sibikinan. 
To pray to God, Talamia Kit- 

cbimanitou. 



Prefent, at prefent, Nougam. 

Prefently, Ouibatcb. 

Petty, Olichichin. 

P*, Patch agon. 

Proper, Handfome, Safega. 

to Purfue, Nopinala. 

I put away (a term ufed for 

a Man's putting away his 

Wife) Ouebinan. 

Q. 

V^/Uickly, Kegatcb. 



R 



R. 



„Ain, Kimiouan. 
Red Colour, Mifcoue. 
Red Powder, efteemed by the 

Savages Oulaman. 
to Regard, Ouabemo. 
to Regrate, Kouiloma. 
Relation, Kinfman, Taouema. 
Refolve, I refolve, Tibelin- 

dan. 
to Refpedfc, Tabamica. 
to Reft or Repofe, Chinki- 

chin. 
Right, to be in the right, 

Tepoa. 
A Ring, Dibilincbibifon. 



742 



A Dictionary of the 



River, Sipim. 

Robe, Ockola. 

Root, Ouftikoues. 

Row, to row, Tapoue. 

to Run, Pitchibat. 

Run to, I run to, Pitcbiba. 



[296] S 

i^Able, Negao. 

Sack, Maskimout. 

Sad, to be fad, TalimiJ/i. 

Sail, I fail, Pimifca. 

to Salute, Mackaouala. 

Say, I fay, Tila. 

He fays, fays he, (a very ufual 
Word) Toua. 

Sea, a great Lake without lim- 
its, Agankitcbigamink. 

To fee, Ouabemo. 

Seek, I feek, Nantaouerima. 

Senfe, to have fenfe, Nabou- 
acka. 

Ship, or Great Canow, Kitchi 
Chiman, 

Shirt, Papakiouian. 

Shooes, Mackifin. 

Sick, Outineous. 

Side, on the other fide, Gaa- 
mink. 



Since, Mipidacb. 

To fing, Chicbin. 

Skin, Pacbikin. 

Slave, Ouackan. 

Sleep, Nipa. 

Smoak, I fmoak Tobacco, Pen- 

takoe. 
To make a Smoak, Sagaffoa. 
Softly, Peccabogo. 
Sons, Nitianu 
Sorry, I am forry, Iskatifli. 
Soldier, Simaganicb 
To Speak, Galoula. 
Spirit, an Intelligent Invifible 

Being, Manitou. 
Spoon, Mickouan. 
Spring-time, Mirockamink. 
Star, Alank. 
To deal, Kimoutin. 
Stockins, Hofe, Mitas^ 
Stone, Affin. 
Strong, firm, hard, Mafcb- 

kaoua. 
A Strong-man, Macbkaouejfu 
Very ftrong, Magat. 
Sturgeon, Fifh, Lamek. 
Sun, Kifis. 

Sweat, to fweat, Matoutou. 
Sword, Simagan. 
Surprifing, 'tis furprifing or 

wonderful, Etteoui. 



Algonkin Language. 



743 



T< 



T. 



Obacco, Sema. 
Take, I take, Takouan. 
Take hold, Emanda. 
Teeth, Tibit. 
That, Maba. 

There, that way, Mandadibi. 
There, at a diftance, Ouatfa- 

dibi. 
[297] To Think or entertain 

an Opinion, Tilelindan. 
This, Manda. 
This way, Undach. 
On this fide, Undachdibi. 
Time, a long time ago, Cbacb- 

ayi, Piraouigo. 
Together, Mamaoue. 
Tongue, Outan. 
Too Little, Offame Mangis. 
Too much, OJfani. 
To Truck Tataouan. 
Truly Keket. 
A Turtle-Dove, Mimi. 
Tyr'd, I am tyr'd, Takonfi. 



W. 



w, 



Alk, I walk, Tija. 
Value, it is a valuable Thing, 
Arimat. 



Water, Nibi. 

War, Nantobali. 

To make War, Nantoubalima. 

Warriors, Nantobalitchick. 

Way, or Road, Mickan. 

Well, that is well, Oueoiielim. 

Well, well, what then ? Achin- 

dacb. 
Well then, Taninentien. 
What's that ? Ouaneouine. 
What has he ? Kekouanen. 
Whence, Tanipi. 
Whence come ye? Tanipi 

Endayenk. 
Where? Ta. 

Where is he ? Tanipi Api. 
While, Megaotcb. 
White, Ouabi. 
Whither do you go ? Taga 

Kitiga. 
Who's that? Ouaneouine maba. 
Why? Tanientien. 
Wicked, in fpeaking of the 

Iroquefe y MalataJJi. 
Will, Ouifcb. 
Village, Oudenanc. 
Win at play, I win, Packitan. 
Wind, Loutin. 
Wine, the Juice or Broath of 

Grapes, Cboeminabou. 
Vifit, to pay a Vifit, Piametijfa. 



744 



A Dictionary of the 



Winter, Pipoun. 

I Winter, or pafs the Winter, 

Pipounichi. 
To underftand, Nifitotaoua. 
Wolf, Mahingan. 
Woman, Ickoue. 
Wood for Firing, Mittik. 
Write, I write, Mafinaike. 



1 Ellow, Ouzao. 
Yes, Mi, or Mincouti. 
Yes, indeed, Ante, or Sankema. 
Yefterday, Pitchilago. 
Yet, Minaouatcb. 
Young, Ouskinekiffi. 



[298] I fhall here content my felf in giving you the four 
Tenfes of the Indicative Mood of one Verb ; by a view of which 
you may form the Conjugation of the other Moods. 'Twere 
eafy to inlarge upon this Subjedt ; but if I offer'd to launch 
out, the multiplicity of things that fall in the way, would oblige 
me to Write a formal Grammar. 



To love, Sakia. 

Prefent 
I love, Nifakia. 
Thou loveft, Kifakia. 
He loves, Oufakia. 
We love, Nifakiamin. 
Ye love, Kifakiaoua. 
We and you love, Kifakiamin- 

aoua. 
They love, Sakiaouak. 

Imperfedl. 
I loved, Ni fakiaban. 
Thou lovd'ft, Ki fakiaban. 



He lov'd, Ou fakiaban. 
We lov'd, Ni faikaiminaban. 
You lov'd, Ki fakiaouaban. 
We and you lov'd, Kifakimin- 

aouaban. 
They lov'd, Sakiabanik. 

I have lov'd, Ni kifakia. 
Thou haft lov'd, Ki kifakia. 
He has lov'd, Ou kifakia. 
We have lov'd, Ni kifakiamin. 
You have lov'd, Ki kifakiaoua. 
We and you have lov'd, Ki 

kifakiaminaoua. 
They have lov'd, KifakiaouaL 



Algonkin Language. 



745 



I (hall love, Ningafakia. 
Thou fhalt love, Ki gafakia. 
He fhall love, Ou gafakia. 
We fhall love, Nin gafakiamin. 
You fhall love, Ki gafakiaoua. 



We and you fhall love, Ki 

gafakiatninaoua. 
They fhall love, Gafakiaouak. 
Love thou, Afakia. 
Let us love, Afakiata. 



As for the Nouns they are not declin'd at all. The plural 
number is form'd by a k. added to a Angular, ending in a 
Vowely as Alifinape fignifies a Man, and Alifinapek feveral Men. 
If the Noun [299] ends with a Confonant, the plural is form'd 
by the addition of ik ; as Minis fignifies an Ifle, and Miniffik 
Ifles ; Paskifigan a Fufee, and Pafkifiganik a plurality of Fufees. 



The Algonkin way of Counting. 



(")Ne, Pegik. 

^* Two, Nincb. 

Three, Nijfoue. 

Four, iWflw. 

Five, Naran. 

Six, Ningoutouaffou. 

Seven, Ninchouaffou. 

Eight, Niffouaffou. 

Nine, Cbangaffou. 

Ten, Mittaffou. 

Eleven, Mittaffou achi pegik. 

Twelve, Mitaffou achi nincb. 

Thirteen, Mitaffou achi niffoue. 

Fourteen, Mitaffou achi neou. 

Fifteen, Mitaffou achi naran. 



Sixteen, Mitaffou achi ningotou- 
affou. 

Seventeen, Mitaffou achi nin- 
cb oaffou. 

Eighteen, Mitaffou achi niffou- 
affou. 

Nineteen, Mitaffou achi cbang- 
affou. 

Twenty, Ninchtana. 

Twenty one, Ninchtana achi 
pegik. 

Twenty two, Ninchtana achi 
nincb. 

Twenty three, Nichtana achi 
niffoue. 



746 A Dictionary of the 

Twenty four, Ninchtana achi Thirty, Nijfouemitana. 

neou. Thirty one, Nijfouemitana achi 

Twenty five, Ninchtana achi pegik ) &c. 

naran. Fourty, Neoumitana. 

Twenty fix, Ninchtana achi Fifty, Naran mitana. 

ningotouaffou. Sixty, Ningoutouaffou mitana. 

Twenty feven, Ninchtana achi Seventy, Ninchouaffou mitana. 

nincboaffou. Eighty, Niffouaffou mitana. 

Twenty eight, Ninchtana achi Ninety, Changajfou mitana. 

niffouaffou. A hundred, Mitaffou mitana. 

Twenty nine, Ninchtana achi A thoufand, Mitaffou mitaffou 

changaffou. mitana. 

[300] If you can once count to a hundred, 'tis eafy to 
count by tens from a thoufand to a hundred thoufand, which 
number is in a manner unknown to the Savages^ and by con- 
fequence not us'd in their Language. 

You muft take care to pronounce fully all the letters of 
the Words, and to reft upon the A's that come at the end. 
The pronunciation is very eafy, becaufe this Language has no 
Guttural or Palate Letters, fuch as the Spani/h J Confonant 
with their G and their //, as well as the Englijh th, which puts 
a Foreigner's Tongue upon the rack. 

I can't pafs by one curious Remark touching the Language 
of the Hurons and the Iroquefe; namely, that it do's not ufe the 
Labial Letters, viz. b, /, w, p. And yet the Huron's Language 
appears to be very pretty, and founds admirably well, notwith- 
ftanding that the Hurons never ftiut their Lips when they fpeak. 

Commonly the Iroquefe make ufe of it in their Harangues 
and Councils, when they enter upon a Negotiation with the 



Algonkin Language. 747 

French or Englifh. But in their Domeftick Interviews they 
fpeak their Mother Tongue. 

None of the Savages of Canada care to fpeak French, unlefs 
they are perfuaded that the force of their Words will be per- 
fectly underftood. They muft be very well fatisfied upon that 
Head before they venture to expofe themfelves in fpeaking 
their mind in French; abating for fome cafes of neceflity, when 
they are in Company with the Coureurs de Bois that do not 
underftand their Language. 

To return to the Huron Language ; we muft confider that 
fince neither the Hurons nor the Iroquefe ufe the Labial Letters, 
'tis impoflible for [301] either of 'em to learn French well. I 
have fpent four days m trying to make the Hurons pronounce 
the Labial Letters, but I could not accomplifh it ; nay, I am of 
the Opinion that in ten years time they would not learn to 
pronounce thefe Words, Bon, Fils, Monfieur, Ponchartrain : For 
inftead of Bon they'd fay Ouon; inftead of Fils, Rils; inftead of 
Monfieur, Caounfieur ; and in the room of Ponchartrain, Con- 
char train. 

I have here added fome Words of the Huron Language, 
that your curiofity may be gratified with a view of the differ- 
ence between that and the Algonkin. The Hurons fpeak with 
a great deal of gravity, and almoft all their Words have afpir- 
ations, the H being pronounc'd as ftrong as poflible. 

I do not know that the Letter F is usd in any of the Sav- 
age Languages. 'Tis true, the EJfanapes and the Gnacfitares 
have it ; but they are Seated upon the long River beyond the 
MiJJifipi, and confequently out of the Limits of Canada. 



748 



A Dictionary 



Some Huron Words. 



'TND be a Man of Senfe, 
A Hondioun. 
Spirit, Divinity, Ocki. 
Fire, Tfifta. 
Iron, Aouifta. 
Woman, Ontehtian. 
Fufee, Ouraouenta. 
To be forry, Oungaroun. 
'Tis cold, Outoirha. 
Fat, Skoueton. 
Man, Onnonhoue. 
Yefterday, Hiorbeha. 
Jefuit, Tfiftatfi. 
Far, Deheren. 
Otter, Taouinet. 
Not, Staa. 
Yes, Endae. 
Pipe or Calumet, Gannon- 

daoua. 
Near, Touskeinbia. 
Soldiers, Skenraguetti. 
To Salute, Tgonoron. 
Shooes, Arrachiou. 
Traffick, Attendinon. 
Altogether, Tiaoundi. 
All of 'em, Aouetti. 
Tobacco, Oyngoua. 



'Tis valuable, difficult, [302] 
and of importance, Gan- 
noron. 

To be gone, Saraskoua. 

Covetous, Onnonfte. 

Handfome, Proper, Akouafti. 

Very much, Atoronton. 

That's well, Andeya. 

I Drink, Abirrba. 

Indian Corn, Onneha. 

Stockins, Arrhich. 

A Bottle, Gatfeta. 

A brave Man, Songuitebe. 

'Tis done, Houna. 

My Brother, Tatfu 

My Comrade, Yonaro. 

Heaven, Toendi. 

A Hutt, Honnonchia. 

Hair, Eonbora. 

Captain, Otcon. 

Dog, Agnienon. 

Softly, Skenonha. 

Peace, Skenon. 

I fay, Attatta. 

To morrow, Achetek. 

To be, Sackie. 



INDEX 



INDEX 



ABE 

Abenaki Indians, significance of name, 
328} habitat, xxviii, 327, 328; lan- 
guage, 339; migrations, 90, 327, 
328, 3 30 j tribe of, 90, 328; French 
allies, 328; St. Castin among, 328, 
329; missions for, 46-49, 328-330, 
339, 340; give tidings of English 
fleet, 242; present numbers, 3285 
characterized, 3 39; sketch, 327, 328. 

Abies canadensis, 371. 

Abittibi (Tabitibi) Indians, habitat, 3425 
language, 342; characterized, 3425 
sketch, 342. 

Acadia, climate, 325, 326; part of 
Canada, 302; boundaries, 236, 323, 
3245 coast, 323, 324; described, 323 
-327; early grant of, 3315 Indians, 
90, 327, 328, 339, 399, 414, 734; 
settlement, 324, 326, 331; popula- 
tion, 330; capital, 330, 331; in La- 
hontan* s lieutenancy, xxx, 281; gov- 
ernors of, 52, 53, 237, 288, 326, 
327, 332; French officers in, 224, 
236, 237; English in, 69, 227, 3265 
projected attack on, 274; fisheries, 
324-3265 fur-trade, 327, 3285 mis- 
sions, 329, 330; agriculture, 3255 
visited by Bishop, 232. 

Acadiensisy 330. 

Acipenser rubicundus, 156. 

Achirigouan Indians, habitat, 3425 lan- 
guage, 342; characterized, 342; 
sketch, 342. 

Adario (Kondiaronk, The Rat), Huron 
chief, characterized, xlviii, 220, 242; 
Denonville attempts to punish, 209, 
220; French ally, 2205 relations with 
Frontenac, 149; at Fort Frontenac, 
220, 221 j relations with Iroquois, 



AMM 

Adario (continued). 

xxii, 149, 165, 220-225, 2 37> *38, 
5085 opposed to war, 495, 4965 friend 
of Lahontan, xxii, 9, 165; Dialogue 
with Lahontan, xiv, lxi, 7, 8, 517- 
6185 arguments, 442, 4435 quoted, 
xliv, xlvi, 495, 496; wife, 4615 fun- 
eral, 1 49 j sketch, 149. 

Adders, in Canada, 352, 357. 

Africans, characteristics of, 282, 284. 

Agnies Indians. See Mohawk Indians. 

Akansas Indians. See Arkansa Indians. 

Akouessan. See Longueuil. 

Albany (N. Y.), location, 75 raids near, 
240, 262. 

Alders, in Canada, 365. 

Algonkin Indians, habitat, 47, 50, 515 
vocabulary of language, 733-748; 
numbers, 733; allied with French, 
5 1 ; conduct French to Iroquois 
country, 81, 82 j Lahontan hunts 
with, 46, 47, 88, 89; mission for, 
49; sketch, 51. 

Algonquian family, tribes of, xl, 47, 77, 
82, 90, 168, 174, 175, 218, 309, 
3*7, 3^7, 34o, 343, 39 8 > original 
tribe of, 342; language, 47, 176, 
297, 339> 34*>733> 7345 vocabulary, 
297, 736-748; name for governor of 
Canada, 97, 404; religious ideas of, 

435- 
Alligator mississippiensis, 347. 
Allouez, Father Claude, founds Green 

Bay mission, 168; monument to, 1 6 8 ; 

mentions wild rice, 175; cited, 494. 
American Naturalist, 200. 
Amherstburg (Ont.), Indian reservation 

near, 155. 
Ammunition, Canadian import, 376. 



752 



Index 



AMO 

Amours, Genevieve cT, affair with La- 
hontan, xxvii, xxviii, 388-3905 mar- 
riage, 391; god-daughter of Fron- 
tenac, xxviii. 

— , Mathieu d', councillor at Quebec, 
3^4, 3 2 5> 3 88 > grants of land, 325; 
friend of Nelson, 389, 390. 

— , Mathieu d', the younger, in New 
Brunswick, xxviii, 324, 3255 friend 
of Nelson, xxviii, 389, 390. 

— , Rene d', in New Brunswick, xxviii, 
324, 3255 defends fort, 3255 friend 
of Nelson, xxviii, 389, 390. 

Anastase, Father. See Douay. 

Andastes Indians, identified, 320; habi- 
tat, 320, 321. 

Andastogueron Indians, language, 733. 

Andre, Louis, authority on Algonquian 
language, 733. 

Andros, Sir Edmond, uprising against, 
265. 

Angola, Portuguese colony, 282, 2835 
customs, 6325 ships, 636. 

Angui, Messieurs d', provision Placen- 
tia, 282. 

Annapolis, site, 331; population, 331. 
See also Port Royal. 

Anne, ruler of England, 3 j war in reign 
of, 5. 

Anschild (Anskoeld), Frederick, re- 
puted discoverer, 309-3115 origin of 
myth of, 309; Journals, 310. 

Anse du Tonnerre. See Bay, Thunder. 

Aoutaerobi, Indian spirit, 603. 

Apache Indians, medicine men among, 
468. 

Appleton (Wis.), rapids at, 174. 

Apple-trees, of Canada, 319, 3645 fruit 
described, 367. 

Aragon, capital, lxi, 9, 718; govern- 
ment, 720, 721; social classes, 724, 
725; customs, 727-7295 physical 
characteristics of people, 72 1 5 women, 
722, 723, 729, 730; dress, 726; 
morality, 723, 724, 728-7305 food, 



ATT 

Aragon {continued). 

721, 7285 wines, 7215 inns, 721; 
carriages, 725, 726. 

Arce, Sieur d\ See Isaac, baron La- 
hontan. 

Arctomys pruniosus, 1 1 1 . 

Arctostaphylos ura-ursa, 474. 

Aria. See Viele. 

Aristotle, Lahontan describes, xiv, 116, 
117. 

Arkansa Indians, hunt buffalo, 203,204; 
Lahontan meets, 203-205, 465, 4665 
trade with Illinois, 2045 possess iron 
instruments, 2045 La Salle among, 
2045 French term for Siouan tribe, 
2045 migrations, 2045 sketch, 204. 

Arkansas, Indians of, 204. 

Army, troops in Canada, xi, xv, 386, 
387; first troops arrive, 3925 quar- 
tered, xii, xiv, 3875 work for habi- 
tants, 3875 in trade, 3875 relations 
between officers and soldiers, 391; 
pay of officers, 3835 marriage of offi- 
cers, 387, 3885 pay of soldiers, 383. 

Arpent, French measure, defined, 35. 

Arreche, Sieur d*, French merchant, 655. 

Arrow-heads (iron), in fur-trade, 378. 

Asher, George M., Henry Hudson the 
Navigator, 309. 

Ash-trees, of Canada, 364. 

Aspens, of Canada, 3655 described, 3715 
food of beavers, 371, 480, 482. 

Asps, in Canada, 352; poisonous, 357. 

Assan-oustick, Indian word for toma- 
hawk, 402. 

Assiniboin (Assinipoual) Indians, habi- 
tat, 304, 305, 342, 3435 language, 
342, 3435 tribe associated with, 3435 
migrations, 343. 

Associates of Montreal, 53, 55, 233. 

Astrolabe, described, 401. 

Atinton Indians. See Teton Indians. 

Attikamek (Attikamegues) Indians, lan- 
guage, 3405 habitat, 340; destroyed, 
3405 sketch, 340. 



Index 



753 



AUN 

Aunay, Count cT, escort to Lahontan, 
257, 258; thanked, 259. 

Aunoy, Madam d', 647. 

Authoutantas Indians. See Oto Indians. 

Auvergne, commerce of, 725; mules, 
633. 

Aux, Chevalier Pierre d', sent on em- 
bassy to Iroquois, xxvi, 238, 239, 
5085 imprisoned, xxvi, 238,239, 5085 
escapes, 2395 brings information, 
239; sketch, 239. 

Avaux, Count d", Lahontan' s patron, 
11, 12. 

Aveiro, Lahontan at, 619, 625, 626; 
harbor, 6225 situation, 625; salt 
works, 625. 

Aveneau, Father Claude, chaplain at 
Fort St. Joseph, xx, 140} sketch, 
140. 

Awls, in fur-trade, 377. 

Axes, in fur-trade, 377. 

Aztec calendar, 428. 



Baccaleos, early name for Newfound- 
land and Labrador, 307. 
Badgers, Canadian like European, 343; 

animal resembling, 344. 
Bain, James, jr., Henry's Travels and 

Adventures, 99, 219, 309, 357, 380. 
Balenots, in Canada, 3585 described, 

360. 
Balzac, Jean Louis Guez de, Letters, 

692; Dissertations, 692. 
Bar-Haven (havre de barre), described, 

622. 
Bases, small fish, 358. 
Baskets, of birch-bark, 370. 
Basques, early American explorers, x; 

fisheries off New Foundland, 308. 
Basse-Pyrenees, Lahontan born in, ix. 
Bastille, French prison, 53, 265, 293, 

2945 Lahontan fears, xxxii. 
Batteurs de faux, identified, no; size, 

35 1 - 

48 



BAY 

Bay of Biscay, fishermen at Newfound- 
land, 275, 305 j reputation of sailors, 
272; soldiers, 276, 278; aid in de- 
fence, 279, 281; captains favor La- 
hontan, 288; harbors in, 294. 

— Chaleurs, described, 324; origin of 
name, 324; fishing villages, 306. 

— Chequamegon, traders near, 315; 
French post on, 209. 

— Dingle, on west coast of Ireland, 
302. 

— Fortune, Newfoundland, 334. 

— Franchise. See Fundy. 

— Fundy, 330; explored, 324; tercen- 
tenary of settlement, 324. 

— Georgian, islands in, 154, 218; route 
through, 218, 273 j north channel, 
218; Indians near, 340, 488. 

— Grand. See Grand Traverse. 

— Grand Traverse (Mich.), identified, 
208} early names for, 208; affluent 
of, 210; beaver hunting grounds, 
481; described, 210. 

— Green, French name for, 146, 1 67 5 
significance, 1 46 ; fur-trade, 1 46, 168; 
location, 167, 494; islands in, 167; 
Lahontan visits, xxiv, xlii, 167-173; 
described, 167; tides in, 168; Indian 
villages near, xxiv; Jesuit mission 
near, xviii, 168; fertility of, 168. 

— Hamilton (Ganadoke, Ganaraske), 
321, 322; Iroquois hunting ground, 

3*3- 

— Hudson, origin of name, 311; de- 
scribed, 309, 314; climate, 314; dis- 
covery, 309-311; explorations, 244, 
310, 312; boundary, 302; natives, 
47> 30 g > 309> 312, 342, 734; French 
posts, 313; English posts, 312, 313, 
316; French and English struggle 
for, 69, 217, 236, 244, 312-314; 
fur-trade, 244, 31 1-3 14. 

— Irondequoit, location, 125. 

— James, French expelled from, 314. 

— Missisaguas. See Georgian Bay. 



754 



Index 



BAY 

Bay Mortier, in Placentia Bay, 3385 
origin of name, 338. 

— Noquet, 317. 

— Notre Dame (Newfoundland), 333. 

— de TOurs qui Dort (Sleeping Bears). 
See Grand Traverse Bay. 

— Papinachois, location, 261. 

— Passamaquoddy, settlement, 324, 

33*- 

— Placentia, location, 334; harbor of 
refuge, 335, 336; town on, 3355 
si ze > 3 35 5 harbor, 338. 

— Quiberon, French harbor, 294. 

— Quinte, mission at, 705 portage to, 
318. 

— Saginaw, size, 3185 islands, 143,318, 
3195 navigation, 318, 319; beaver 
hunting grounds, 48 1; Lahontan 
crosses, 143. 

— St. Lawrence, in Placentia Bay, 338; 
ship-building at, 338. 

— Savage, discovered by Anschild, 310. 

— Seven Islands, location, 261. 

— Thunder (Lake Huron), Lahontan 
passes, 143. 

— Toronto, size, 317; location, 317, 
3185 projected fort on, 273, 318. 
See also Georgian Bay. 

— Trepassey, location, 334. 

— White (Newfoundland), 308. 
Bayonne, port of departure for Canada, 

373; brandy exported from, 375; 
harbor, 6225 harbor improved by 
Lahontan, ix, xxi, 150; grant of, ix; 
bourgeois, ix$ money seized at, xxi, 
15 1 5 Lahontan at, 698. 

Beads, Venetian, in fur-trade, 378. 

Beans, raised by Indians, 1485 at Green 
Bay, 1 68 j on River Long, 187. 

Bearberry. See Sacacommis. 

Beam, engineering works at, xxi, 150$ 
justice of, 151; parlement at Pau, 
150, 707; French officer from, 328, 
3295 Lahontan a native of, ix; re- 
former-general, ix; governor, x; com- 
merce, 725; witchcraft, 696-710. 



BEA 

Bears, described, 115, 343, 346, 347; 
Polar, described, 344, 347, 348; 
hibernation, 115,484; hunted, 114, 
115, 346, 482-484; used for food, 
115, 169,482; near Fort St. Joseph, 
484; price of skins, 380; Norwegian 
trade in skins, 681; not enemies of 
beaver, 480. 

Beaucourt, Josue Dubois de Berthelot, 
sieur de, aids in fortifying Quebec, 
265; commands party against Iro- 
quois, 266; sketch, 266. 

Beaujeu, — , commander of La Salle's 
vessel, 335. 

Beau port. See Juchereau. 

Beaupre, origin of name, 32; location, 
xii; habitants of, xii; Lahontan at, 
xii, 34-38; sketch, 34. 

Beauvais, — , commandant at Fort St. 
Joseph, xviii. 

Beauvilliers, Paul, duke of, French 
courtier, sketch, 227. 

Beaver-eater. See Carcajou. 

Beavers, described, 171-173; nearly 
extinct, 481, 483; habitat, 319, 
326, 344, 481; homes of, 170, 171, 
477, 479, 480; different kinds, 343, 
345, 346; amphibious, 170, 476; 
land-beavers, 170, 171, 482, 484, 
485; habits, 171-173, 479, 480; 
food, 371, 480, 482; sagacity, 8, 
172, 476-478; make dams, 478, 
479; sentinels, 477, 478, 480; tree- 
felling, 477, 480; domesticated, 
170, 171; enemies, 480, 485; de- 
fenses, 480; parasites, 171; hunted, 
82, 143, 171, 172, 175, 319, 349, 
481-485, 507, 573-5755 bait *° r > 
171,482,483, 485; traps, 482-485; 
tail used for food, 169; flesh, 173; 
skins in commerce, 54,91, 122, 377, 
383, 591, 609; price, 54, 91, 101, 
x 73> 3795 compared with muskrats, 
1 10; variety of pelts, 379; method of 
preparing, 485; valued, 172, 280, 
398; farmers-general of, 38*. 



Index 



755 



BEC 

Bees de scie, species of duck, 352. 
Beech, in Canada, 364. 
Bees, in Canada, 352; sting, 357. 
Begon, Monsieur de, courtier of Louis 

XIV, 254. 
Belin, Lahontan at, 648. 
Belle Isle, French harbor, 294. 
Benedictines, in Viana, 621, 622. 
Beothics, aborigines of Newfoundland, 

334J hatred of whites, 334; sketch, 

334. 
Beray, — , sieur, Biscayan captain, 288. 
Bergeres, Raymond Blaise des, sieur de 

Kigauville, commandant at Niagara, 

162; seeks reinforcements, 162; 

sketch, 131. 
Berlin (Wis.), on Fox River, 178. 
Bernon, Samuel, chief merchant of Can- 
ada, 374. 
Berrien County (Mich), 208. 
Berthelot, Canadian family, 39. See also 

Beauport. 
Beschefer, Thierry, Jesuit missionary, 

starts for Canada, 2595 superior at 

Quebec, 259; sketch, 259. 
Biche, French name for elk, 103. 
Bienville, Jean Baptiste le Moyne, sieur 

de, founds Louisiana, 74. 
Biggar, H. P., Early Trading Companies 

of ' Ne<w France, 303. 
Big Mouth. See Grangula. 
Birch, of Canada, 3645 described, 370. 
Birch-bark, maps drawn on, 427; used 

for canoes, 63, 3705 paper, 8705 

baskets, 370. 
Bissot. See Jolliet, and Couillard. 
Blackbirds, in Canada, 350. 
Blueberries (bluets), in Canada, 365} 

described, 372; uses, 373; Indian 

food, 372. 
Boat, — , wounded at Placentia, 279. 
Boats, flat-bottomed, 85. See also 

Canoes. 
Bodin (Bodinus), Jean, Demonomanie 

des Sorciers, 704.. 
Bois, L. E., Isle d" Orleans 9 39. 



BRA 

" Bon," shipwrecked off Newfoundland, 
336. 

Bonaventure, Claude Denis, sieur de, 
announces Frontenac's restoration, 
2275 sketch, 227. 

Bonnecamps, Father Joseph Pierre de, 
descends St. Lawrence, 6$. 

Bonrepos. See Dusson. 

Bordeaux, port of departure for Canada, 
88, 373; wines exported from, 3755 
Lahontan at, 697. 

Bossuet, — , minister of state, 150. 

Boston, revolution in, 265; fort in har- 
bor, 2655 French prison' rs in, xxvi, 
239, 265, 330; receives information, 
265; capital of New England, 330; 
French inhabitants near, 330; unde- 
fended, 239; fleet at, 289; editions 
of Lahontan in Athenaeum, liii-xciiij 
in Public Library, liii-xciii. 

Boucher, Pierre, governor of Three 
Rivers, 98. 

— family, 98. 

Boucherville, Lahontan at, xiv, 96-1175 
review at, 103; La Forest, 1255 
sketch, 98. 

Bouillon, Cardinal de, Lahontan's pa- 
tron, 11. 

Bourbon regiment, Lahontan in, x. 

Bourke, John G., " Medicine Men of 
the Apache," 468. 

Bouteux, fishing nets, described, 401. 

Bouts de g£uie<vres f small fishing nets, 
402. 

Bragelonne, Claude, relative of La- 
hontan, xi. 

— family, relatives of Lahontan, xi, 

*53- 
Branchus, species of duck, described 

355; origin of name, 355. 
Brandy, imported to Canada, 373; 

price, 375; valuable in fur-trade, 

378, 568. 
Brazil, Portuguese colony, 282, 284; 

aborigines of, 2845 customs, 632; 

fleet, 624, 637. 



756 



Index 



BRE 

Brebeuf, Jean de, authority on Huron- 
Iroquois language, 733. 

Breccia, on Cape Breton, 333, 334. 

Bretons, early explorers and fishers, 307, 
308, 324. 

Brigantine, built for Frontenac, 239, 
241, 242} described, 402. 

Brinton, D. G., Myths of New World, 

435, 447, 448, 468, 47*> 5 l °- 

British Museum, editions of Lahontan 
in, liii-xciii. 

Brittany, Lahontan in, 264; harbor, 
294; fishers from, 324. See also 
Bretons. 

Brouillon, Jacques Francois de, governor 
of Placentia, xxix, 276, 287; de- 
fends Placentia against English, xxix, 
276-278; Lahontan presents himself 
to, 287, 288; commends Lahontan, 
279; dislikes Lahontan, xxxi, 12, 
287-289; attempts to prevent La- 
hontan' s escape, 294, 297; Lahontan 
accuses, xxxi, 289-294, 337, 338; 
accuses Lahontan at court, 293, 297; 
unpopular, xxxi, 292-294; extor- 
tionate, 288, 290, 337, 338; wife, 
291; letters, 288; sketch 287, 288. 

Brulots, in Canada, 352; described, 357, 

Bruyas, Father Jacques, Jesuit mission- 
ary, 56; superior, 56; aids in treaty 
of peace, 56; Indian grammar, 56; 
acts as interpeter, 84; sketch, 56. 

Bryce, George, Hudson's Bay Company, 

3 I2 > 3 J 4 

Buffalo (Wild Beet), 343; on Missis- 
sippi, 170, 203,- on River Long, 192, 
197; on Missouri, 202; on Lake 
Erie, 320; hunted, 193, 194, 203; 
hunted by puma, 345; used in man- 
ufactures, 194, 213, 214; used as 
food, 197. 

Bustards, Canadian resemble European, 
351; in Wisconsin, 174; manner of 
hunting, 109. 



CAN 

Button, Sir Thomas, early English navi- 
gator, 310, 311. 

Caddoan family, tribes of, 200. 

Cadillac, Antoine la Mothe, sieur de, 
founder of Detroit, xix, xlvi, 125, 
133; secures upper country, xlvi. 

California, Indian customs of, 473. 

Callieres-Bonnevue, Louis Hector, sieur 
de, governor of Montreal, 86, 88; 
governor of New France, 86, 129; 
on Denonville's expedition, 1 20; aids 
in defences of Quebec, 242; inter- 
cedes for English envoy, 246; sketch, 
86. 

Calumet, 58; described, 75, 76, 168, 
169, 402; origin of name, 402; In- 
dian name for, 402; uses, 75, 76, 
423, 424; token of peace, 75, 77, 80, 
81, 508, 509; sacred, 508; dance, 
83; significance of dance, 168, 169; 
Foxes dance, 175; limit of authority, 
189. 

Camanistigoyan. See Kaministiquia, 

Campbell, Henry C, " Radisson and 
Groseilliers," 312. 

Canada, governor of, 153; Library of 
Parliament (Ottawa), editions of La- 
hontan in, liii-xciii; Indian depart- 
ment Report, 55; Royal Society 
Proceedings, xviii, hi, 36, 37, 51, 98, 
145, 151, 312; Archives, xviii, 87, 
125, 519 See also New France. 

Canadian Journal, 154. 

Canal, Cornwall, 68. 

— Grenville, 217. 

— Lachine, 67. 

Canibas Indians, habitat, 327, 328; lan- 
guage, 339; allies of French, 328; 
characterized, 339. 

Canissec, Count, Danish envoy, 688. 

Canoes, how made, 63, 64; of birch- 
bark, 370; cedar, 63, 371; white 
wood, 372; skins, 106, 307, 4815 
gummed for water, 158; supports of, 



Index 



757 



CAN 

Canoes (continued). 

404, 406, 407 j shape, 65; size, 62, 
63; weight, 64; tonnage, 635 light 
draught, 63, 64; working of, 65, 665 
unsteady, 62, 63; price, 65; Iro- 
quois inferior, 138} used in war- 
parties, 501 ; not useful in discover- 
ies, 2iij travel in, 46, 62-65, 6y, 
value of cargoes, 54, 64. 

Cantabrian soldiers, defend Placentia, 
276. 

Capa y d'espada, term for councillors, 
402. 

Cape Diamond (Quebec), 2655 place of 
execution, 268. 

— Finisterre, Lahontan passes, 257, 
258, 295, 649, 650. 

— Forillon, off Gaspe, 306. 

— Hurd, off Georgian Bay, 154. 

— North, northern extremity of Eu- 
rope, 301. 

— Race, origin of name, 28} descried, 
29; coast near, 334; longitude, 302. 

— Ray, location, 30, 3335 passage 
choked with ice, 325} coast near, 334. 

— St. Francis. See Long Point. 

— St. Mary (Newfoundland), 275. 

— Tourmente, location, 32, 39, 261; 
origin of name, 32. 

— West, in Iceland, 301. 
Cap Rogo. See Cape Race. 
Caps, in fur-trade, 377. 

Carcajous, characterized, 344; hunted, 
in. 

Caribou, identified, 107; habitat, 316, 
344; manner of hunting, 1075 price 
of skins, 380. 

Carignan-Salieres, regiment de, in Can- 
ada, 35, 36, 52, 59; members perish 
with cold, 605 officers, 125, 328} 
disbanded, 3285 sketch, 36. 

Carolina, early explorations of coast, 
303; parrots in, 354. 

Carp, in Great Lakes, 3595 Mississippi, 
359; described, 362. 



CED 

Cascades, St. Lawrence rapids, portage 
of, 6j. 

Carter-Brown Library, editions of La- 
hontan in, liii-xciii. 

Cartier, Jacques, explores St. Lawrence, 
3 1 ? 3° 3; gives geographical names, 
3*> 39> 5 X > 26l > 3 2 4» second voy- 
age 67, 303; alludes to Niagara, 
1375 accounts of, 303; explorations, 
3035 sketch, 303; Voyages, 303. 

Cartography, xxxviii, 8-10, 28, 200, 
208, 376. 

Casson de Dollier, Frangois, Sulpitian 
superior, 55; chaplain in Mohawk 
campaign, 55; accompanies La Salle, 
555 historian of Montreal, 55. 

Castor canadensis, 345. 

Castor gras a" hi<ver. See Beaver skins. 

Cataracoui. See Fort Frontenac. 

Cataract du Trou, St. Lawrence rapid, 
6 7 . 

Catholic University Bulletin, 512. 

Catlin, George, explores quarries at 
Pipestone, 76. 

Catlinite, used for calumets, 76. 

Caton, John D., Antelope and Deer of 
North America, 103. 

Caudisona terguemina, 357. 

Caughnawaga, mission village at, 56. 

Cavelier, Abbe Jean, brother of La Salle, 
arrives at Mackinac, xxi, 1445 Sul- 
pitian, 145; sketch, 145. 

— Jean, nephew of La Salle, at Mack- 
inac, xxi, 1445 sketch, 145. 

Cayuga (Goyoguans) Indians, 77, 80; 
habitat, 58, 323, 341; language, 
341; fishing grounds, 155, 1565 
chief of, 2335 request missionaries, 
70; English should remove, 399. 

— County Historical Society, Collec- 
tions, 127, 131. 

Cedar, of Canada, 3655 described, 371; 

two species, 371; used for canoes, 

6 3> 37M odor of, 371. 
Cedars, rapids in Fox River, 174. 



758 



Index 



CEL 

Celoron, Jean Baptiste de Blainville, 

wife of, 391. 
Cenis Indians, mission to, 145. 
Central America, Indian customs of, 

473- 
Cervus alches, 1035 canadensis, 103; 

<virginianus, 107. 
Chalumeau. See Calumet. 
Chambly, Jacques de, Canadian officer, 

Chambly. See Fort Chambly. 

Champigny, Jean Bochart de, intendant 
of New France, 102, 120; advances 
to Fort Frontenac, 120, 1215 voyage 
to Montreal, 2395 Lahontan visits, 
220; sketch, 103. 

— Madam de, intercedes for Iroquois 
prisoners, 266, 267; mercy of, 269. 

Champlain, Samuel de, gives geograph- 
ical names, 32, 51, 66, 118, 3255 
builds Fort St. Louis, 40; controls 
liquor traffic, 94; hears of Niagara, 
137; visits Huron, 21 9 j founds 
Quebec, 303, 331; explores Bay of 
Fundy, 324, 3315 discovery cele- 
brated, 324; map, 3255 makes ene- 
mies of Iroquois, xv. 

Chaouanon, Indian slave, 156. 

Chapeau Rouge, location, 334, 338. 

Charles II (England), orders peace with 
Iroquois, 61, 795 subservient to 
France, 615 patronizes Radisson and 
Groseilliers, 313; sells part of New- 
foundland, 275. 

Charlevoix, Pierre Francois Xavier de, 
Jesuit historian, 42, 44, 149; de- 
scribes Nipissing, 342; exposes fallacy 
of River Long, xxxix; Histoire de 
Nouvelle France, 149, 217, 2795 
Journal Historique, xxxix, 42. 

Chateaubriand, Francois Auguste, vi- 
comte de, French romanticist, x-lviii. 

Chauanon Indians. See Shawnee In- 
dians. 

Chequamegon, French post on, 315. 



COD 

Cherries, of Canada, 364, 365; de- 
scribed, 366, 367. 
Chestnuts, of Canada, 364; on Lake 
Erie, 319; in Seneca country, 1315 
in Illinois, 367. 

Chevaliers, species of water-fowl, 351. 

Chicago (Chekakou), Indians at, 340; 
Lahontan, 2075 site described, 2075 
portage, xxiv, 2075 canal, 207. 

Chicoutimi County (Quebec), 260. 

China, passage to, sought, 309. 

Chipmunk, described, 348. 

Chippewa (Salteur) Indians, French 
name for, 149, 340; habitat, 149, 
J 5 2 > 49 3 j physical characteristics, 
4155 brave, 159, 160; courtship and 
marriage among, 45 7 j war customs, 
502-509; secret society among, 468; 
totems, 511; calendar, 427, 428; 
with Iroquois, xxii, 149, 153-161; 
capture Iroquois, 159; rescue slaves, 
160; at Fort St. Joseph, 161 j warn 
Foxes of Iroquois raid, 489, 493; 
war with Foxes, 489, 494; charac- 
terized, 340. 

Chonkasketons (Sonkaskiton) Indians, 
Siouan tribe, 343; significance of 
name, 343; habitat, 342; language, 
343- 

Christianity, discussion of, 517-550. 

Christy, Miller, Voyages of Captain Luke 
Foxe and Captain Thomas James, 
310. 

Citrons. See Mandrake. 

Citrouille, in Canada, 364; described, 
369; Indian food, 148, 369. 

Clarke, John M., "Perce: a brief sketch 
of its geology," 305. 

Coal, exported from Canada, 374. 

Cockles, in Canada, 359, 361. 

Cod, in Canada, 358; export, 374; 
demand for, 394; method of drying, 
336. 

Cod fishery, off Newfoundland, 27, 290, 
305> 308, 332, 333, 336, 337; off 



Index 



759 



COD 

Cod fishery {continued). 

Gaspe, 305, 306; near St. Law- 
rence, 3065 off Acadia, 324, 326; 
Tadoussac, 31; time for, 3375 bait, 
337, 3 6 °> 36 1 ; value, 338. 

Colbert, Jean Baptiste, French minister, 
118. 

Colin, — , Indian interpreter, accom- 
panies d'Aux, 238. 

Collars. See Wampum. 

Collection des Manuscrits relatifs a la 
Nowvelle France ', 26, 124, 257. 

Comitatus, among Indians, 500. 

Commerce, 2355 merchants at Mon- 
treal, 53, 96, 97; profits of, 54, 375- 
3775 exchange with France, 101, 
3765 general view^ 373-378; few 
exports, 373, 374; with French West 
Indies, 374; season for, 375; inter- 
nal, 376; reform needed, 391, 392; 
customs tariff, 373. See also fur- 
trade. 

Compagnie des Indes Occidentales, 91. 

Company of Domain, 91. 

— of Merchants of London, discoverers 
of North-West Passage, 312. 

— of One Hundred Associates, xi, 34, 
253. 

— of New France, 41, 303; founded 
at Rouen, 303. 

Compass, variation of, 403. 
Conestoga Indians, Huron - Iroquois 

tribe, habitat, 321. 
Conges. See Licenses for fur-trade. 
Connecticut, Indians of, 90; troops to 

invade Canada, 240. 
Conurus carolinensis, 354. 
Cook, Samuel F., Drummond Island, 

153. 

Coots, Canadian resemble European, 

35°- 
Copper, used by Indians, 195; found on 

Lake Superior, 316; purity of ore, 

316. 
Coregonus clupeiformus, 147. 



cou 

Corlaer, Indian title for governor of 
New York, 82, 84, 2365 origin of 
term, 82. 

Corlear. See Schenectady. 

Cormaillon, — de, French officer in 
Danish army, 674. 

Cormorants, in Canada, 351. 

Costabelle, sieur Pastour de, governor 
of Placentia, 276; of Cape Breton, 
276; envoy to English, 276, 277; 
sketch, 276. 

Cotes of Canada, described, 34, 35. 

Coues, Elliott, Early History of North- 
west, 474; identifies River Long, xl. 

Couillard, Marie, mother-in-law of 
Jolliet, captured by English, 243, 
244; effects exchange of prisoners, 
244, 249; sketch, 244. 

Courbeious (bird), in Canada, 351. 

Courcelles, Daniel de Remy, sieur de, 
war with Mohawk, 59; recommends 
site of Fort Frontenac, 69; sketch, 

59- 

Coureurs de bois, 48, 430; term de- 
fined, 403; bravery of, 237; relia- 
bility, 477; thievery, 100, 537; por- 
digality, 54; in fur-trade, xviii, 54, 
92, 99, 140, 153, 164, 168, 207, 
315, 430; extent of ranging, 304; 
restricted, 99, 399; on Great Lakes, 
125; Lake Superior, 315; Mackinac, 
136; Maine, 236, 237; New York, 
236; Sault Ste. Marie, 488, 489; 
Illinois, 207 ; commandants, 1 64, 1 65, 
209, 217; protected by Perrot, 53; 
under Duluth, 73; enemies of En- 
glish, 125-128, 209, 216, 247; gar- 
rison Fort St. Joseph, 139; repair 
Fort Frontenac, 232, 233; aid La- 
hontan, 141; captured by Iroquois, 
270; robbed by Iroquois, 77. 

Couttes (Ecouttes), Abbe de, uncle of 
Lahontan, xxvi, 253, 254. 

— Jeanne Franchise le Fascheux de, 
Lahontan' s mother, x. 



760 



Index 



cow 



, English naval officer, 
Exploration of 



Cowper, Capt. 

650. 
Coyne, James H., ' 

Great Lakes," 484. 
Crabs, in Canada, 359. 
Cranes, in Canada, 350. 
Cree Indians. See Cristinaux Indians. 
Creek Cattaraugus, portage route, 155. 

— Chautauqua, portage route, 155. 

— Irondequoit, rendezvous for expedi- 
tion, 125-1275 fort at, 127. 

— Mill (Pa.), identified, 155. 

— Wood, rendezvous for troops, 240. 
Crenger, — , ship commander, 648. 
Creoles, defined, 402. 

Cristinaux (Clistino, Cree, Killistinoe) 
Indians, Algonquian tribe, 3435 
habitat, 309, 342; physical traits, 
415; language, 342, 3435 defeat 
Eskimo, 308, 309} conduct French 
to Hudson Bay, 3125 associated 
with Assiniboin, 3435 present num- 
bers, 3095 sketch, 309. 

Croche, rapids in Fox River, 174. 

Crocodiles, described, 346, 3475 habitat, 
343, 346; capture of, 346; man- 
eaters, 3465 Arkansa kill, 204. 

Cucurbita polymorpha, 148. 

Cungars, in Canada, 358. 

Cutlasses, in fur-trade, 378. 

Cuyler, — , early Dutch trader, 82. 



Dabs (fish), described, 3625 in Missis- 
sippi River, 178, 3595 in Great 
Lakes, 362. 

Dakota Indians. See Sioux Indians. 

D'Amblemont, — , commands rein- 
forcements, 119. 

Danes, discover Labrador, 3075 reputed 
discoveries, 309, 310. 

Danoncaritaoui, Seneca village, 1 3 1 

Davis, John, early English navigator, 310 

— , Sylvanus, narrates fall of Fort Loyal, 
*37» 



DEN 

DeCosta, Benjamin F., Sailing Direc- 
tions of Henry Hudson, 309. 

Deer, described, 348, 3495 hunted in 
Denmark, 669; Newfoundland, 3325 
Canada, 343, 3445 near Lake Cham- 
plain, xiv, 108, 109; Lake Huron, 
3175 Lake Erie, 320, 322; Lake 
Michigan, 2105 Wisconsin, 174, 
1755 Illinois, 206 j River Long, 183, 
1875 manner of hunting, 107, 113, 
114; used as food, 70, 114, 122, 
467, 468, 4825 skins, 193, 213, 
4915 price, 380. 

Dekanissore. See Teganisoreu. 

Denis, — , captured by Iroquois, 224. 

Denmark, character of people, 669-672; 
government, 673; court, 667, 668, 
675, 6765 royal tombs, 685; society, 

672, 673 j cost of living, 68 ij army, 

673, 6 74 j pay of officers, 674, 681; 
navy, 679-682; laws, 675; mone- 
tary system, 682, 683; measures, 
683; wines, 671; beer, 671; drunk- 
enness, 671, 672; diseases, 676-678; 
horses, 684; export articles, 681; 
exact ship toll, 679, 680; depend- 
encies, 664; explorers, 309, 310; 
Lahontan in, xxxiii, Ixi, 9, 664-683. 

— king of, 3, 4; character, 667; hunter, 
669; marksman, 669; linguist, 667; 
royal residences, 666, 668, 684; nat- 
ural children, 676; revenues, 673, 
674; retinue, 684; Lahontan meets, 
679 

Denonville, Jacques Rene deBrisay, mar- 
quis de, governor of New France, 
97; destroys Fort Frontenac, 69, 
209, 225, 226, 271; fortifies Mon- 
treal, 98; reinforced from upper 
lakes, xviii, 73, 125, 126; arranges 
a review, 103; expedition against 
Indians, xv, 11 8-1 34; relations with 
intendant, 103; retains Lahontan, 
xvi, 118, 121; sends him to upper 
country, xvii, 132, 133, 151; visited 



Index 



761 



DEN 

Denonville {continued). 

by Lahontan, 219, 2205 plans de- 
fense of upper lakes, xviii, 139; sends 
messenger to Mackinac, 144, 208; 
orders Lahontan to Quebec, xxii, 1645 
Lachine massacre, 224-226 ; La 
Tourette reports to, 136; promises 
reinforcements, 141 $ commissions 
officers, 164; arranges peace, xxii, 
157, 162, 163, 208, 209, 221, 2235 
relations with Adario,2o8, 209, 220- 
223; serves on expedition, 2375 re- 
called to France, xxv, 227, 228, 2345 
last interview with Frontenac, 2355 
sketch, 97, 98. 

— Marchioness de, 97, 98, 234; fears 
Iroquois, 224. 

De Pere (Wis), mission near, 168$ 
rapids, 174. 

Desnots (Hainault), — , French officer, 
S6, 87, 91,98. 

Des Ormeaux, Daulac (Dollard), de- 
fends Long Sault, 217. 

Detroit, founded, xixj country described, 
1 39 j fruit near, 139; animals, 139; 
Indians, 155; projected post, 125, 

i33> *73- 

Devonshire, William Cavendish, duke 
of, dedication to, 3; patron of La- 
hontan, xxxiv; sketch, 3. 

Didelphys virginiana, 347. 

Dieppe, port of departure for Canada, 
373; birthplace of Longueuil, 74. 

Digby (N. S.), described, 3315 Gut, out- 
let of Port Royal basin, 331. 

Dionne, — , curator of Laval Univer- 
sity, identifies fauna, no, in. 

— Narcisse E , bibliography of Lahon- 
tan, Hi, liiij «• Chouartet Radisson," 
312; Jacques Carrier, 303; Quebec 
under Thjjo Flags, 41. 

Do, Chevalier. See d'Aux. 

Dogs, used in hunting, 105, in, 114, 

349; for drawing sledges, 406; as 

carriers, 45. 



DUL 

Dollard. See Des Ormeaux. 

Dongan, Thomas, governor of New 
York, 61, 126, 157; plans to con- 
trol fur-trade, 61, 126; complains of 
Fort Niagara, 131; sketch, 61. 

D'Opede, — , Portuguese ambassador, 
628. 

Dorman, Rushton M., Origin of Primi- 
tive Superstitions among Aborigines 
of America, 435, 450. 

Dorsey, James Owen, " Migrations of 
Siouan Tribes," 200, 2045 "Omaha 
Sociology," 499, 509. 

D'Orveilliers, Francois Chorel, sieur de, 
dit St. Romain, commands rear- 
guard, 127; sketch, 127. 

Douay, Father Anastase, La Salle's 
chaplain, at Mackinac, 144, 1455 
founds mission to Cenis Indians, 1455 
sketch, 145; Memoir, 145. 

Doughty, Arthur G., Quebec under 
Two Flags, 41. 

Doves. See Pigeons. 

Druillettes, Gabriel, Jesuit missionary, 

3*9> 33°- 

Drummond, Sir Gordon, governor of 
Canada, 153. 

Duchesneau, Jacques, sieur de la Dous- 
siniere, intendant of New France, 
228; favors Jesuits, 228, 381; op- 
poses Frontenac, 228, 381; recalled, 
2285 sketch, 228. 

Ducks, Canadian resemble European, 
350; described, 3555 color, 350, 
355; varieties, 351, 352, 354; on 
River Long, 183, 187; manner of 
hunting, 109; used for food, 431. 

Du Creux, Francois. Historic Cana- 
densis seu No<v<e Francia, 412. 

Duelling, in Hamburg, 660. 

Dugmore, Arthur R., "The Outlaw; 
a character study of a Beaver," 477. 

Du Luth (Du l'Hut, Du Lhut, Duluih), 
Daniel Greysolon, familiar with con- 
tinental interior, xxxix, xl, 315; re- 



762 



Index 



DUL 

Du Luth {continued). 

inforcements for La Barre, 72, 735 
aids Denonville, 73, 209; captures 
English traders, 126; posts on Lake 
Superior, 315, 316; among Sioux, 
73 j Lahontan with, xviii, 133, 140, 
216} D'Aillcboust with, 233; builds 
fort, xviii, 136, 139; at Fort St. 
Joseph, xx, 139$ with war party, 
2095 his uncle, 1365 his brother, 
135, 1365 sketch, 73. 

Dumeni, — , French officer in Danish 
army, 674. 

Durantaye, Olivier Morel de la, br'ngs 
aid to Denonville, xviii, 1255 cap- 
tures English traders, 1255 com- 
mandant at Mackinac, 144, 164, 
209 j commander of coureurs de 
bois, 164; takes possession of upper 
country, xviii; sketch, 125. 

Du Rivau Huet, — , French officer, 86, 
87, 92, 98. 

Dusson, Francois, sieur de Bonrepaux, 
ambassador to Denmark, Lahontan 
meets, xxxiii, 665, 666, 671, 6855 at 
Coldinck, 684; Glucstat, 68 8; letter 
to Pontchartrain, 688, 694 ; sketch, 
665. 

Du Tas (Tartre), — , Canadian officer, 
68, 69, 260. 

Dutch, explorations, 3095 in New York, 
6, 7j name for Indians, 320. 



Eagles, described, 353, 354; in Can- 
ada, 350. 

Ecclesiastics, condemn Lahontan, 10; 
Lahontan dislikes, xv, 41, 985 inter- 
fere in private affairs, xv, 88-90, 383, 
384, 391; control Canadian govern- 
ment, 381, 382, 385; confidence in, 
383. See also New France. 

Ecouttes. See Couttes. 

Ectopistes migratoria, no. 

Edits et OrdonnanceSy 384. 



ENG 

Edwards, Jonathan, writings of, 734. 

Eels, in Canada, 3585 River St. Law- 
rence, 40 1 j Great Lakes, 359; man- 
ner of catching, 49, 50, 401. 

Elephant, Knights of the Order of, 675, 
676, 679. 

Eliot, John, writings of, 734. 

Elks (Originals), described, 104, 105; 
identified, 103; on St. Lawrence 
islands, 31; Lake Superior, 316; 
Lahontan hunts, xiv, 103; manner of 
hunting, 103-107, 112,^349, 476; 
skins, 106, 21 3 j Norwegian trade in 
skins, 681 j price of skins, 3805 used 
as food, 468. 

Elms, Canadian resemble European, 364; 
on Lake Erie, 319; bark used for 
building, 418; for canoes, 319. 

Embroideries, Canadian imports of, 

375- 

Encyclopedists, relations with Lahon- 
tan, xlvii. 

England, rulers of, 3 ; in War of Span- 
ish Succession, 5; liberty in, 125 de- 
feated in West Indies, 265 claims 
Great Lakes country, 127; visited by 
Lahontan, xxxiv, lxi. 

English, in fur-trade, xviii, 78, 81, 82, 
98, 125, 126, 281, 311-314, 326, 
395, 398-400; furnish cheap goods, 
98, 99, 281, 326, 394, 396; fleet 
invades Canada, 31; capture Quebec 
(1628), 44, (1759), 4 2 5 capture Port 
Royal, 244, 326, 3 30 j to acquire 
Acadia, 326; revolution of 1688, 3, 
217, 21 8 j attempted capture of Can- 
ada (i69o),xxvi, 240, 242-250; cap- 
ture Fort Frontenac (1758), 69; 
capture Fort Niagara (1759), 131; 
imprison St. Vallier, 165; in Hudson 
Bay, 217, 236, 244, 31 1-314; allied 
with Iroquois, 58, 59, 237, 238; set- 
tlements in Newfoundland, 332; at- 
tack on Placentia, xxix, 275-279, 
281, 287-289, 292; capture Perrot, 



Index 



763 



ENG 

English (continued). 

53 j alliance with France, 218; sea- 
fight, 259, 260$ raid into Canada, 
262,- attack St. John, 325; brave but 
ill-disciplined, 247, 2485 colonists 
characterized, 3995 privateers, 650, 
651; in Maine, 2365 colonial bound- 
aries, 301, 302; explorations for 
Northwest Passage, 310. 

Enjalran, Father Jean, wounded in Den- 
onvihVs expedition, 129; at Dur- 
antaye's prise - de - possession, xviii; 
missionary at Mackinac, xviii; supe- 
rior for upper country, xviiij sketch, 
129. 

Eokoros, xxxix, xlii; country of, 1763 
language, 1855 numbers, 180, 1825 
characteristics, 182, 189; houses, 
1 82; government, 1825 enemies, 181 ; 
Lahontan among, xxiv, 180-182. 

Erasmus, translated by Gueudeville, xlv; 
house at Rotterdam, 652. 

Erie Indians, habitat, 320. 

Errieronon Indians, language of, 733. 

Eskimo, described, 306, 3075 habitat, 
306, 309; numbers, 3085 language, 
3425 treacherous, 308; cowardly, 
308; boats, 307, 308; incursions by, 
3055 pursued by Cristinaux, 308, 
309 j cross to Newfoundland, 309, 

3 34- 

Esleich, barony of, x. 

Espadon. See Sword-fish. 

Essanape Indians, habitat, 181, 184- 
186} numbers, 184; language, 747; 
capital of, 186, 188; cacique, 186- 
189; superstitions, xxxix, xlii, 1895 
government, 1865 allies, 1875 ene- 
mies, 181, 182, 1875 boats, 187, 
1 88 j houses, 188; unused to fire- 
arms, 1885 Lahontan with, xxiv, 
182-189, 197; presents to, 187. 

Estrees, Abbe d\ Portuguese ambas- 
sador, Lahontan with, 628, 7135 be- 
friends French, 643. 



FOR 

Etechemin (Quoddy) Indians, charac- 
terized, 3 39} habitat, 339, 3405 lan- 
guage* 3395 nomads, 339. 

Explorations, early French, 303, 3045 
qualities needed in explorers, 210- 
215; methods of management, 210— 
21 5 j equipment needful, 213, 214. 
See also the several explorers. 



Fallen Timbers, battle of, 461. 

Fasting, among Jesuits, 534, 538. 

Feli s concolor, 345. 

Fenelon, Francois de Salignac, Jansenist 
writer, 1 1 . 

Fer, Nicolas de, cartographer, 8. 

Ferland, J. B. A., Cours cT Histoire du 
Canada^ 304. 

Ferns, maiden-hair, 3 65; described, 372; 
syrup made from, 372. 

Ferrets, in Canada, 343. 

Fiber zibet/iicus, 1 1 1 . 

Fir, of Canada, 3655 described, 3715 
timber made from, 371 ; in Wiscon- 
sin, 1775 on River Long, 180. 

Fish, as food, 70, 122, 431; in Great 
Lakes, xix, 359; River Long, 1795 
gold-colored in St. Lawrence, 358, 
361 } armed fish in Great Lakes, 359, 
362$ enemies, 362. 

Fish-hooks, in fur-trade, 377. 

Fishing, methods at Mackinac, 147, 148. 

Flint stones, in fur-trade, 377. 

Florida, parrots in, 354. 

Flying-squirrels, described, 348; in Can- 
ada, 344. 

Folles-Avoine. See Wild Rice. 

Folles-Avoines Indians. See Menom- 
inee Indians. 

Forest, Fran<jois Dauphine, sieur de la, 
La Salle's lieutenant, 124; brings 
message to Denonville, 124, 1255 
granted Fort St. Louis, xviii, 125, 
133; at Detroit, xviii, 125$ rebuilds 
Fort Miami, 208} sketch, 125. 



764 



Index 



FOR 
Fort Abittibi, location, 342. 

— Albany (Ste. Anne), Iberville cap- 
tures, 217; messengers from, 217. 

— Bougio, on River Taio, 649. 

— Bourbon, Radisson builds, 313; cap- 
tured for English, 313. 

— Chambly, location, 52; described, 
90, 915 fear of attack on, 2625 La- 
hontan at, xiii, 90, 91 j trade, 90, 91. 

— Charles, Hudson Bay, 313. 

— Crevecceur, destroyed, 207, 208 j 
sketch, 207. 

— Frontenac, 79, 323; description and 
sketch, 69; built, 61, 69, 705 im- 
portance of, 226, 271; La Barre at, 
xiii, 695 fur-trade of, 75, 83; de- 
stroyed, 69, 209, 226, 233, 395; 
restored, 68, 69, 233; untenable, 69, 
225, 226, 27 1 j captured by English, 
69$ vessels near, 395; commandant 
at, 73, 125, 127, 162; rendezvous 
for Denonville's expedition, xvi, 
11 9- 121, 126$ Lahontan at, xiii, 
57, 68-72, 6775 peace conference at, 
61, 69, 83; reinforcement sought, 
134, 1625 garrison supplied by In- 
dians, 122} scurvy at, 162; suicide, 
3685 messengerto, 226} raid towards, 
266} visited by Adario, 220. 

— Gratiot (Mich.), French fort on site 
of, 139. 

— Kennebec. See Fort Loyal. 

— LaTourette, on Lake Nipigon, 136. 

— Loyal (Kennebec, Maine), location, 
236; French attack on, 236; English 
narrative of capture, 23 7 j surrender, 
237; flag of, at Quebec, 237. 

— Mackinac, Indians near, 73. See 
also Mackinac. 

— Miami, built by La Salle, 208; de- 
stroyed, 208; rebuilt, 208. 

— Nelson, attacked, 3135 sketch, 313. 

— Niagara, 323; built by Denonville, 
xvi, 131; importance of, 131, 226, 
271 j Lahontan at, xix, 135, 677 j 



FOU 

Fort Niagara {continued). 

besieged by Iroquois, 141, 142; 
commandants of, 131; Miamis 
at, 1 6 1 — 1 63 j sickness, xxii, 162; 
pleases Indian allies, 132; aban- 
doned, xxii, 162, 163, 226, 271; 
history, 131. 

— Pemaquid. See Pemaquid. 

— Pentagoet, location, 328. 

— Remy, besieged by Iroquois, 224. 

— Rolland, besieged by Iroquois, 2245 
Lahontan protects, 2405 sketch, 240. 

— Ste. Anne. See Albany. 

— St. Joseph, site, xviii, 1 39, 208, 3 1 8, 
320; built, xviii, 1395 described, 
xviii, xxxvii, 139, 1405 commanded 
by Beauvais, xviii; surrendered to 
Lahontan, xx, 139, 140; Lahontan 
winters at, xx, 140-143, 149, 484; 
Lahontan leaves, xx, 1435 aban- 
doned, xxii, xxiii, xli, 152, 163; re- 
victualed, xxii, 155; Lahontan re- 
turns, xxii, 161 j restored, 272, 273; 
Indians near, 418, 484; bears, 484. 

— St. Julien, Lisbon fortification, 640. 

— St. Louis (111.), site, 2075 Tonty 
commands, 125, 1 33, 207; La Forest 
commands, xviii, 125. 

— St. Louis (Newfoundland), 275; loca- 
tion, 275, 335 j poorly garrisoned, 
275; bombarded, 278 j Lahontan flees 
to, 348. 

— St. Louis (Quebec), described, 40, 
4ij governor's residence, 235, 382; 
repaired by Frontenac, 235. 

— Sorel. See Sorel. 

— Suppose, projected forts, 272, 318, 

— William, site of, 316. 

Forts, projected by Lahontan, 272, 273, 
280J early French, xxxix; barriers 
against Iroquois, 52; near mouth of 
Ohio (1702), 144. 

Foutereaux, described, no, 344; iden- 
tified, in. 



Index 



765 



FOX 

Fox (Outagami, Renard) Indians, char- 
acterized, 341 j habitat, 34, 168, 
175^478; language, 176, 177, 341J 
physical traits, 4155 calendar of, 427$ 
totems, 51 1 $ village, 175, 177; re- 
lations with Sioux, 175, 1 76 j war 
with Iroquois, 489-494, 502 $ rela- 
tions with Chippewa, 489, 493, 494} 
relations with French, xlvi, 99, 
175, 176; with Eokoros, 176} with 
Sauk, 175; Lahontan among, xxiv, 
xli, 175, 176, 179-207, 4485 return 
to Wisconsin, 207. 

Fox-Wisconsin fur-trade route, nearest 
to Mississippi, 168, 178; portage, 
described, 177, 178; Lahontan at, 
177; canal at, xxiv, 1775 history, 
177, 178. 

Foxes, habitat, 347$ described, 343, 
347; color, 343, 344, 347} value of 
skins,^ 347, 376, 379; Norwegian 
trade in skins, 681 j traps for, 482- 
484; do not attack beaver, 480. 

Franciscans. See Recollects. 

Franquelin, J. B., cartographer, 41. 

Frederick IV of Denmark, Lahontan" s 
patron, 3, 4. 

France, ministers, 55 diplomats, 12; 
West Indian colonies, 26 j carpenters, 
658; alliance with Spain, 5; at war 
with Spain, 1915 English alliance, 
217, 218; refugees in Denmark, 66S $ 
in Holland, 655. 

French, laws compared with savage 
polity, 551-570$ religious and social 
customs compared with savage, 517- 
550; language spoken in Denmark, 
669; diseases, 593-605$ witchcraft 
among, 562-564, 566$ drunkenness, 
566} immorality, 536-538, 540- 
546, 566, 567; first settlement in 
Canada, 331; Newfoundland, 333, 
334$ possessions in America, 334$ 
take possession of Northwest, 342. 

Frogs, in Canada, 352, 357. 



FUR 

Frontenac, Louis Baude, count dc, ar- 
rival at Quebec, 230, 23 ij replaces 
Courcelle, 59, 60, 69; superseded 
by La Barre, xi, 26, 33, 381$ rela- 
tions with intendant, 103; restored 
to governorship, xxv, 227, 2285 op- 
posed by Duchesneau, 228, 381; by 
Jesuits, 227, 381$ favors Recollects, 
43, 44>7°> 4*35 during Phips's 
raid, xxvi, 237-247$ relations with 
Iroquois, xxv, 59-61, 69, 73, 86, 
124, 232-234, 266, 267$ favors La 
Salle, 33, 69$ quarrels with Perrot, 
53$ praises Valrennes, 226$ builds 
Chateau St. Louis, 41, 235$ builds 
Fort Frontenac, 69, 70, 232$ forti- 
fies Quebec, 263, 265$ warmly wel- 
comed, xxv, 228, 230, 231; relations 
with Lahontan, xxv-xxix, xlv, xlvi, 
230, 232, 237, 250, 252, 256, 257, 
262, 271, 272, 274, 280, 388-390; 
promotes discovery, 60$ esteemed by 
Indians, xxv, 228; power of appoint- 
ment, 257$ hospitality, xxvii, 262$ 
courtesy to English prisoners, xxviii, 
265; controls sovereign council, 44, 
45; issues trading licenses, 99; rela- 
tions to liquor traffic, 94$ visits Mon- 
treal, 23 1 $ relation to Adario, lxi, 9, 
149$ to Teganisoren, 222$ to Oure- 
ahe, 233, 234$ interview with Denon- 
ville, 234; services to New France, 
xxxvii, 60; sketch, 60. 

— Countess de, 267. 

Fruit trees, in Acadia, 325$ on Lake 
Erie, 319, 322$ on Lake St. Clair, 
xx$ in Illinois, 206. 

Furs, chief article of export, 374$ me- 
dium of exchange, 376$ names and 
prices, 379, 380. 

Fur-trade, importance to Indians, 507; 
harmful to them, 577$ important to 
Canada, 99, 280, 394; licenses for, 
99-101, 384, 386; goods used in, 
3 o8 > 377> 37 8 i English goods cheap, 



766 



Index 



FUR 

Fur-trade (continued) 

59, 98, 281, 326, 394; Indians pay 
large prices, 595 prices of furs, 379, 
380; cheating, 421, 4225 illegal, 91; 
monopoly, 9$ rivalry, 61, 326, 394; 
profits, 100, 1 01, 3 76 j French offi- 
cials in, 53, 54, 102, 3265 Jesuits, 
385, 386; English, 59, 61, 78, 82, 
90,91, 98, 125, 126, 131, 281, 316} 
coureurs de bois, 77, 92, 146, 153, 
164, 168, 207, 3955 in Acadia, 326, 
331; Anticosti, 3055 off Labrador, 
307-309; Tadoussac, xxxvii, 31; 
Chambly, 90, 91$ at Montreal, 
92-95, 240; with Lake Indians, 
xviii, 53> 54, 60, 153, 377; Green 
Bay, 168; Lake Superior, 315, 316; 
Illinois, 207 j in war-time, 241 j in 
Norway, 681; Iroquois wish to 
control, 26, 59, 78; promoted by 
Frontenac, 60 ; forts to control, 131. 

Fusees, in fur-trade, 377. 



Gagnon, Ernest, " Louis Jolliet," 244; 
Le Fort et le Chateau St. Louis, 41. 

— Phileas, Essai de Bibliographie Cana- 
dienne, Hi. 

Galette, location, 86. 

Game, in Newfoundland, 3325 wild 
fowl numerous in Canada, 109, no; 
wood fowl used as food, 482. See 
also the several birds and animals. 

Ganeausse, location, 122; Indian village, 
121; Cayuga mission, 70. 

Ganondaoe,Indian word for calumet,402. 

Gaspe, significance of term, 306; island 
near, 305; fisheries off, 305, 306; 
vessel from, 259; present conditions, 
306; native of, 340. 

Gasperots, small fish, 358; described, 
360; used as bait, 360. 

Gaspesian Indians, language, 339; num- 
bers, 340; characteristics, 340; fur- 
trade with, 306; sketch, 340. 



GRE 
Geese, in Canada, 350, 351; color, 350, 

351; manner of hunting, 109; used 

for food, 431; on River Long, 183, 

186. 
George I of England, protector of 

Lahontan, xxxiii, xxxiv. 
George II of England, lake named for, 

9 1 - 

Girouard, Desire, Lake St. Louis, 224, 
240. 

Gnacsitare Indians, habitat, 187, 192, 
193; language, 747; characteristics, 
187, 191, 195; hospitality, 192; ig- 
norant of calumet, 189; manner of 
hunting, 193; power of chief, 191, 
192, 197; allies of Essanapes, 187; 
enemies, 187, 194; dread Spaniards, 
190, 191; Lahontan among, xxiv, 
xxxix, 190—195. 

Gnats, in Canada, 352. 

Gomara, Francois Lopez de, Histoire 
Generalle des I71d.es Occidentalis et 
Terres newves, 307. 

" Good," vessel. See "Bon." 

Gooseberries, described, 372; in Canada, 
3 6 4> 365, 369; useless, 369, 372; 
vinegar made from, 372. 

Goyogoan Indians. See Cayuga Indians. 

Grand Chute, rapids in Fox River, 174. 

— Portage, location, 316. 

Grandville, — , captured by English, 

243- 

Grangula, Iroquois chief, 7; embassador 
to La Barre, 74, 75; speeches of, 79- 
84; dances, 84, 85; sketch, 74. 

Grant, — , on courtship and marriage, 

457- 
Grape-vines, described, 368; in Canada, 

364; fruit, 368; on Lake Erie, 319; 

in Illinois, 206. 
Grave, la grand, at Placentia, 336. 
" Great Lake," Indian term for Europe, 

533- 
Great Lakes, Indians upon, 26, 60; dis- 
coveries of, 60, 484; navigation, 64; 



Index 



767 



GRE 
Great Lakes {continued). 

fur-trade, 70; fish, 359, 361-3635 
claimed by French, 7 8 ; forts to guard, 
2735 Iroquois bar French from, 218. 
See also the several lakes. 

— Mohawk, Iroquois chief, 239. 
Green Bay (La Baie), mission at, 168. 
Greenland, birds migrate from, 356. 
Gregory. See MacGregory. 
Grelans, in Canada, 351; described, 355. 
Grelins episses, term explained, 260. 
Grenada, French colony at, 52. 
Groseilliers, Medard Chouart de, in 

Wisconsin, 1775 visits Hudson Bay, 
3125 on Lake Superior, 312, 3155 
proposals rejected by French, 313; 
erects Hudson Bay post, 313; sketch, 
312. 

Gros-Ventre (Big-bellied) Indians, cap- 
tured by Iroquois, 1595 rescued by 
Chippewa, 160. 

Ground-squirrel, described, 348. 

Grouse, in Canada, 353. 

Gudgeons, in Wisconsin lakes, 1 74, 359. 

Guerin, Jeanne, wife of baron Lahon- 
tan, ix. 

Gueudeville, Nicolas, Lahontan' s work 
ascribed to, xliv, xlv; L Esprit des 
Cours de V Europe, xlv; Atlas His- 
torique, xlv; sketch, xliv, xlv. 

Guiche, Count de, sponsor for Lahon- 
tan, x. 

Guiscard, Count de, Lahontan' s patron, 
1 1. 

Guldenlew, — de, viceroy of Norway, 
670; title, 676; Lahontan meets, 
671. 

Gulf of Mexico, receives Mississippi, 32; 
La Salle's colony upon, xii, 33, 

335- 

— St. Lawrence, 274; cod-fishing in, 
324; islands, 324; traversed by La- 
hontan, 30, 31. 

Gull-fish, in Great Lakes, 359. 
Gulo luscus, in. 



HER 

Hainaut. See Desnots. 

Hakluyt Society, Publications, 309, 310, 
312. 

Hale, Horatio, "Indian Wampum Rec- 
ords,' * 76. 

Hannay, James, Acadia, 330. 

Hanover, elector of, protects Lahontan, 
xxxiii, xxxiv. 

Hares, in Newfoundland, 332; on St. 
Lawrence, 266; in Canada, 343; on 
River Long, 183; white, 344, 348; 
used as food, 105, 106, 482. 

Harisse, Henry, Decouverte et Evolution 
cartographique de Terre-Neuve, 28, 
30, 324; Discovery of 'North America, 
303; Notes sur la Nouvelle France, 
lii. 

Harper* s Magazine, 73, 479. 

Harvard College Library, editions of 
Lahontan in, liii-xciii. 

Havre de barre. See Bar Haven. 

— de Grace, port of departure for Can- 
ada, 373. 

Hawley, Charles, Cayuga History, 72; 
"Jesuit Missions among Senecas," 
131. 

" Hazardous," French man-of-war, 260. 

Hazel-trees, Canadian resemble Euro- 
pean, 364. 

Hearne, Samuel, describes beavers, 480. 

Heath-cocks, Canadian resemble Euro- 
pean, 351. 

Hemlock spruce (epinette), 365; de- 
scribed, 371. 

Hennepin, Louis, dedicates book to 
English king, 3; at Fort Frontenac, 
70; omits mention of River Long, 
xxxviii; Indians mentioned by, xxxix; 
describes falls of Niagara, xix, 137; 
Description de la Louisiane, 413; New 
Discovery, 70, 77, 131, 145, 152, 
200, 413. 

Henry, Alexander, Travels. See Bain 
(ed.). 

Herns, in Canada, 351. 



768 



Index 



HER 

Herring, in Canada, 358; in Newfound- 
land, 333} in Great Lakes, 3595 used 
as bait, 360. 

Historical Magazine, 155. 

Hoffman, W. J., " Midewiwin of the 
Ojibwa," 468 j " Native Indian Pic- 
tographs," 512. 

Holland, canals of, 652; monetary sys- 
tem, 655, 656; weights and measures, 
656; inns, 6555 boats, 652, 656, 
6575 wines, 6635 Lahontan in, 651- 
659. 

Homer, read by Lahontan, xiv, 116, 
306, 307. 

Honeoye Falls (N. Y.), Indian villages 
near, 131. 

" Honore," vessel, Lahontan on, 257- 
262. 

Horse-chestnuts. See Chestnuts of Illi- 
nois. 

Hospitalieres, at Quebec, 44. 

"Hoy," vessel, described, 693. 

Huards, described, 353; fresh-water 
fowl, 353; hunted, 353; in Canada, 
350- 

Hudson, Capt. Henry, explores for 
Dutch, 309; follows Danish pilot, 

309, 3105 discovers Hudson Bay, 

310, 31 1 j discovers New Nether- 
lands, 3 1 1 j journals of, 3115 sketch, 
309; Voyages, 309. 

Hudson' s Bay Company, organized, 311- 
3135 struggle with French, 312-3145 
history, 313-314. 

Huguenots, persecuted by Louis XIV, 
xlvi; banished from France, 3925 
useful in Canada, 392, 393; Lahon- 
tan' s plan for, xlvi. 

Humming birds (Oiseau Mouche), in 
Canada, 350; described, 354. 

Huron (Petun, or Tobacco, Tionntate) 
Indians, 154, 46 ij English name for, 
155; stock, 3215 habitat, 73, 143, 
153-155, 340, 418, 484; character- 
ized) 4155 clans, 4613 language, 46, 



ILL 
Huron Indians {continued). 

47, 339, 34o, 733, 747, 74^j num- 
bers, 340; villages, 340, 418; totems, 
51 1 j burial customs, 4735 inheri- 
tance, 46 1 j cultivate fields, xx, 148} 
hunting grounds, 319$ government, 
499; calendar, 427, 428; missions 
to, 46, 48, 318, 340; missions de- 
stroyed, 48, 153, 155, 3185 in trade, 
81, 92, 241; visited by Champlain, 
21 9 j Duluth, 72 j Longueuil, 74; 
join Denonville's expedition, xvii, 
1255 relations with Iroquois, 73,1 40- 

143, 149, 153, 155, ^5, 318, 340, 
502; desire French fort, xvii, 1325 
relations with Ottawa, 146, 397; chief 
Adario, 9, 149; dispose of captives, 
144; tribal chief, 46 ij at Lorette, 
46, 48, 268, 269; at Gaintsouan, 
484; at Mackinac,xx, 145, 147, 1555 
anecdote, 45 5 ; battle with Americans, 
461; remnant extant, 48} sketch, 

i55, 34o. 
Huron County (Ont.), 154. 
Huronia, location, 488. 
Hyporcheme, compared with Indian 

dance, 423. 



Iberville, Pierre Le Moyne, sieur de, 
founder of Louisiana, 74, 133, 144, 
145, 236} commands in Hudson 
Bay, 217, 313, 314$ subordinates, 
xxxix, 227; expedition against New 
York, 235, 2365 convoys merchant- 
men, 274; sketch, 236. 

Iceland, discoverers from, 309. 

Illinois Indians, 1745 habitat, 3415 
described, 2065 characterized, 3415 
physical traits, 415, 4885 language, 
198, 201, 204, 341; sodomy, 4625 
berdashes, 4625 totems, 51 15 rela- 
tions with Iroquois, 26, 77, 78, 81, 
82, 198, 486-488, 502; allies of 
French, 78, 2075 a *d Lahontan, 



Index 



769 



ILL 

Illinois Indians {continued), 

207; fur-trade with French, 146, 
207; with Arkansas, 2045 join Den- 
onville, 1255 La Salle among, 26, 
77} calendar, 427, 428; sketch, 77. 

Illinois, early forts, xviii, 207; La Salle 
m > 33> 77> 20 7> Lahontan, 205-2075 
mission, xviii 5 Iroquois in, 198} 
diseases, 465,- slavery, 1695 parrots, 
3545 chestnuts, 367. 

Indian territory, tribes in, 340. 

Indiana, Indians of, 341. 

Indians: 

Physical characteristics — in gen- 
eral, 282, 414, 415, 465; robust, 
593-605, 415, 416, 471; stature, 
415; color, 284, 285, 415; com- 
plexions, 430; unbearded, 282, 284, 

414, 5 8 4> 599J longevity, 418, 592, 

593- 

Mental characteristics — in general, 

415, 421, 4235 endurance, 268, 269, 
41 6 j observation, 429; memory, 431, 
438; independence, xliii, 11, 59, 82, 
421, 499} intelligence, 413, 4295 
contentment, 4215 deference to age, 
431; generosity, 586} faithfulness, 
4525 patience, 475; politeness, 414; 
reasonableness, 438, 439; valor, 424} 
not quarrelsome, 4825 not passionate, 
451-453, 463; natural equity, 285; 
philosophy, 7, 8, 426; without jeal- 
ousy, 451, 453, 460; without caste, 
421; gravity, 424, 425; brevity of 
speech, 425, 4265 without discipline, 
4995 superstitious, 126, 429, 467, 
4685 hatred, 424. 

Philology — in general, 46, 47, 56, 
58, 176, 733, 734; most useful, 2975 
vocabulary, 288, 297; picture-writ- 
ing, 512-515, 590. See also Chip- 
pewa Indians, Algonquian, Huron- 
Iroquois stock. 

Mythology , Folk Lore, and Religion 
— in general, xxxv, xliii, 435-445, 
49 



IND 

Indians (continued). 

518, 5 19 j compared with French, 
5 17-5505 idea of God, 59, 434-437, 
4465 of divine justice, 436, 437; 
divinities of, 445-4495 evil spirits, 
446-448, 467, 4685 animal mani- 
tous, 345, 446; solar worship, 437, 
4495 dualism, 446-448; belief in life 
after death, 435, 436, 441, 449, 450, 
460, 4725 in transmigration of souls, 
189; in dreams, 449, 459, 460; cere- 
monies, 286, 448-450; sacrifices, 
448-450, 5015 hymn, 4505 medicine 
men, 447, 467, 468, 563, 593, 6035 
influence of, 460 j methods, 467, 468; 
difficult to christianize, 146, 413, 
414, 435, 445; beliefs compared 
with Christianity, 517-550. 

Occupations — in general, 431,432; 
hunting, 82, 1 04-1 17, 319, 349, 
481-485,573-575; fishing, 147,1485 
agriculture, 148, 432; map-making, 
193, 427.^ 

Food — in general, 422, 470, 471, 
580-5835 vegetable, 148, 175,187, 
202, 369, 372, 502; fish, 147, 148, 
J 69> I75> 3 6 3> 43i> 4^75 animal, 
169, 170, 175, 187,202,431,467; 
unsalted, 422, 471; no salads, 471; 
cooking, 470, 471; appetite the 
guide, 470; drinks, 170, 466, 467; 
avoid ice-water, 471. 

Feasts — in general, 169, 170, 422, 
424; political, 58, 404; feast of 
union, 404; wedding, 458; for sick, 
4^7) 563, 603; funeral, 473; war, 
500, 501; eat-all, 466. 

Villages and Cabins — villages for- 
tified, 417; cabins, 92, 182, 188, 
454; cabins described, 417, 418. 

Domestic Animals — dogs, 1 05, 349, 
495; horses, 131 5 cattle, 1315 fowl, 
1315 hogs, 131. 

Utensils — cradles, 416, 417, 4595 
beds, 418; traps, 113, 484, 485; 



77o 



Index 



IND 

Indians {continued). 

anchors, 1585 for fishing, 147, 1485 
drums, 5005 snow-shoes, 103, 104. 
See also Canoe, Calumet. 

Dress — in general, 417, 581-584; 
unclothed, 4 1 7,583 ,607-6 1 o ; cloaks, 
417$ caps, 417; shoes, 417; made 
of beaver-skins, 379 ; of women, 
416, 609, 6ioj hair-dressing, 153, 
416. 

Warfare and Weapons — weapons 
in general, 155, 213; bow and ar- 
rows, 94, 115, 514; clubs, 487, 497, 
498, 514; casse-tete, 4025 hatchets, 
512; amazed at fire-arms, 188, 203, 
21 3 j symbol of wars, 512; occasions 
for, 231,232,496; preparations, 153, 
155, 500, 501 ; declaration, 507,508; 
methods in, 128, 129, 142, 497-499, 
502-508; scouting, 156, 486, 497, 
498; no precautions against surprise, 
485, 486, 497, 498; in forests, 70, 
271, 497; fortifications, 590; seldom 
attacked, 237, 273, 490; ambus- 
cades, 247, 489-493; track enemy, 
498,499, 502; take scalps, 129, 492, 
493, 502, 505; personal following in, 
500; private war-parties, 500; tree 
of peace, 407; cruelty in, 496-502; 
during hunting, 485-494, 498; use- 
ful to French, 237; return, 505; cap- 
ture of prisoners, 503, 504; treat- 
ment of, xvi, 122-124, 137,144,199, 
267-269, 496, 503-507; running the 
gauntlet, 238, 505; torture of, xlvi, 
208, 268, 270,496,497, 504; death 
song of, 268,504; adopted, 505, 506; 
exchanged, 194, 195, 506, 507. See 
also Slavery, below. 

Slavery — in general, 94, 106, 
m> ii3> 420; origin of, 169, 504, 
505; in Illinois, 169; treatment of 
slaves, 169, 432, 439, 454, 491; in 
declaring war, 508; enfranchisement, 
474- 



IND 

Indians {continued). 

Government — without laws, 7, 
553> 55 8 > in general, xxxiv, 58, 194, 
424, 499, 500; authority of chief, 
499, 500; under chieftains, 500, 501; 
council, 75, 79~ 8 5> 9 2 ~94> 4*2, 
423; composition of, 422, 427, 431, 
499, 5075 functions of, 499, 505, 
507; oratory in, xiii, 7, 92, 162; 
treaties, negotiation of, 76, 431; for 
peace, 506, 508, 509; alliances, 507; 
envoys, 509; legal institutions com- 
pared with French, 551-570. 

Social Customs — lack of property 
distinctions, xxxv, xliii, 7, 8, 282, 
285, 420, 454; scorn of riches, 
xxxiv, 196; aversion to money, 94, 
420, 421; equality, 452, 454; visits, 
426; meals, 432; games, 432, 433, 
594; gambling, 433; dances, 422; 
varieties, 423; compared with Greek, 
423; occasions for, 423, 424; of the 
calumet, 168, 169, 423, 424, 508, 
509; of war, 424, 501, 502; relig- 
ious, 448, 450; of the chiefs, 168, 
1 69, 423 ; gift-giving, in embassy, 84, 
509; at fair, 93; in marriage, 457; 
for the dead, 473; articles for, 169. 

Sex Relations, Courtship, and Mar- 
riage — in general, 605-618; im- 
morality, 451, 453-455* 463, 54o, 
541, 615, 616; unchastity, 451, 452, 
540, 541, 612, 615, 616; courtship, 
451, 453-457; marriage, xxxv, xliii, 
605, 606; monogamous, 458; con- 
sanguineous forbidden, 606; with 
slaves, 613; age for, 451, 459, 541, 
592; ceremonies, 456, 457; fidelity 
in, 453, 458, 460, 461; punishment 
for adultery, 416, 460, 607; divorce 
easy, 453, 456-458; berdashes, 462. 

Women and Children — physical 
characteristics of women, 416; pas- 
sionate, 45 1, 459, 475; gaiety, 453; 
freedom, 45 3, 46 3 ; occupations, 43 2 ; 



Index 



771 



IND 

Indians {continued). 

assist in worship, 450; adopt pris- 
oners, 459; prefer French, 455; 
widowhood, 459, 460, 462; whores, 
463, 464; child-bearing, 458, 459, 
606-608; purification, 458, 459; 
children, highly prized, 458; treat- 
ment in infancy, 459; take mother's 
name, 461, 462; assist in religious 
service, 448; training, 426, 427; of 
slaves, 474 ; of separated persons, 
458. 

Diseases and Remedies — diseases, 
in general, xxxv, 418, 465-475, 
593-605; immunity from, 418, 465, 
475; carelessness regarding, 465; of 
women, 475; pleurisy, 475; con- 
sumption, 466; pox, 465; natural 
remedies, 467, 468, 470; sweating, 
467-469, 600-604; medicines, 161, 
465-475; of roots, 466; of plant 
juices, 468, 471; cure of wounds, 
471; avoidance of European rem- 
edies, 467-471. 

Mortuary Customs — in general, 47 1 ; 
no mourning, 472, 473; wailing, 
472; funeral orations, 472; coffins, 
473; hut for dead, 473; cremation, 
473; interment, 473; presents to 
dead, 474; resuscitation, 474; name 
of dead avoided, 473, 474. 

Miscellaneous Customs — heraldry, 
510, 511; totemism, 510; calendar, 
427, 428; music, 500, 501; suicide, 
368, 418, 419, 441,459, 460, 530; 
hunting customs, 104- n 7, 349, 481- 
485* 571-5751 hunting limits, 481, 
482, 496; drunkenness, 94,466,568; 
excused, xvi, 124, 466. 

Trade — articles used in, 70, 71, 
377, 378; with Europeans, 574-577, 
590, 591; annual fair at Montreal, 
92-95; contracts recorded by wam- 
pum, 76, 431. See also Fur-trade. 

Missions — in general, xvi, 48, 49, 



IRO 

Indians (continued). 

55, 56, 59, 119, 168. See also 
Jesuits, Recollects. 

Iowa, Indians in, 174, 175. 

Iron, exported to Canada, 373. 

Iron-ware, imported, 375. 

Iroquois (Iroquese) Indians, xl; origin 
of name, 58; English name for, 6, 
58; habitat, 26, 58, 59, 82, 323, 396, 
397; numbers, 58; language, 46, 47, 
5 6 > 58, 339, 34i, 733, 7445 cruelty, 
632; slaves, 239; feasts, 404; women 
commit suicide, 368; strength, 120; 
tribes, 58, 323, 341; government, 
58, 404; in warfare, 396, 497, 
498, 501, 502; name for governor- 
general, 80, 82, 84, 404; canoes, 
138, 147; physical characteristics, 
415, 488, 497; characterized, 26, 59, 
339, 495~5°3j importance to Can- 
ada, 394, 395; relations with Euro- 
peans (general), 6, 58, 59; La Barrels 
expedition against, xiii, 66-86; De- 
nonville's expedition, xv-xviii, xxiii, 
118-134, 151, 162, 163, 208, 209, 
221-229; Frontenac's war with, 55, 
69, *3 X , 2 33, 2 34, 237-239; mis- 
cellaneous hostilities with French, xi, 
xv, xvi, xxiv, xxv, xxix, xxxvii, 6, 26, 
3 6 , 5 1 , 52, 59-6i, 74, 77, 103, 
124, 136, 137, 156, 208, 218, 221, 
223-227, 231, 237-240, 263, 266- 
273, 280, 283, 385, 485-494, 504; 
relations with English, 26, 58, 6 1, 
*37, 2 3 8 , 2 $2, 281; at Fort Niagara, 
137, 142; wars with other tribes, 
xiii, xxii, 26, 51, 73,78, 81,86, 140- 
142,147,149,152-161,165,167,198, 
199, 220-223, 317, 320, 340, 395, 
485-493, 502, 503; in fur-trade, 26, 
69, 78, 81, 125, 226, 395; relations 
to missions, xvi, 48, 55, 56, 59, 70, 
121-124, 153, 155, 239, 259, 318, 
339, 34° 5 approve Adario's strategy, 
225; sketch, 26, 58. 



772 



Index 



IRO 

Iroquois country, described, 323; inac- 
cessible, 805 expedition against, 149, 
1 52-1 61; lacks fish and game, 323, 
396. 

Islands, Allumettes, in Ottawa, 216. 

— Anticosti, location, 30, 31, 305; his- 
tory, 3 1 j seigniory of Jolliet, 31, 243, 
305; size, 305; fort, 305; trade, 305. 

— Bacchus. See Orleans. 

— Belle, 40. 

— Bird Rocks. See Island of Fowls. 

— Cape Breton (Royale), origin of 
name, 324; described, 30, 274; gov- 
ernor, 276; Indians, 328; coal ex- 
ported from, 374; fishery near, 324; 
unpeopled, 324; quarries on, 333, 
334; sketch, 324. 

— of Caves, identified, 154. 

— Charity, in Saginaw Bay, 143, 318, 

319- 

— aux Coudres, origin of name, 3 1 ; 
danger off, 250; passed by Lahontan, 
31, 250, 261. 

— Drummond (Detour, Pontaganipy), 
Indian name for, 153; location, 153; 
sketch, 153. 

— Fitzwilliam, identified, 154. 

— of Fowls (Bird Rocks), sighted, 30; 
location, 31. 

— Gaudeloupe, commerce with, 3745 
sugar-refineries, 374. 

— Goat (aux Chevres), in Basin of Port 
Royal, 331. 

— Hare (au Lievres), location, 261. 

— Mackinac, location, 146. 

— Magdalen, location, 31. 

— Manitoulin, described, 1 53 ; size, 317; 
Indians, 153, 317^340. 

— Martinique (Martinico), commerce 
with, 374; sugar-refineries, 374. 

— Mingan, seigniory of Jolliet, 244, 

3 °. 9 ' 

— Miquelon, French possession, 334. 

— Montreal, location, 2195 Indians, 
1 19 j habitants of, 96, 975 sacked by 



JES 

Islands, Montreal (continued). 

Iroquois, 224, 225; fort on, 2405 
attempted raid on, 262. 

— Orleans, location, 39, 2475 described, 
39 5 mission village on, 485 English 
fleet anchors off, 2435 troops land 
near, 247. 

— Perce, location, 323; described, 305; 
fishery off, 305, 306, 324. 

— of Re, location, 294. 

— Rencontres, origin of name, 198, 
199; location, 198. 

— Rouge (Red), location, 31, 32, 260, 
261. 

— St. Croix, early settlement on, 324, 

33'- 

— St. Helen, location, xv, 118; named 
by Champlain, 118; rendezvous for 
Denonville's expedition, xv, 118, 
121. 

— St. John (Prince Edwards), origin 
of name, 324; lacks harbors, 324; 
sketch, 324. 

— St. Pierre, French settlement at, 
334; inhabitants expelled from, 3345 
retroceded to France, 3345 sketch, 

334- 

— Seven, harborage at, 2615 sketch, 
261. 

Issati Indians, Hennepin among, xxxixj 
branch of, 343. 



Jansen, Cornelis, Dutch theologian, 
383, 384; followers, 383, 384. 

Jenks, Albert E., "Wild-rice Gather- 
ers of the Upper Lakes," 175. 

Jesuits, doctrines of, 518-5505 accept 
Aristotle, xiv, 116, 117; arrival in 
Canada, 43,413; mission villages of, 
48, 49, 56; missionaries, 91, 129, 
140, 146, 259, 345, 365,413,417; 
relations with Recollects, 43, 44, 
383, 413; mission at Tadoussac, 31, 
345 at Quebec, 42, 43, 259; Aben- 



Index 



773 



JES 

Jesuits (continued). 

aki mission, 48, 49, 329, 330} at 
Montreal, 555 Iroquois mission, 131, 
259, 266, 2675 among Papinchois, 
340; among Gaspesians, 3405 St. 
Joseph mission, xviii, 208; Huron 
mission, 48, 75, 3465 at Mackinac, 
xviii, 140, 146; at Sault Ste. Marie, 
xviii, 149, 152,489; at Green Bay, 
xviii, 168; Illinois mission, xviii ; 
among Sioux, xviii; relations with 
Indians, 413, 414, 435, 437, 438, 
49 6, 73 3; describe native customs, 
426, 466, 468, 472; oppose brandy 
trade, 81, 466; preserve morals, 455, 
464; in fur-trade, 385, 386; rela- 
tions with government, xxvii, 6, 227, 
2 3 x > 3 8l > 384-386; as interpreters, 
84> 385; as messengers, 149; rear 
Jolliet, 243; name Fox River, 168; 
Canadian superior, 56, 259; instruc- 
tion condemned, 267, 268; disbe- 
lieved by Adario, 517, 518; Rela- 
tions, xxxvi, xlvii, 26, 31, 47, 58, 
68, 76, 82, no, 124, 127, 152, 153, 
165, 168, 169, 174, 175, 207, 242, 
3*°> 33°> 340, 345> 380, 382, 386, 
412, 414-418, 423, 424, 431, 444, 
448, 450, 457, 460, 462, 466, 468, 
469* 473) 474> 479> 4^0, 483, 488, 
512, 530, 603, 733; sketch, 413. 

Johnson, Sir William, names Lake 
George, 91. 

Jogues, Isaac, Jesuit missionary, 91. 

«* Joli,** shipwrecked ofFNewfoundland, 
335, 336; conveys La Salle to Texas, 

335- 
Joliet (111.), terminus of Chicago canal, 

207. 
Jolliet, Sieur de. See Aux. 

— Claire Franchise Bissot, wife cap- 
tured by English, 243, 244, 249; 
sketch, 244. 

— Louis, seigniory at Anticosti, 31, 
243, 305; explores Mississippi, 200, 



KIT 

Jolliet, Louis (continued). 

219, 243, 244; names Illinois River, 
205; describes Chicago portage, 207; 
loses papers at Lachine rapids, 219, 
244; captured by English, 243, 249; 
trade of, 305; in Hudson Bay, 244; 
in Labrador, 244; sketch, 243. 

Jones, Arthur E., " Identification of St. 
Ignace II and of Ekarenniondi," 484. 

Juchereau, Charles de St. Denis, com- 
mandant at Mackinac, 144, 165; 
builds Ohio post, 144; sketch, 144. 

— Louis de St. Denis, expedition to 
New Mexico, 144. 

— Nicolas, Sieur de Beauport, 144. 
Jutland, Lahontan in, 686. 



Kakaling, Grand, location, 174; sig- 
nificance, 174; Lahontan passes, 173. 

— Little, location, 174. 

Kaministiquia, French post at, 316; an- 
noys Hudson's Bay Company, 316; 
fur-trade at, 316; sketch, 316. 

KansaIndians,Missouri mingle with,20o. 

Kansas, Indian reservations in, 174. 

Kaukauna (Wis.), location, 174; his- 
tory, 1 74. ^ 

Kellogg, Louise Phelps, aid acknowl- 
edged, lxviii. 

Kennebec Indians. See Canibas. 

Kente. See Quinte. 

Kettles, in fur- trade, 377. 

Kickapoo Indians, habitat, 174, 341; 
language, 341; village, 174; Lahon- 
tan meets, 174; characterized, 341; 
sketch, 174. 

Killistinoe Indians. See Cristinaux. 

Kimberly (Wis.), rapids at, 174. 

Kinnikinick. See Indian tobacco. 

Kirk, Sir David, invades Canada, 31. 

Kitchi Manitou, chief Indian divinity, 
445; sacrifices to, 448, 449. 

— Okima, Algonquian name for gov- 
ernor, 93; defined, 405. 



774 



Index 



KNI 

Knives, in fur-trade, 377. 

Kolnus, Johannes, Polish explorer, 309. 

Kondiaronk, Huron name for Adario, 

149. 
Kryn. See Great Mohawk. 
Kwapa. See Quapaw. 



La Barre, Febre, governor of Canada, 
25; supersedes Frontenac, xi, 265 in 
West Indies, 265 in fur-trade, 77, 
9 1 ; illness, xiii, 71, 72, 8 1 ; speeches, 
xiii, 77-795 expedition against In- 
dians, xi, xiii, 26, 32, 34, 46, 65— 
86, 72-79, 91, 97, 103, 120, 125, 
2265 sketch, 26. 

L" Abat, — , French officer in Danish 
army, 674. 

Labrador, described, 306, 307,309, 3105 
discovery, 244, 3075 trade, 307—309; 
part of Newfoundland, 333. 

Laces, Canadian import, 375. 

Lachine, rapids of, 66, 67, 303; origin 
of name, 67; post at, 240; La Salle's 
embarkation, 67; canal, 67; danger- 
ous, 2193 massacre at village, xvi, 
224, 225, 266. 

La Fontaine, in Placentia Bay, 276, 278. 

Lafontaine, L. H., "De Tesclavage en 
Canada," 169. 

LaForest. See Forest. 

La Galette, location, 68. 

Lahontan, Isaac Lorn d' Arce, baron de, 
father of author, ix, x, xxi, 150, 151 5 
sketch, 151. 

— Louis Armand Lorn d' Arce, baron 
de, partnts of, ix, x, 150, 1 5 1 5 
birth, x; sponsors, x; destined for 
army, x; joins marine corps, x; voy- 
ages to Canada, xi, xii, 6, 25-33, 
258-262; signts Quebec, xi, 32; 
quartered at Beaupre, xii, 34-38; or- 
dered to Montreal, 38, 46; visits mis- 
sion villages, xii, 48, 49; ascends to 
Montreal, xiii, 49-56; in La Barre' s 



LAH 
Lahontan, Louis {continued). 

expedition, xiii, 6 6-8 6, 1 2 3 ; returns to 
Montreal, xiii, 85, 88-90; quartered 
at Chambly,xiii, 90, 91; at Boucher- 
ville, xiv, 96-1 17; ordered to France, 
xv, 1 18; refused permission, xvi, 121, 
J 3 2 > J 335 hunts with Indians, xii, 
xiv, 46, 88, 1 03-1 17; learns Indian 
languages, xii, 46, 47, 88; accom- 
panies Denonville's expedition, xv- 
xviii, 121-134; at Fort Frontenac, 
xvi, 122-126; befriends captive Iro- 
quois, xvi, 122-124; censured for 
humanity, xvi, 124; ordered to upper 
country, xvii, 132, 133; makes prep- 
arations, xvii, xviii, 133; journey to 
Fort St. Joseph, xix, xx, 135-139; 
describes Niagara, xix, 136, 137; ar- 
rives at fort, xx, 139; winters thereat, 
xx, 140-143; expects attack from 
Iroquois, 142; seeks provisions at 
Mackinac, xx, 143-151; meets sur- 
vivors of La Salle's expedition, xxi, 
144, 145, 347; sends letter to 
Seignelay, xxi, 149-151; visits Sault 
Ste. Marie, xxii, 152, 153; accom- 
panies Indian war-party, xxii, 149, 
15 2-1 61; revisits Fort St. Joseph, 
xxii, 155, 161; abandons his post, 
xxii, xxiii, 152, 163; retreats to Mack- 
inac, xxiii, 163-166; ordered to Can- 
ada, xxiii, 164; postpones return till 
spring, xxiii, 164; embarks for dis^ 
covery, xxiv, 167; visits Wisconsin, 
xxiv, xii, xiii, 167-178; describes 
Indian feast, 169, 170; among Fox 
Indians, 175, 176; ascends the Mis- 
sissippi, xxiv, 178, 179; explores 
River Long, 179-197, 300; limit of 
journey, xxiv, 193, 197; descends 
the Mississippi, xxiv, 197-200, 203- 
205; explores the Missouri, 200-203; 
burns Indian village, 203 ; meets 
Arkansa Indians, 203-205, 465,466; 
at mouth of Ohio, xxiv, 205; crosses 



Index 



775 



LAH 
Lahontan, Louis (continued). 

Illinois, xxiv, 205-207 5 meets Tonty, 
2075 returns to Mackinac, xxiv, 207^ 
2085 disbands detachment, 2095 re- 
turns to Canada, xxv, 216-2185 en- 
counters Ste. Helene, 217; rescued 
from rapids, xxv, 2195 describes 
Lachine massacre, 224, 2255 re- 
ceives furlough, xxv, 230,- counter- 
manded, xxv, 2305 patronized by 
Frontenac, xxv, 230, 232, 237, 2815 
declines Iroquois embassy, xxv, 237- 
239; illness of, 238; on detachment, 
240; sent to France with tidings, 
xxvi, 250; in France, xxvi, 252- 
257; finds estates sequestered, xxvii, 
xxxiii, 151, 230, 252, 253; attempts 
to recover, 2535 receives military 
order, xxvi, 253, 254, 257; desires 
a benefice, xxvii, 254; solicits favor 
at court, 256; commended to Fron- 
tenac, xxix, 256, 257; appointed 
captain, xxvi, 257; returns to Canada, 
257; arrives in Quebec, xxviii, 262, 
7085 marriage arranged, xxvii, 388- 
3905 declines, xxviii, 389, 390; plans 
defense, xxix, xlv, 271-2735 Fron- 
tenac commends, xxix, 273, 274; 
sent to France, xxix, 274-2795 aids 
in defense of Placentia, xxix, 275, 
276, 278, 2815 praises English valor, 
279; praised by English, 2815 project 
rejected at court, 280, 281, 288; 
made lieutenant of Newfoundland, 
xxx, 281; dispute with physician, 
282-286; embarks for Placentia, 
287; incurs Brouillon's enmity, xxxi, 
12, 287-294, 694, 6955 builds 
house, 288, 2925 entertains, 290; 
attempts to conciliate Brouillon, 291, 
292; composes satiric song, xxxi, 
2935 supported by Placentians, xxxi, 
292-2945 in danger, xxxi, 2935 es- 
capes, xxxii, lxi, 9, 293, 2945 voyage 
to Portugal, xxxii, 294-2965 pur- 



LAH 

Lahontan, Louis (continued). 

sued by pirates, xxxii, 295, 296} in 
disgrace at court, xxxii, 297, 298, 
647, 694, 696; sent to Rochelle, 
296, 297; in Portugal, xxxii, 619- 
626, 648-6505 letter from Lisbon, 
619-6475 meets Abbe d'Estrees, 
6285 sees king of Portugal, 629; 
voyages to Holland, 648-6505 ad- 
ventures with English privateers, 6 50, 
6515 at Guernsey, 648, 6505 visits 
Holland, xxxii, 648, 651-656, 658, 
6595 visits Hamburg, xxxii, 648, 
657-6635 attempts at reinstatement 
at French court, xxxii, xxxiii; letter 
to court, xxxii, xli; at Lubeck, 648, 
662, 663; at Copenhagen, xxxiii, 
663-684; meets king of Denmark, 
679; patronized by, 35 journeys to 
Paris, 684-694; passport, 688; letter 
from Paris, 684-695; at Versailles, 
694; adventure with German coun- 
tess, 688-693; returns to native 
province, xxxiii, 6965 letter from 
Beam, 696-7105 arrest ordered, 
xxxiii 5 escapes to Spain, xxxiii; at 
Bordeaux, 697; at Bayonne, 698; 
at Esperon, 698; Dax, 698-711; in 
Spain, 698-717; at Ortez, 710-712; 
letter from Huesca, 711-717; taken 
for Huguenot, 712-714; letter from 
Saragossa, 718-731; later European 
wanderings, xxxiii, xliii, 9, 730; in 
England, xxxiv, 8; at court of Han- 
over, xxxiii; befriended by Leibnitz, 
xxxiii; defends English king, xxxiv; 
death, xxxiii; posthumous works, 
xxxiv; characteristics of, xi, xlii, xliii, 
xlvi, xlvii; occupations, xii, xiv, xx; 
humanity, xlvi, 122-124, 208, 269, 
270; impartiality, 299, 300; scorns 
criticism, 10, 11; tolerance, xlvii; 
obscenity, xliv; skepticism, 285, 286, 
438-445, 448; dislikes ecclesiastics, 
xxvii, xxxvi, 42, 297; denounces 



776 



Index 



LAH 

Lahontan, Louis {continued). 

ecclesiastical tyranny, xv, 88-90, 98} 
belittles Jesuit missions, 329; fond- 
ness for sport, xiv, xx; study, xiv; 
wilderness life, xxi, xxx, xli, 7, 11, 
281; knowledge of wilderness con- 
ditions, xxv, xli, 435, 4525 knowl- 
edge of Indian languages, xvii, 123, 
132, 176, 414, 733; beloved by 
Indians, 274, 2815 hatred for Iro- 
quois, 6 5 describes Iroquois, 57- 
61 j satirizes civilization, xxxv-xxxvii, 
xlii-xliv; slanders women of Can- 
ada, 30-38} views on origin of 
human race, 282-286; dissertation 
on witchcraft, 696-7 10; exaggerates 
numbers, 237, 249, 2625 keeps jour- 
nals, 206, 264, 300, 370; discusses 
difficulties of discoveries, 210-215; 
describes natural history, xiv; de- 
scribes beavers, 170-173; apochry- 
phal voyage to River Long, xxiii, 
xxxviii-xliii; poses as a discoverer, 
xli; acquaintance with explorers, xli; 
reasons for invented journey, xxxix- 
xli; ignorance of Siouan country, 
342, 343; skepticism concerning, 
xxxix; misfortunes of, xlii, xliii; ex- 
tent of travels, 418; patrons, 1 1 ; fore- 
shadows Revolution, xlvii; literary 
style, xxiii, xxxiv, xxxvii, xxxix; 
Algonquian dictionary, 732-748 ; 
memoir on Canada, 299-400; table 
of explanation of terms, 297, 301, 
401-407; bibliography of works, 
xxxvi, li-xciii; Dialogue s with Adario, 
517-618; Indian participant, xliv, 9, 
149; described, xliv, xiv; possible 
author of, xliv, xiv; style, xxxix, 
xiv; origin, xiv, xv, xliv, 8, 9; apol- 
ogy for, xli, 7, 8; published sepa- 
rately, xiv; borrowed from, xlviii; 
Voyages, xi; origin of, 6; motive for, 
xxxiv, 300; first destined to be burned, 
xxxiv, 5; criticized, 10, 11; copies 



LAK 

Lahontan, Louis (continued). 

kept, 300; published, xxxiv; illus- 
trations, lxii, 9, 10; correctness 
of maps, 300; dates, 6; vogue of, 
xxxiv-xxxvi; historical value, xxxvi- 
xxxviii; neglect accounted for, 
xxxviii ; French editions, xxxiii, 
xxxiv, Hi, liv-lx, lxiii-lxxiv, lxxvi, 
lxxxix-xci, xciii, 124, 143; trans- 
lated into English, xxxiv, xliv, 8, 9; 
English editions, xxxiv, xlviii, 
lx-lxiii, lxxxii-lxxxvii, xcii; Dutch 
edition, lxxv, lxxxvii-lxxxix, 8 ; 
Italian editions, xcii, xciii, Ger- 
man editions, lxxiv-lxxxvi, xci; ded- 
ication, 3, 4; preface lxi, 5-10; 
R'eponse a la lettre (Tun particulier, 
xxxiv; Memoir on Fur-Trade of 
Canada, xxxiv. 

— barony of, erected, ix ; seized by 
creditors, x, xxi, 151, 230. 

— village of, location, ix. 

Lake Abittibi, French post on, 342. 

— Andiatarocte. See Lake George. 

— d' Angouleme. See Lake St. Peters. 

— Assinipouals. See Winnipeg. 

— Champlain, Indians near, 59; afflu- 
ents of, 108; outlet, 52, 90, 240; 
hunting near, xiv, 1 08-1 17; route 
from New York, 240; Iroquois hunt- 
ing ground, 240 ; rendezvous of troops, 
240. 

— Chautauqua, as fur-trade route, 155. 

— Erie (Conti), origin of name, 320; 
size, 319; shores described, 319-321, 
399; empties into Lake Ontario, 131, 
304, 321; islands of, 321; depth, 
320; navigation, 157, 158, 320; 
climate, 319; portage to Ontario, 
321, 322; boundary of Canada, 302; 
trees, 319; game, 320, 322; Indians 
frequent, 320; projected fort on, 272, 
2 73> 3 2I > Lahontan coasts, xix, 138, 
155, 158. 

— Frontenac. See Lake Ontario. 



Index 



777 



LAK 
Lake George, origin of name, 91 ; Indian 
name for, 915 route to New York, 90. 

— Grand Butte des Morts, Lahontan 

on, 174, 175- 

— Huron, 92; shore described, 1435 
shape, 3175 size, 3165 climate, 316, 
3175 ice, 144, 448} navigation, 147, 
317, 318} outlet, 304; portage, 322; 
course from Mackinac to French 
River, 2185 islands, 153, 154, 218, 
317; fish, 3 20 j game, 317; Indians 
near, xvii, 154, 317, 340, 488; war- 
party on, xxii, 153, 154,488; La- 
hontan crosses, 143, 144, 163; En- 
glish traders, 125; forts, xviii, xix, 

139, *7*> 3 2 °- 

— Machakandibi, on route to Hudson 
Bay, 314. 

— of Malhominis. See Lake Grand 
Butte des Morts. 

— Michigan (Illinois), 92; described, 
209,210, 319; outlet, 143, 145, 146; 
affluents, 208; islands, 167; bays, 
317; passage to Mississippi, 178; 
fish, 320 j Indians adjacent, 341; La- 
hontan crosses, xxiv, 167, 207, 208; 
Lahontan familiar with, xlii. 

— Nipigon (Lenemipigon), location, 
304; limits of explorations, 304, 305; 
fort on, 136. 

— Nipissing (Nepicerinis), origin of 
name, 218; source of French River, 
317; on route to upper country, 218; 
Indians near, 342. 

— Ontario (Frontenac), described, 322; 
size, 322; depth, 322; banks, 322; 
affluents, 322; Erie empties into, 
131, 304; source of St. Lawrence, 
304; portage, 318, 321, 322; route, 
273; Indians near, 58, 70, 323, 341; 
expeditions on, xiii, 68, 126; vessels, 
68, 226, 395; missions, 70. 

— Pepin, French fort on, xxxix. 

— St. Clair, Iroquois name for, 139; de- 
scribed, xx, 138, 139; beauty of, 



LAP 
Lake St. Clair (continued). 

139; Indian rendezvous, xviii, 125; 
fort near, 418. 

— St. Francis, in St. Lawrence, 67, 86. 

— St. John, route to Hudson Bay, 244. 

— St. Louis, in St. Lawrence, 67, 86, 
219; described, 240. 

— St. Peters, described, 51. 

— du St. Sacrement. See Lake George. 

— Salt, reported to Lahontan, xxiv, 
194; inhabitants of, 194. 

— Simcoe, described, 317, 318; river 
flowing from, 318; Indians near, 
318, 340; Iroquois hunting grounds, 
323; projected fort on, 273, 318. 

— Superior (Upper), described, 315; 
size, 315; shores, 153; outlet, 152, 
304, 316; islands, 316; climate, 
316; fogs, 153; ice, 316; game, 
316; fish, 316; copper mines, 316; 
navigation, 312; 315, 316; ports, 
315; Indians, 315, 342; fur-trade, 
153; trading posts, 315, 316; Duluth, 
315; voyage from Hudson Bay, 314, 

3I5 \ 

— Temiscaming, significance of name, 

342; location, 342; Indians near, 342. 

— Toronto. See Lake Simcoe. 

— Trout, on Ottawa route, 219. 

— of Two Mountains, in River Ottawa, 
217; mission village on, 55. 

— Winnebago, Indian village on, 174; 
currents in, 178. 

— Winnipeg, reports of, 304, 305; 
river rises near, 311. 

Lalande, Jacques de, 244. 

La Montagne, mission village at, 55, 

339, 34o. 

Lampreys, in Canada, 358. 

Lang, Andrew, Myth, Ritual, and Re- 
ligion, 510. 

Lapland, cape on coast of, 301; witch- 
craft in, 701. 

La Plante, — , captured by Iroquois, 
224, 266. 



778 



Index 



LAP 

La Plaque, — , leads war-parties, 239, 
240. 

La Prairie de la Madeleine, site, 240; 
mission village at, 56; besieged, 226; 
French encamp at, 2405 attacked, 
240; sketch, 240. 

Lapwings, in Canada, 351. 

La Revue Canadienne, 244. 

La Rochelle. See Rochelle. 

La Salle, Rene Robert Cavelier, sieur de, 
as discoverer, xii, 133, 2105 at Fort 
Frontenac, 69; embarks at La Chine, 
67; at Fort Miami, 2085 at Niagara, 
131; accompanied by Recollects,4i 3 ; 
describes Chicago portage,207 j meets 
Shawnee, 82; in Illinois, 26, 33,207; 
plundered by Iroquois, 775 discovers 
Mississippi, 32, 33, 885 among Ar- 
kansa, 204; envoy to Onondaga, 61 ; 
impoverished, 69; embarks for France, 
xii, 33; familiarity with Canada, 335 
enemies, 69, 125; endorsed by Fron- 
tenac, 695 his lieutenant, 124, 125, 
1335 last expedition, xii, xxxii, 144, 
*45> 335 J * ts survivors, xxxii, xii, 
i44> M5> 3475 murdered, 33, 115, 
1455 published accounts of, xii; 
sketch, 33. 

La Touche, Monsieur de, courtier of 
Louis XIV, 254. 

La Tourette, Claude Greysolon de, 
Dulutrfs brother, Lahontan meets, 
135, 136; at Lake Nipigon, 136; 
sketch, 136. 

Laval, Francois de Montmorency, builds 
Basilica, 425 favors Jesuits, 435 op- 
poses Recollects, 43; forbids liquor 
traffic with Indians, 94; successor of, 
165; rigor, 166; establishes seminary, 
386; benefices of, 3835 sketch, 43. 

— University (Quebec), no; editions of 
Lahontan in, liii-xciii. 

Law, Adario compares French and sav- 
age, 551-592; former works injus- 
tice, 555-559- 



LOB 

Lea, Charles Henry, History of Inquisi- 
tion, 704. 

Lead, in fur-trade, 377. 

Leagues, length of, 513. 

LeClercq, Christian, Premier etablisse- 
ment de lafoy dans la Nowvelle France, 
41 3; cited, 200. 

Le Courrier du Li<vre, liii. 

Legler, Henry E., " Henry de Tonty," 

Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm, befriends 
Lahontan, xxxiii, xxxiv; Epistolas ad 
diver sos, xxxiii. 

Leisler, Jacob, rebellion of, 126. 

Le Jeune, Paul, Jesuit missionary, 417; 
describes Indian customs, 466, 472; 
on Huron-Iroquois language, 733. 

Le Moyne. See Iberville, Bienville, 
Longueuil, Ste. Helene. 

Lentils, on River Long, 191. 

Lepidus timidus, 348. 

" Le Rocher," Illinois landmark, 207. 

Lery, Chassegros, Canadian engineer, 
41, 42. 

Le Sueur, Pierre Charles, ascends Mis- 
sissippi, xxxix. 

Levasseur de Nere, — , aids in fortifying 
Quebec, 265. 

Lewis, Meriwether, and Clark, William, 
describe plant, 474. 

Lewiston, Niagara portage at, 136. 

Library of Congress, editions of Lahon- 
tan in, liii-xciii. 

Licences (conges), for fur -trade, 99- 
101. 
384, 386; reform in system, 392. 

Linden, in Canada, 364. 

Linen, Canadian import, 376. 

Liquor-traffic, with Indians, 94. 

Lisbon, described by Lahontan, lxi, 9, 
297, 619—650. 

Little Chute (Wis.), location, 174. 

— Rapids (Wis.), location, 174. 

Livre, value of, 101. 

Lobsters, in Canada, 333, 359, 361. 



Index 



779 



LON 

Long, John, English trader, 9 3 ; Voyages 
and Travels, 93, 433, 457, 510, 

734- 

— Point (Lake Erie), described, 321 j 
Lahontan portages, 138. 

Longitude, former manner of reckoning, 
302. 

Longueuil, Charles Le Moyne, sieur de, 
74j relations with Iroquois, 74, 75, 
77, 81, 84, 224; ennobled, 745 gov- 
ernor of Montreal, 2245 sketch, 74, 
2245 sons of, 74, 118, 236. 

Lons, Marquise de, sponsor of La- 
hontan, x. 

Lorette, mission village, 46, 48, 268, 
269, 339, 340- 

Loskiel, George H., Mission of United 
Brethren, 448. 

Louis X, king of France, orders to 
governors, 290. 

Louis XIV, friend of Prince von Furst- 
emberg, 6925 aids La Salle, 88 j con- 
trolled by Jesuits, 3845 persecutes 
Huguenots, xlvij grant to Lahontan" s 
father, ix$ ministers of, 5, 254-256, 
338; aids Canadian missions, 55; 
sends troops to Canada, 26; relations 
with Iroquois, 77, 2805 relations 
with Lahontan, xxxiii, 5, 281, 
298 ; appoints Canadian bishops, 
165; chaplain, 165 j recalls Denon- 
ville, 2275 orders to governors, 338} 
receives cession of part of New- 
foundland, 275; grandsons of, 2275 
controls king of England, 61. 

Louisiana, Canadian founders of, 74, 
*44> i45> *35> 2 3<>; posts, 1445 
missions, 145; Tonty's death, 133. 

Loup Indians, French name for Mo- 
hican, 90. 

Louvois, Francois Michel le Tellier, 
marquis de, confers order on La- 
hontan, xxvi, 254; sketch, 254. 

Lower Granville (N. S.), site of Port 
Royal, 331. 



MAC 

Loyalists, in Nova Scotia, 331. 
Lubeck, Lahontan at, 648, 662, 663, 

680. 
Lucian, read by Lahontan, xiv, xv, xliv, 

116. 
Lude, Count de, 11. 
— Duchesse de, Lahontan's patron, 

1 1. 
Lutreola <vison, 1 1 1 . 
Lynx, in Canada, 343. 



Macaulay, Thomas Babington, His- 
tory of England, 665. 

MacGregory, Patrick, captured, 126} 
sketch, 126. 

Machakandibi Indians, habitat, 342} 
language, 342; characterized, 342. 

McKenney, Thomas L., Tour of the 
Lakes, 64. 

Mackenzie, Alexander, Voyages through 
North America, 219. 

Mackerel, in Canada, 358. 

Mackinac, location, xx, 92, 145, 146; 
described, 145-148; latitude, 1455 
importance, 145, 149, 318; route 
thither, xxiii, 207, 208, 218, 219; 
Indians at, 92, 98, 143, 317, 448; 
neighboring villages, 144, 145, 340, 
418, 429; agriculture, 144, 148; 
fish, 147, 148; game, 147; Jesuit 
mission, xviii, 129, 140, 146, 149; 
French settlement, 146; entrepot of 
Northwest, xli, 146; security, 147; 
prisoners shot, 144, 222; messenger 
to, 144; commandants, xviii, xxiii, 
125, 144, 164, 209; Duluth at, 72, 
73; La Tourette, 135; Lahontan, 
xx, xxii-xxiv, xl, xli, 135, 143, 149, 
*5 2 > 163-167, 208, 216, 300, 315, 
430; survivors of La Salle's expe- 
dition, xxi, 144, 145, 347; English 
traders captured near, 125; map, 146, 
3 19 j sketch, 92, 146. See also Fort 
Mackinac. 



780 



Index 



MCL 

McLennan, William, "Gentlemen of 
the King's Guard, 1 * 73; "Death of 
Duluth," 73 5 Patriarchal Theory, 
462, 510. 

Macoun, John, Catalogue of Canadian 
Birds, 356. 

Maheu (Mahu), Jean Paul, messenger 
to France, 26. 

Maine, Indians of, 49, 90, 126, 327, 
328 ; St. Castin in, xi, 328, 329 ; 
French post, 327, 328,- fort attacked, 
236, 2375 celebration by Historical 
Society, 324; Collections, 328. 

Maize, raised by Indians, 139, 140, 
148, 5025 in Acadia, 3255 Green 
Bay, 168. 

Mallery, Garrick, " Picture-Writing of 
American Indians," 512, 514. 

Malomini Indians. See Menominee In- 
dians. 

Malouins, fisheries of, 308. 

Mandrake, in Canada, 364; described, 
368. 

Manhattan (Manathe), location, 6 ; 
route to, 91. 

Manitou, Indian spirits, 345, 603. 

Mantet (Mantz, Manteht), Nicolas 
d'Ailleboust, sieur de, leads rangers 
to Fort Frontenac, 232, 233; with 
Duluth, 233; repairs Fort Frontenac, 
2335 raid against Schenectady, 236; 
sketch, 233. 

Manzanita, Spanish name for plant, 

474- 
Maples, described, 366, 3675 in Canada, 

364, 365 5 sap, 429 5 method of 

making syrup, 366, 3675 drunk by 

Indians, 170. 
Marble, varieties of, 685. 
Margry, Pierre, D'ecowvertes et etablisse- 

ment des Francais, xxxii. 
Marine, department of, in charge of 

colonies, x, xi, 5, 118,384; Lahontan 

in corps of, x. 
Marion, Fontaine, shot as deserter, 127. 



MEN 

Markham, Albert H., "Voyages and 
works of John Davis, Navigator," 
3 IO « 

Marmot. See Whistler. 

Marquette, Father Jacques, companion 
of Jolliet, 244; discoveries of, xli, 
412; establishes St. Ignace mission, 
146, 154; at Fox- Wisconsin portage, 
1 77 j describes Chicago, 207; names 
Illinois River, 205; Ohio, 205; Mis- 
souri, 200; return route, 207; map, 
200; describes berdashes, 462; michi- 
bichi, 345; calumet dance, 169,424. 

Martens, in Canada, 344; Lahontan 
hunts, 115; traps for, 482-484; skins 
of, 376; Norwegian trade in skins, 
6815 price, 379. 

Martin, Horace F., Castorologia, 171, 
*73; 346, 380, 479-481. 

Martinique, besieged, 288, 289. 

Maryland, emigrants to, 126. 

Mascoutin Indians, 174, 341. 

Maskikik, Indian remedy, 468. 

Massachusetts Historical Society, edi- 
tions of Lahontan in library of, liii- 
xciii; Collections, 237. 

Masson. L. R., Bourgeois de la Com- 
pagnie du Nord-Ouest, 41 7, 457, 468, 
483, 500. 

Matchi-Manitou, evil spirits of Indians, 
446-448.^ 

Mattawan, distance from Montreal, 219. 

Maupeau, Sieur de. accompanies Lahon- 
tan to Canada, 257, 262; preferred 
before Lahontan, xxix, 390. 

Maurault, J. A., Histoire des Abenakis, 
328. 

Maya calendar, 428. 

May-apples. See Mandrake. 

Melons, raised by Indians, 148. 

Membertou, Micmac chief, 328, 414. 

Membre, Father Zenobie, voyages, xli, 
204. 

Menneval, Robineau, sieur de, governor 
of Acadia, 327, 330. 



Index 



781 



MEN 

Menominee (Malomini) Indians, habitat, 
xxiv, 168, 3415 language, 341; vil- 
lage, 1685 entertain Lahontan, xxiv, 
1 68-1 71; French name for, 175; 
characterized, 341; sketch, 168. 

Merles, in Canada, 358. 

Merlins, in Canada, 352. 

Meules, Jacques de, intendant of New 
France, 865 recalled, 102, 103. 

Miami (Oumami) Indians, habitat, 77 j 
migrations, 775 language, 341; phy- 
sical traits, 415, 488; totems, 51 15 
characterized, 341; mission to, xviii, 
140, 2085 treatment of prisoners, 
5045 calendar, 427, 428; fur-trade 
with, 1465 allies of French, 78, 125; 
Indian allies of, 82, 486; fight Iro- 
quois, 78, 81, 82, 157, 159-164, 
208,486-488. 

Michibichi, described, 343, 345, 446. 

Michigan, Indians of, 167, 174. 

Michitonka, Miami chief, 1 61-163. 

Micmac (Souriquois) Indians, habitat, 
327, 3285 language, 339; chief, 328, 
414; devoted to French, 3285 mis- 
sions to, 3285 characterized, 339$ 
sketch, 328. 

Mink, identified, in. 

Minnesota, boundary of, 3165 Histor- 
ical Collections, 315. 

Minquas Indians, identified, 320. 

Mission Indians, assist French, 119,122, 
239, 240; enumerated, 339, 340. 
See also the several missions. 

Mississague Indians, habitat, 317; lan- 
guage, 34. 

Missouri Indians, habitat, 200; charac- 
teristics, 204, 205; migrations, 2005 
Lahontan visits, 200-2035 sketch, 
200. 

Mohawk (Agnies) Indians, English name 
for, 658; habitat, 58, 59, 341; lan- 
guage, 56, 339, 3415 Indian ene- 
mies, 905 enemies of French, 77, 80, 
2385 expedition against, 55, 59, 2245 



MOO 

Mohawk Indians (continued). 

missions, 56, 239, 339, 340 j charac- 
terized, 339. 

Mohican (Mohegan, Wolf, Fr. Loup) 
Indians, habitat, 90; characterized, 
339; language, 339; in fur-trade, 
905 wandering, 327, 328. 

Molina, Luis, Jesuit theologian, 383, 
384. 

Monroe County (N. Y.), 125, 131. 

Monsoni (Monzoni) Indians, habitat, 
342; characterized, 342; language, 
342; wandering, 3425 at Sault Ste. 
Marie, 342. 

Montagnais Indians, language, 339; 
tribes of, 261, 339, 340; at Tadous- 
sac, 31; mission, 495 trade with 
Jolliet, 305. 

Montmagny, Charles Huault de, gov- 
ernor of Canada, 40, 82. 

Montmorency County, location, 34. 

Montreal, founded, 52, 53, 233; loca- 
tion, 38; early name, 52; mountain, 
xxxvii, 55, 339, 513; island near, 
118; described, 52-56; fortifications, 
53, 88, 89, 98; government of, 52, 
53, 86, 120, 144, 202, 224, 383; 
river transportation, 657; courts, 392; 
seminary of St. Sulpice, 55; Fron- 
tenac at, 231, 232; Lahontan, xiii, 
xxv, xxvi, 48, 52-56, 88-90, 218, 
2 35> 2 39> Iroquois raid, 224, 270, 
271; commerce, 96, 97, 376; fur- 
trade,92-95; peace conference(i 701), 
149; Adario interred, 149; Denon- 
ville bound for, 103; history, 53, 
55 ; Historical Society Memoirs, 169. 

Monts, Pierre du Gas, sieur de, French 
explorer, 331. 

— Notre Dame, in Canada, 274; fish- 
eries off, 306; identified, 306. 

Montortie, — , French officer, 86, 87, 
92, 98. 

Moor-hens. See Wood-hens. 

Moose, identified, 103. 



782 



Index 



MOR 

Moracin, Sieur de, French merchant, 

6 55; 
Moravians, missions to Indians, 448. 

Morgan, Lewis H., "Houses and House- 
Life of American Aborigines," 4185 
Ancient Society, 462. 

Mortier, Corneille, cartographer, 338. 

— Pierre, bay named for, 338. 
Mosquitoes, torment of, 68. 
Mountains, Chicchack. See Monts Notre 

Dame. 

— Pyrenees, Lahontan near, ix, xxi; St. 
Castin born near, 329; timber from, 
150. 

— Shickshock. See Monts Notre Dame. 

Moyacks, in Canada, 351, 355. 

Mozeemlek, xxxix; habitat, 193; char- 
acteristics, xxiv, 187, 193,195, 196; 
enemies, 187, 194; numbers, 187, 
193, 194; houses, 1945 mistaken for 
Spaniards, 192, 1935 appearance, 1935 
refuse to go to Canada, 196. 

Mulattoes, in Europe, 284. 

Muller, Frederik, Catalogue of Books, 

Maps, Plates on America, Ixxv. 
Mullets, in Great Lakes, 359. 
Murcey, — , French officer, 97. 
Muskrats (Fiber xibethicus), in Canada, 

343, 344; manner of hunting, 110, 

11 15 price, 380. 
Mussels, in Canada, 359; described, 361 ; 

pearls of, 361. 
Myrand, Ernest, Sir William Phips 

deuant Quebec, 249. 



Nadouessioux Indians. See Sioux In- 
dians. 

Nantes, Lahontan at, 264, 279-282; 
brandy exported, 375; edict revoked, 
xlvi. 

Naroutsouat (Norridgewock, Maine), 
French post at, 328. 

Natchitoches, early French settlement, 
144. 



NEW 
Navarre, parlement of, ix. 
Nebraska, Indians in, 175. 
Needles, in fur-trade, 378. 
Neenah (Wis.), Indian village near, 

. I74> 
Neill, Edward D., identifies river, 315. 

Nelson, John, captured by French, xviii, 
265, 274; promotes Lahontan's mar- 
riage, xxviii, 389, 3 90; hypothetical 
voyage of, 311; sketch, 265. 

Nemitsakouat, Dulutlfs post, 315. 

Nepisirini Indians. See Nipissing Indians. 

New Brunswick, Indians of, 90, 327; 
celebration by Historical Society, 3 24. 

— England, boundary, 323, 400; In- 
dians, 49, 90, 126, 327, 328; early 
explorations, 311; English, 237, 399; 
forts, 236; raided by French, 236, 
237; French in, 127, 3305 negotia- 
tions with French, 385; Wheler in, 
289; fisheries, 399, 400. 

Newfoundland, 274, 275; described, xxx, 
xxxii, 27, 259, 287, 288, 295, 302, 
305, 308, 309, 33 2 -339^348, 355> 
374, 401; early explorations, 303, 

307, 308; early name, 3075 included 
in Canada, 302; natives, 309, 334; 
white population, 332, 337; English, 
332; Basques, 308, 333; French, 
xxix, 275-279, 332, 334; officers in, 
12, 266; visited by bishop, 232; by 
Iberville, 2365 Lahontan in, xxx, 
xxxii, lxi, 9, 281; storms, 27, 274; 
trade, 282, 288; maps, lxi, 28, 30, 
259. 

New France, Indian name for, 93; boun- 
daries, 301-303, 400, 414; physical 
characteristics, 285, 391; rivers, 64; 
forests, 70 j mountains, 50; climate, 
xii, 38, 41, 45, 46, 104, 106, 249, 
250; animals, 104-117, 343"349> 
48 1 j birds, 350-356; fruits, 364- 
372; fish and fisheries, 305, 306, 

308, 358-363, 394; Indian tribes, 
339-34 2 i 7*05 their languages, 46, 



Index 



783 



NEW 

New France {continued). 

47 j discovery by whites, 303} limits 
of exploration, 304; white settle- 
ment, 31, 303, 331 j Indian opposi- 
tion, 303; population, 304; com- 
merce and fur-trade, 33, 54, 96, 97, 
99, 101, 102, 235, 280, 326, 373- 

378, 3 82 , 39 1 , 39 2 , 394, 657, 681; 
commercial companies, xi, 34, 41, 
9 1 , 2 53, 3°3> 3 8 *; agriculture, 35, 
39, 55j navigation, 64, 65; travell- 
ing, 45, 46, 62-65, 70; Indian wars, 
58-61,- troops, 26, 36,72, 119, 392; 
relations with Iroquois, 6, 26, 45, 
59, 60, 9 2 ~94, 3 8 5, 3975 govern- 
ment, xxxviii, 329, 381-393; gover- 
nors, xi, 25, 26, 41, 42, 59, 97, 
11 9, 2 35, 3 8l » 3 8 4, 404 — see also 
Onontio; local governors, 51, 382, 
383; intendants, 41, 42, 44, 102, 
i°3, 239, 382, 384, 3925 sover- 
eign council, 41, 42, 44, 45, 230, 
382, 385, 402; judiciary, 44, 45, 
392; noblesse, 98, 260, 386} seig- 
niories, 26, 34, 39 j feudalism, 34, 
36, 53, 260; land allotments, 36; 
luxury, 55, 97, 391, 3925 Indian 
allies, 26, 92—95, 119, 270-272; 
ecclesiastics, 42, 43, 383, 386, 542- 
545; habitants, xii, xxxviii, 34-38, 
49> 3 8 7> 39 1 , 399, 4° 2 > manufac- 
tures, 392; invaded by Kirk, 31; 
Praps' s expedition, 242-250; capital, 
39-44, 33^5 histories, 412,413. 

— Holland. See New York. 

— Mexico, French exploration towards, 
144; inhabitants of, 191. 

— York (New Holland, New Nether- 
lands), Indian name for, 82, 236; 
boundaries, 6; discovery, 31 15 route 
from Canada to, 90, 915 incite Iro- 
quois against French, 237; Canadian 
raid, 235, 236; troops to invade 
Canada, 240; French negotiations, 
385; governors, 61, 78, 79, 157, 



NOR 

New York (continued). 

287; fur-trade, 126, 395-397, 3995 
editions of Lahontan in Public Lib- 
rary, liii-xciii; in Historical Society 
Library, liii-xciii; Colonial Docu- 
ments, 68, 72, 74, 86,87, I2 *>, 131, 
J 3 6 > J 39, *55, *S7> ^2, 220, 222, 
236, 237, 240, 241, 262, 271, 327, 
461, 486; State Paleontologist's 
Report, 305. 

— York City (Manathe), name for, 6; 
French prisoner at, 239; easy to cap- 
ture, 239; Adario in, 519. 

Niagara, location, 131; fort at, 131; 
Lahontan leaves, xix, 135, 220; 
portage, xix, 136; Seneca village, 
137; troops near, 73. 

— Falls of, first described, xix, 136, 
137; beasts and fish killed in, 137; 
passage under, 137. 

Nicolet, Jean, French explorer, 209, 
244. 

Nicolas, Huron chief, revolts, 461. 

Nicollet, I. N., American explorer, xl. 

Nicotiana tabacum, 474; rustica, 474. 

Nider, — , Formicarius, 703, 704. 

Nightingales, in Canada, 350, 354. 

Niles (Mich.), French fort near, 208. 

Nipissing (Nepisirini) Indians, habitat, 
218, 342; characterized, 342; lan- 
guage, 342; original Algonquians, 
342; numbers, 342; sketch, 342. 

Nopemen d'Achirini. See Achirigouans. 

Noquets (Nocke) Indians, habitat, 317; 
language, 340. 

Normans, early fisheries of, 305; early 
settlers, 402; founders of Canadian 
commerce, 373. 

Norridgewock. See Naroutsouat. 

Norsemen, early discovery of America 
by, 307, 309; silver miners, 681. 

North America, size, xxxvi, 210, 211, 
299, 300; maps, 300; explorations 
of coast, 303, 304, 307, 309-314. 

— Sea, channels in, 6585 islands, 664. 



7 8 4 



Index 



NOR 

North West Company, in fur-trade, 316. 
Northwest (Old), not part of Canada, 

302, 3035 Indians of, 305; St. Lusson 

takes possession, 342. 

— Passage, explorations for, 310, 312. 
Notre Dame du Mont Carmel, order of, 

254. 

— des Anges, Recollect convent, 44. 
Noue, Sieur de la, at Kaministiquia, 3 1 6. 
Nova Scotia, bays, 330, 331; Indians^ 

328; Scotch, 331; Loyalists, 3315 
land grants, 2655 Historical Society, 
324. See also Acadia. 
Nut-trees, in Canada, 364, 369. 



Oaks, of Acadia, 325, 3265 Canada, 
3645 Lake Erie, 319. 

Oars, described, 65. 

Ochagach, map drawn by, 427. 

Oiseau Mouche. See Humming Birds. 

Ojibwa, Indians, to Chippewa Indians. 

Oka, Indian mission village, 55. 

Oklahoma, Indian reservations in, 174, 
175, 202, 204. 

Old Port auChoix(Newfoundland), 308. 

Old South Leaflets, 303. 

Oleron, St. Casting birthplace, xxi, 150, 
151, 328. 

Olier, Jean Jacques, founder of Sulpi- 
tians, 55. 

Omaha Indians, 499, 509. 

Oneida (Onnoyoutes) Indians, habitat, 
58, 32*3, 341; French enemies, 77, 
80; to waylay English embassadors, 
238. 

Onondaga (Onnontagues) Indians, hab- 
itat, 58, 77, 80, 81, 323, 3415 lan- 
guage, 3415 council house among, 
58; embassy to, 61, 74, 77, 238, 
2395 orator, 745 chief, 2225 Miami 
raid, 162; attack Miami, 163. 

— French captive at, 270. 

Onontio, title of governor of Canada, 
80, 82, 84, 404. 



OTT 

Onoyout Indians, to Oneida Indians. 

Ontario, boundary of, 316} Indians, 3 1 7, 
3425 Historical Society Records and 
Papers ; 484$ Archaeological Report, 

484. 

— County (New York), 127. 

Openango Indians, habitat, 90, 328; 
language, 3395 characterized, 339; 
in fur-trade, 90. 

Opossum, described, 3475 habitat, 343. 

Orange. See Albany. 

Originals. See Elks. 

Ortolans, in Canada, 351, 356. 

Ortyx uirginianusy 353. 

Osage Indians, habitat, 202; character- 
istics, 204, 2055 sketch, 202. 

Oshkosh (Wis.), Indian village near, 
174. 

Ossa. See Opossum. 

Oswego County (New York), 72. 

Oto (Otentas, Otontantas) Indians, early 
form of name, 200 j habitat, 19 8-200 j 
agriculturists, xx, 1995 Missouri 
amalgamate with, 200 j Lahontan 
visits, 199, 200; sketch, 200. 

Otontagan Indians, Ottawa band, 153 

Otreouate. See Grangula. 

Otsi Keta, Iroquois name for Lake St. 
Clair, 139. 

Ottawa (Outaoua) Indians, tribes of, 
153, 3*7, 340; habitat, 73, 92, 143, 
153, 3*7, 34o; physical traits, 415} 
hair dressing, 1535 language, 176, 
340; totems, 511 5 religious hymn, 
449, 450; hunting grounds, 210, 
317; agriculturists, 1485 treatment of 
prisoners, 144, 504; characterized, 
5035 calendar, 427, 428} hunting 
expedition, 1435 first encounter 
French, 1535 relations to Lahontan, 
xvii, xxiv, xxv, 132, 165, 167, 177, 
181, 184, 189, 216-2185 relations 
with other tribes, 73, 146, 149; 
153-161, 209, 317, 321, 340, 397, 
5035 in fur-trade, 81, 92, 95, 241, 



Index 



78s 



OTT 

Ottawa Indians (continued) 

under Duluth, 73; under Denon- 
ville, xvii, 125; cowardly, 156, 159, 
160, 163, 216, 217} at Mackinac, 
145-147, 317,429; mission to, xviii, 
129, 131, 140; sketch, 340. 

Otters, in Acadia, 326; Canada, 344 j 
River Long, 206; enemies of, 485; 
attack beavers, 485; used as bait, 
484; hunted, 112-114, 482; price 
of skins, 113, 379; Norwegian trade 
in, 681; varieties of pelts, 379. 

Ouadebaton Indians. See Wahpeton. 

Ouiatonon Indians, habitat, 341; lan- 
guage, 341 ; characterized, 341 ; 
sketch, 341. 

Oureahe (Ourehaoue), Cayuga chief, 
sketch, 233, 234. 

Outagami Indians. See Fox Indians. 

Outchipoue Indians. See Chippewa 
Indians. 



Pacific Ocean, rivers flowing to, 200; 
discovery of route to, xxxix. 

Paltsits, Victor Hugo, Bibliography of 
Lahontan, xxxvi, xlviii, xlix, li-xciii; 
of Hennepin, xlix. 

Paneasse Indians, tribe of Pawnee, 200. 

Panetouka Indians, tribe of Pawnee, 
200. 

Panimaha (Pawnee, Loup) Indians, tribe 
of Pawnee, 182, 199, 200. 

Papinachois Indians, significance of 
name, 261; habitat, 261, 340; lan- 
guage, 339; nomads, 339, 340; trade 
with Jolliet, 305; missions, 340; 
sketch, 339, 340. 

Paris, parlement of, supports Lahon- 
tan' s creditors, 151, 253; members, 
257; churches, 165; Lahontan in, 
xxvi, 252, 684-696; Adario, 536; 
witchcraft, 701 ; papers from archives, 
293; editions of Lahontan in Biblio- 
theque Nationale, liii-xciii. 
60 



PET 

Parkman, Francis, 77; cites Lahontan, 
xxxiv, 223; Frontenac, 45, 77, 124, 
126, 223, 234, 241, 262, 381; 
Jesuits in North America, 58, 155, 
418; La Salle, xxxiv, 61, 136, 145, 
205; Old Regime, 34, 37, 217, 385. 

— Club (Milwaukee), Papers, 133, 312. 
Parrots (Paroquets), in Canada, 3 5 o, 3 54. 
"Partridge" (Akouessan), Indian name 

for Longueuil, 74, 77, 81, 84. 

Partridges, described, 350, 351, 353, 
355, 356; numbers, 106, 356; in 
Newfoundland, 332; used for Indian 
food, 431. 

Passage Courant. See Strait of Canso. 

Passamaquoddy Indians, 328. See also 
Abenaki. 

Pau, parlement of, 150, 707, 712, 713. 

Pawnee Indians, sketch, 199, 200. 

Pearls, in St. Lawrence River, 361. 

Pears, in Canada, 367. 

Pease, raised by Indians, 148; at Green 
Bay, 168; on River Long, 187; ex- 
ported, 367, 373. 

Pelicans, in Canada, 350. 

Peltrie, Madame de la, patroness of 
Ursulines, 44. 

Pemaquid (Me.), birthplace of Phips, 
244; projected attack on, 265, 274. 

Pennsylvania, Indians of, 320. 

Penobscot Indians, 328. See also Abe- 
naki. 

Pentagoet, French fort at, xxviii, 328. 

Peoria (111.), fort near, 207. 

Perce Rock, fishing village at, 305. See 
also Isle Perce. 

Perch, in Mississippi River, 359. 

Perrot, Francois Marie, governor of 
Montreal, 53; of Acadia, 53, 327, 
330; succeeded by Callieres, 86; 
yields to English, 327; sketch, 53. 

— Nicolas, French explorer, xxxix, xli; 
Memoir e, 379. 

Perusse-trees, 365; described, 371. 
Petit Nord, fisheries, 308, 334. 



786 



Index 



PET 

Pctronius, Lahontan' s copy mutilated, 
xv, 89, 90. 

Petun Indians. See Huron Indians. 

Pheasants, in Canada, 3 50, 3 5 3 $ on Lake 
Erie, 3225 River Long, 180. 

Phips, Sir William, attack on Quebec, 
xxvi, 242-250$ captures Port Royal, 
244, 327, 3 30 j governor of Massa- 
chusetts, 244, 289 j sketch, 244. 

Phoca <vitulina, 349. 

Pickerel, in Fox River, 174. 

Pigeons (wild), numerous in Canada, 
109, no, 350, 351 j migration, 109, 
1 12. 

Pike, in Canada, 3585 in Mississippi, 
3595 Wisconsin Lakes, 174. 

Pilling, James Constantine, Bibliography 
of Algonquian Languages •, Hi, 734. 

Pine trees, in Canada, 365, 370. 

Pineapples, in Canada, 364. 

Pingo, Captain — , commands " Tem- 
pest,' * 26. 

Pipestone (Minn.), quarries at, 76. 

Piquer defondy 65. 

Pirates, in Atlantic, 296, 327, 374. 

Pirogues, on River Long, 187, 188, 193. 

Placentia (Newfoundland), location^ 35 $ 
harbor, 335, 336, 3385 fisheries, 336, 
337> 3745 fortified, 275-278, 282, 
288, 289, 334, 335, 348$ popula- 
tion, 336-338; Lahontan at, xxix, 
xxxi, xxxii, 275-279, 287-290, 292, 
294, 295, 621, 694; English attack, 
xxix, 275-278, 281; natives, 309; 
governors, xxix, 276, 292, 3375 
sketch, 275. 

Plaice, in Canada, 358. 

Platina, Bartolommeo de Sacchis, Vita 
Pontificium, 703, 704. 

Plovers, in Canada, 351. 

Plum trees, on Lake Erie, 319. 

Plums, described, 367. 

Plungeons, in Canada, 350, 351. 

Poagan, Indian name for calumet, 402. 

Podophyllum peltatum, 368. 



POR 

Pointe Verte, in Placentia harbor, 278, 

336. 
Pole-cats, in Canada, 3445 price of skins, 

380. 
"Poli," commanded by Iberville, 274. 
Pontchartrain, Jerome Phelypeaux, count 

de, opposes Lahontan, 5, 10; sketchy. 

— Louis Phelypeaux, count de, opposes 
Lahontan, xxvi, xxx, xxxii, 5, 10,252, 
254, 273, 280, 281, 338, 647, 688, 
694-696$ sketch, 5. 

— Madame de, xxix, 257, 390. 
Pontiac, Ottawa chief, 149, 340. 
Pope, Joseph, Jacques Cartier, 303. 
Popular Science Monthly , 76. 
Porcelain. See Wampum. 
Porcupine, in Canada, in, 112, 344. 
Porphry, in Canada, 43; on Cape Breton 

and Newfoundland, 333. 
Porpoises, described, 358, 360. 
Port au Basques (Newfoundland), 333. 

— Nelson, named by Button, 311. 

— Ontario (New York), 72. 

— Royal (Annapolis), 265$ location, 
330, 331$ described, 330$ founded, 
3*4, 3*8, 33°, 33M harbor, 330, 
331$ basin, 330, 331$ poorly forti- 
fied, 327, 330$ captured by Phips, 
244, 327, 330$ fur-trade, 331$ popu- 
lation, 330, 331$ tercentenary cele- 
brated, 324, 331; sketch, 330. 

— Royal (France), retreat of Jansenists, 
384. 

Portugal, described, 9$ climate, 642$ 
manners and customs, 619-647$ cos- 
tumes, 641$ inns, 627, 628, 634; 
food, 627, 634, 635$ wine, 635$ 
literature, 638, 639; music, 640, 641$ 
religion, 639$ Inquisition, xlvi, 631, 
632$ monks, 632, 633, 639$ law, 
642, 643,646$ army and navy, 643- 
645$ sailors, 650$ pay of officers, 
644$ use of titles, 621, 629, 641$ 
royal order, 647$ weights and meas- 
ures, 646$ monetary system, 645, 



Index 



7S7 



POR 

Portugal (continued). 

646; transportation methods, 633, 
634; colonies, 282, 284; women 
wear veils, 636} behind gratings, 6345 
morality of, 635-638; witchcraft in, 
701; mulattoes, 284; Lahontan in, 
xxxii, lxi, 282-287, 294-296, 619; 
cartography, 376; Portuguese in New- 
foundland, 333. 

Porzana Carolina, no. 

Pot, French liquid measure, 430. 

Potawatomi (Pouteouatami, Pouteout- 
ami) Indians, Algonquian tribe, 398; 
habitat, xxiv, 167, 168, 341, 398; 
language, 341 ; totems, 511$ villages, 
168; bay named for, 167; at war 
with Iroquois, 167; Lahontan with, 
xxiv, 16 8-1 71; sketch, 168; charac- 
terized, 341. 

Portachua. See Old Port au Choix. 

Portage (land carriage), described, 404; 
at Chicago, xxiv, 207; Fox- Wiscon- 
sin described, 177, 178; history, 177, 
178; Lahontan at, xxiv, 177; canal, 
177; Grand, 316; from Lake Erie, 
155; of Toronto, 273; au Vase 
(Ottawa route), 219. 

Portland (Me.), fort on site, 237. 

Portneuf, Jacques Robineau, sieur de, 
leads raid into Maine, 236, 237; 
seigniory, 260; seigniory harborage, 
261; son, 330; sketch, 237, 260. 

Poterie, Le Neuf de la, Canadian no- 
blesse, 260. 

Poutrincourt, Jean de Biencourt, sieur 
de, French explorer, 331. 

Powder, in fur-trade, 377. 

Powell, John W., "Linguistic Families 
of North America," 47; "Mythol- 
ogy of North American Indians," 
435 5 "Wyandot Government/' 
499, 500. 

Pownall, J., quoted, 155. 

Prices, of Indian products, 148. 

Prince Society, Publications, 312. 



RAC 
Prowse, D. W., History of Newfound- 
land, 3 34- 
Ptolemy, Claudius, early geographer, 302. 
Pulse, in Acadia, 325. 
Puma, described, 345. 
Putnam, Herbert, aid acknowledged, liii. 
Pyrrho, Greek philosopher, 414. 
Pyrricha, compared to Indian dance, 423. 



Quail, in Canada, 353. 

Quapaw Indians, habitat, 204. 

Quebec (Kebec), founded, 303, 331; 
described, xii, xiii, xxxvii, 39-45; 
location, 39, 40; plan of, 41; forti- 
fications, 40, 41, 263, 265, 266; 
chateau, xxvii, 40-42, 235, 262; 
intendant's palace, 41, 42, 243, 244, 
392; bishop, 42, 43, 165, 381-383, 
386, 389; churches, 42, 44, 237, 
386; hospitals, 44; university, no; 
city hall, 43; Jesuit college, 43, 259; 
Recollects, 43, 44; feudalism abol- 
ished, 34; commerce, 374-378; 
river transportation, 657; society, 
xii, xxvii, 388-390; courts, 392; 
local governor, 383; Frontenac in, 
230, 231; Lahontan, xi, xxvii, 32, 
49, 216, 226, 230, 258, 261, 262, 
708; Adario, 519; attacked by En- 
glish, 44, 118, 242-250; letter from, 
25; archives, 304; editions of Lahon- 
tan in legislative library, liii-xciii. 

Queylus, Gabriel, Sulpitian superior, 55. 

Quinte, Indian village, 121, 122. 

Quiros, Francesco Bernado de, Spanish 
diplomat, 11, 12. 

Quoddy Indians, English name for Ope- 
nango, 90. See also Etechemin-. 



Rabbits, in Canada, 343. 

Rabeyre, Lieutenant de la, burned by 

Iroquois, 224. 
Rackets. See Snow-shoes. 



788 



Index 



RAD 

Radisson, Pierre Esprit, in Wisconsin, 
177; visits Hudson Bay, 312; on 
Lake Superior, 312, 315; French 
reject proposals, 313; goes over to 
English, 3 1 3 j returns to French, 313; 
sketch, 312; Voyages, 312. 

Rails, in Canada, no, 350. 

Raisins, on Missouri River, 202; on 
Illinois, 206. 

Kangifer caribou, 107. 

Rapids, Allumettes (Ottawa), 216. 

Raspberries, in Canada, 365, 372. 

Rat, Huron chief. See Adario. 

Rattlesnakes, in Canada, 352, 357. 

Ravens, in Canada, 350, 352. 

Read, John M., Historical inquiry con- 
cerning Henry Hudson, 309. 

Recollects (Recollets), Franciscan mis- 
sionaries, xxxvi 5 early Canadian 
service, 31, 43, 44, 55, 70, 413; 
opposed by Laval, 435 by Jesuits, 
43> 44> 3 8 3> 4 I 3 3 supported by 
Frontenac, 4135 aid La Salle, 144, 
145; relations with Lahontan, xxxi, 
290-29 3 j opinion of Indians, 413, 
414; sketch, 44, 413. 

Reid Transinsular Railroad, Newfound- 
land, 333. 

Reindeer. See Caribou. 

Religion, Jesuit and savage compared, 

5I7-550- 

Renard Indians. See Fox Indians. 

Repentigny, Jean Paul le Gardeur, sieur 
de St. Pierre de, at Mackinac, 208, 
209; messenger to Fort Frontenac, 
226 ; sketch, 209. 

Revenclaw, Count de, Danish minister,, 
670. 

Ribbons, Canadian import, 375. 

Richelieu, Cardinal Armand Jean du 
Plessis, establishes feudalism in Can- 
ada, 34. 

Rigauville. See Bergeres. 

River Abittibi, located, 342. 

— of Algonkins. See Ottawa. 



RIV 

River Allegheny, portages to, 1 55 ; Wash- 
ington* s embassy, 209. 

— Arkansas, Indians of, 204. 

— Aspe, valley of, 716. 

— Aspree, shipping on, 660. 

— Au Sable (Mich.), described, 143. 

— Bagouasch, location, 315. 

— Bois Brule, Indian rendezvous, 315. 

— Cannon, identified as River Long, 
xl. 

— de la Chaudiere, village on, 49. 

— Chicago, drainage canal, 207. 

— Conde, described, 321 ; identified, 
155; fort, 155,156} convenience, 399. 

— Creuse (Deep), part of Ottawa, 216, 
219. 

— Des Moines (Otentas), identified as 
River Long, xlj described, 199, 200; 
Indians, 199, 2005 fish, 363. 

— Detroit, described, 161; islands, 139, 
161; war-party on, 155, 161 j fort, 
139; Lahontan passes, 138. 

— Divine. See Illinois. 

— Du Fer, affluent of Hudson, 91. 

— Ebro, Saragossa on, 719; navigable, 
725. 

— Elbe, mouth of, 65 95 tide, 659; ship- 
ping, 66oj Hamburg on, 659, 6605 
Glucstat, 68 8. 

— Famine, location, 72 ; La Barre's 
expedition at, xiii, 72-79; salmon, 
74; Adario's ambuscade, 223. 

— Fox (Puants, Renards), Lahontan 
describes, xxiv, xlii, 168, 173, 174; 
Indian villages, 168; French names 
for, 168; Jesuit mission, 168; fertil- 
ity of banks, 168; navigation of, 
174, 177, 178; beaver in, 481. 

— French, origin of name, 218; de- 
scribed, 317; route to upper country, 
218; navigation difficult, 218; fort 
advised, 399. 

— Genessee, outlet of, 322; Seneca 
near, 137; vessels to visit, 395. 

— Grand, near Lake Ontario, 321, 322. 



Index 



789 



RIV 

River Grand (Mo.), Indian village at 
mouth, 200. 

— Hudson (Manathe, Manhattan), loca- 
tion, 7; Indians upon, 905 connects 
with Canada, 91. 

— H umber, on Toronto portage route, 

3I . 8 '. 

— Illinois (Seignelay), described, 205, 

2065 early name for, 205; navigation, 
2055 gameon banks, 206} fruit, 206} 
forts, 2075 portage, 2075 Lahontan 
at mouth, xxiv, 205—207. 

— Kennebec, boundary of New En- 
gland, 3235 Englishman captured on, 
265; French missions, 329, 330. 

— Lemipisaki, identified, 315. 

— au Lievre, tributary of Ottawa, 217. 

— Lima, Viana on, 621. 

— Lisbon (O Rey dos Rios), tide in, 
641. 

— Loire, 279. 

— Long, described, xxiv; source, 193; 
affluent of Mississippi, 167, 179; 
shores barren, 189, 190, 197; fish 
and game, 179, 183, 197, 206, 363; 
navigation, 179, 197; Lahontan' s 
alleged journey to, xxiii, xxiv, 
xxxviii-xliii, 179-197, 301, 414; 
limits of Lahontan' s voyage, xxiv, 
190; regarded as fictitious, xxiii, 
xxxviii, xxxix ; proposed identifica- 
tions, xxxix, xl; on maps, xxxviii, xlv, 
301. 

— du Loup, location, 51. 

— of Machakandibi, identified, 315; 
navigation, 314. 

— Maheu, fief upon, 26. 

— Maitland (Ont.). See Theonontate. 

— Manathe. See Hudson. 

— Manhattan. See Hudson. 

— Maskinonge, location, 51. 

— Mattawan, described, 216, 219. 

— Miami (Oumamis), Indian hunting 
grounds on, 486. 

— of Miami. See St. Joseph. 



RIV 
River Michipiciton, navigation of, 3 1 4, 

3 1 5- 

— Minnesota, identified with River 
Long, xxxix, xl. 

— Mississippi, longitude, 302; described, 

167, 178, 197, 205, 206; routes to, 

168, 178, 2075 islands, 178, 206; 
fish and game, 343, 359, 362, 363 5 
parrots near, 3545 crocodiles, 204, 
205, 343; fruit, 367; Indians of, 
174, *75, 203, 204, 342, 462, 7475 
early voyages on, 149, 200, 204, 
205; Jolliet, 81; La Salle, 33, 88, 
144, 145 j Lahontan, xxiv, 178, 179, 
197-200, 203-205; Le Sueur, xxxix; 
French fort, xxxix; fur-trade, 146; 
western boundary of Canada, 302, 
4 J 4> 733 5 diseases, 465,466. 

— Missouri (Pekitanoui), significance of 
name, 200; current, 200, 203; fish 
and game, 200, 203, 363; Indians, 
200, 205, 343; first visitors, 200; 
Lahontan explores, 200-203, 301, 
465, 466; map, 301. 

— Moingona. See Des Moines. 

— Moose, identification, 315; tributary, 
342. 

— Muddy. See de Vase. 

— Nelson, described, 311; post on, 313. 

— Nicolet, location, 51. 

— Nipigon, identified, 315. 

— Nottawausaga. See Theonontate. 

— Ohio (Ouabouskiguo), early names 
for, 205; depth, 205; navigable, 205; 
portage, 321; boundary of Canada, 
302; Indians upon, 204; Lahontan 
at mouth, xxiv, 205; fort at mouth, 
144; parrots on, 354. 

— Osage, Lahontan reaches, 202. 

— Oswego (Onnontagnes, Onondaga), 
identified, 72, 322; vessels to visit, 
395- 

— Otentas. See Des Moines. 

— Ottawa, described, xxxvii, 95; rapids, 
216, 270; islands, 216; tributaries, 



790 



Index 



RIV 

River Ottawa {continued). 

216, 217, 2195 union with St. Law- 
rence, 219; Indians on, 98, 323, 
3425 fur-trade route, 218, 219, 3995 
Lahontan descends, xxv, 216-218. 

— Ouabache. See Wabash and Ohio. 

— Ozao, Laruns on, 712. 

— Papinachois, location, 261. 

— Pekitanoui. See Missouri. 

— Penobscot, French fort on, 328; In- 
dians near, 339. 

— Platte, Indians on, 200. 

— Portneuf, location, 260. 

— des Prairies. See Ottawa. 

— Richelieu, location, 51, 905 trade 
route, 240. 

— Rupert, post on, 313. 

— Saco, Indians of, 90. 

— St. Charles (Quebec), 41, 42, 44, 
264. 

— St. Clair, described, xx; ice in, 141; 
fort on, xviii, 139. 

— St. Croix, Poutrincourt on, 331. 

— St. Francis, location, 51. 

— St. John, described, 325; Indians 
near, 3395 hunting upon, 3255 
French on. xxviii; Englishman cap- 
tured at, 265; posts upon, 324, 325. 

— St. Joseph (Mich.), Lahontan at, 207, 
208, 210; La Salle's fort on, 208; 
later French fort, 208. 

— St. Lawrence, described, xxxvii, 31, 
39, 264, 3045 source, 304, 3235 
length, 304; breadth, 3055 shores, 
26 1 j forests, 70 j current, 304; winds, 
261 j becomes salt, 323; ice in, xi, 
3 2 > 3 8 >45> 9°> 2 3 2 > 249,250,266} 
navigation, 49-53, 67, 122, 261, 
262, 270, 65 7 } affluents, 49, 219, 261, 
306} islands, 31,39,52, 11 8,260,261, 
305; rapids, 67-70, 85, 122, 226, 
2325 lakes within, 51, 67, 219; fish, 
306, 358, 360, 361, 401; harbors, 
2615 boats on, 239, 241, 242, 657; 
Indians on, 90, 221, 223, 3405 early 



ROC 
River St. Lawrence (continued). 

explorations, 303 j voyages on, 260- 
262, 274; naval battles off mouth, 
259, 260; French captured on, 243; 
Canadian boundary, 3025 seigniories 
on, 34, 260; cities on, 38. 

— St. Louis. See Illinois. 

— St. Mary, route to, 153. 

— St. Maurice, described, 50; flows 
into St. Lawrence, 49, 51; Indians 
on, 340. 

— St. Peter's. See Minnesota. 

— Saginaw, described, 319; hunting 
grounds of, 143, 318} Indian murder 
at, 146. 

— Saguenay, location, 31; Jolliet as- 
cends, 2445 vessels refuge in, 244, 
249. 

— Salmon, identified, 72, 322. 

— Sand. See Au Sable. 

— Seignelay. See Illinois. 

— Taio, Lahontan on, 629, 630, 648, 
649. 

— Tanaouate, 322; identified, 318. 

— Theonontate(Teonontate), in Huron 
country, 154, 318, 322. 

— of Toronto, outlet, 322. 

— Trent, portage to Lake Ontario, 318. 

— of Tsonontouans. See Genessee 
River and Irondequoit Creek. 

— de Vase (Muddy), on Ottawa route, 
219. 

— Wabash (Ouabache), early name for 
Ohio, 205. 

— Wisconsin, described, 177, 178; 
islands in, 177, 1785 Lahontan on, 
xxiv, 177, 178. 

— Wolf (Wis.), Indian village on, 174. 

— Yamaska, location, 51. 
Riverside Natural History, 478. 
Roach, in Canada, 358, 362. 
Robineau. See Portneuf. 

Rochelle, port of departure for Canada, 
xi, xxvii, 25, 26, 40, 119, 120, 145, 
229, 235, 238, 373, 374, 3775 La- 



Index 



791 



ROC 

Rochelle (continued). 

hontan at, 242, 252, 2575 harbor, 
294; merchant of, 296, 6575 Adario 
in, 536. ^ 

Roe-bucks, in Canada, 343; Lake Erie, 
320, 322; near Detroit, 139, 161 j 
in Illinois, 206 j near Lake Michigan, 
210; as food, 169, 187, 367, 482$ 
price of skins, 380. 

Rolland, Francois le Noir, dit, Lachine 
trader, 240. 

Roots, used as medicine, 161. 

Rotterdam, Lahontan at, 648, 651, 652, 
692. 

Rouen, birthplace of Gueudeville, xlivj 
merchants found Quebec, 303. 

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, anticipated 
by Lahontan, xlvii; Discours sur 
V Origine et les Fondements de 
VInegalite parmi les Hommes, xlvii, 
xlviii. 

Roy, Edmond, opinion as to River Long, 
xl, xli; "Le Baron de Lahontan,' * 
xviii, xl, Hi, 37, 151, 257, 273, 279, 
288, 293, 391; bibliography of La- 
hontan, Hi. 

Ruche, fish implement, 406. 

Rupert Land, Indians of, 342. 



Sabin, Joseph, Dictionary of Books relat- 
ing to America, Hi, lxxv, lxxxii. 

Sabres, in fur-trade, 378. 

Sacacommis, identified, 474. 

Saco (Me.), attacked by Indians, 90. 

Saentsouan, Huron chief, 141. 

Sagard-Theodat, Gabriel, Histoire du 
Canada et voyages que les freres 
mineurs Re collets y ontfaicts, 413. 

Saguenay County (Quebec), 261. 

"St. Albans," English man-of-war, 276, 
277. 

" St. Ann," Lahontan in charge of, 274. 

St. Bento, Benedictine monastery in 
Lisbon, 630. 



ST. V 

St. Castin, Anselm, son of Jean Vincent, 
influence with Indians, 328. 

— Baron Jean Vincent, sketch, xi, 328, 

3*9-. 
St. Denis. See Juchereau. 
St. Francis de Sales, mission village, 46, 

48, 49, 328. 

— du Sault, mission village, 56. 

— Xavier mission. See Green Bay. 
Ste. Helene, Jacques le Moyne, sieur 

de, 118} leads raid against Schnec- 
tady, 2365 Lahontan encounters, 2175 
expedition to Hudson Bay, 2175 
death, 248. 

St. Ignace, mission of, 146, 154. 

St. John (N. B.), tercentenary cele- 
brated, 3 24 j attacked by English, 

3*5- 

St. John de Luz, trade with Newfound- 
land, 282, 288} sketch, 288. 

St. John de Pied de Port, roads, 716. 

St. Johns (Newfoundland), described, 

333- 
St. Lazare, order of, Lahontan receives, 

xxvi, 253, 254; history, 254. 
St. Louis, La Salle's colony in Illinois, 

33- 

St. Lusson, Simon Francois Daumont, 
sieur de, takes possession of North- 
west, 342. 

St. Malo, fishers and explorers from, 
308. 

St. Michel, — , captured by Iroquois, 
270. 

— order of, ix. 

St. Nazaire, French harbor, 279, 281, 

287. 
St. Pierre, Jacques le Gardeur, sieur de, 

receives Washington, 209. 
St. Simon, Louis de Rouvroy, due de, 

Memoirs , 227. 
St. Sulpice, Parisian church, 165. 
St. Vallier, Jean Baptiste de la Croix 

Chevriere, abbe de, bishop of Quebec, 

l6 5> 3 83 j arrives in Canada, 2325 



792 



Index 



ST. V 

St. Vallier {continued). 

visits diocese, 2325 adjusts cures, 
386; intercedes for English envoy, 
246; sketch, 165, 383; portrait, 165. 

"Salleeman," pirate ship, 296. 

Salmon, in Acadia, 324; Canada, 3585 
Newfoundland, 33 35 Famine River, 

74- 
Salvelinus namycush, 148. 
Sandaouires, Huron Indian, 146. 
Santee Indians. See Issati. 
Sasteretsi, Huron chiefs, sketch, 461. 
Sauk (Saki) Indians, habitat, xxiv, 168, 

341; language, 3415 village, 168; 

entertain Lahontan, xxiv, 168-171; 

amalgamate with Foxes, 175, 397, 

398; sketch, 168} characterized, 341. 
Sault du Buisson, St. Lawrence rapid, 67. 

— des Cedres, St. Lawrence rapid, 67. 

— de la Chaudiere. See St. Francis de 
Sales. 

— Long (of Ottawa), defended by 
Dollard, 217; Lahontan passes, 2175 
Iroquois battle, 270. 

— Long (of St. Lawrence), 67, 68. 

— au Recollet, mission village, 55. 

— Ste. Marie, described, 152, 153,316; 
legend, 152; Indians of, 149, 152, 
340, 342, 493,494; war-party from, 
xxii, 153; Lahontan at, xxii, 152, 
153; fort, 149, 488, 489; mission, 
xviii, 1 49 j importance, 149, 152; 
sketch, 149. 

— St. Louis origin of name, 66; de- 
scribed, 66, 6y, mission village on, 
56, 239, 339, 340; Lahontan endan- 
gered in, xxv, 2 1 9 j Jolliet loses papers 
in, 219, 244. 

Saulteur Indians. See Chippewa. 

Saurel, Pierre de, Canadian seignior, 52. 

Savary, A. W. , County of Annapolis, 330. 

Saw-mills, in Canada, 371. 

Scadding, Henry, antiquarian of To- 
ronto, 154, 155, 318; Toronto of 
Old, 318. 



SHI 

Schefer, John, Lapland, 705. 
Schenectady (Corlaer), raided by French, 

2 33> 2 35> 2 3 6 - 
Schuyler, Peter, leads raiding party, 

262; " Report," 262. 
Sciuropterus volucella, 348. 
Scotch, in Nova Scotia, 331. 
Scurvy, described, 406; causes, 676-678. 
Sea of Jesso, seeking passage to, 310. 

— ofSaragossa, described, 9. 

— Vermillion. See Pacific Ocean. 
Sea-cows, described, 358, 361. 

— -parrots, described, 351, 355. 

— mews, described, 351, 355. 

Seals (sea-wolves), described, 349; in 
Acadia, 326; Canada, 344; hunted, 
3 J >3335 skins in trade, 305,307-309; 
price, 380; for canoes, 307; consid- 
ered as fish, 326. 

Seignelay, Jean Baptiste, marquis de, 
French minister, 118; Lahontan ac- 
credited to, 250-252; Lahontan's 
letter to, xxi, 149-152; death of, 
xxvi, 251, 252; successor, 252. 

Seigneuries sauvage, trade stations, 325. 

Seneca (Tsonontouans) Indians, habitat, 
58, 127, 130, 131, 137, 323, 341; 
language,34i ; domestic animals, 131; 
arms, 513; at war with Miami, 162; 
English should remove, 399; enemies 
of French, 77, 80; destroy La Salle's 
fort, 131; ambush Denonville, 128; 
country laid waste, xvi, 130, 131. 

Severance, Frank H., Old Trails on 
Niagara Frontier, 131. 

Seven Trumpets, 686, 704. 

Shad, in Canada, 358. 

Shawnee (Chauanon) Indians, sketch, 82. 

Shea, John Gilmary, translator, 149, 
217; "Huron Indians," 155; Dis- 
covery and Exploration of Mississippi 
Valley, 204; Early Voyages on Mis- 
sissippi, 200. 

Shell-fish, in Canada, 359, 361. 

Shirts (linen), in fur-trade, 377. 



Index 



793 



SIL 

Sillery, mission village, 46, 48, 49, 329, 

33<\339> 340. 

Silver mines, near Lake Erie, 322. 

Simcoe County (Ont.), Hurons in, 154. 

Siouan family, tribes of, 200, 202, 204, 
3<>5> 34*> 343, 39^} migrations, 200, 
204. 

Sioux (Nadouessioux) Indians, signifi- 
cance of name, 1755 described, xxxixj 
habitat, 175, 342; language, 342, 
343} totems, 5 1 1 5 relations with Foxes, 
l 75> 1 7^h enemies of, 182, 198, 199^ 
war with Iroquois, 198, 199; Duluth 
among, 735 missions, xviiij Lahontan 
ignorant of their country, 342, 343. 

Slavery, among Indians, 94, 104, 169; 
among French in Illinois, 169. 

Sledges, described, xii, 406. 

Sloops, described, 656-6585 advantages 
of Dutch, 6575 cost of passage on, 
656. 

Small-pox, among Indians, 595, 603. 

Smelt, in Canada, 358. 

Smithsonian Institution, Reports, 477. 

Snipe, in Canada, no, 351. 

Snow-shoes, described, xii, 103, 104. 

Soap, in fur-trade, 378. 

Sokoki (Soccoki) Indians, habitat, 90, 
3285 language, 339; enemies of Mo- 
hawk, 90; wandering, 328; in fur- 
trade, 905 sketch, 90} characterized, 

339-. 

Sonkaskiton Indians. See Choukasketon. 

Sorcery, penalty for, 562, 563. 

Sorel, described, 52, 90. 

Souffleur, large sea-fish, 358, 360. 

Souriquois Indians. See Micmac. 

South America, ships from refuge at 
Placentia, 335. 

Southey, Robert, Lahontan memoir in 
library of, xxxiv. 

Souza, Don John of, Portuguese gov- 
ernor-general, 621. 

Spain, Lahontan in, xxxiii; his letter 
from, 718-731 j war with, 5 j diplomats, 



SUL 

Spain (continued). 

12; treasure ships, 2445 mulattoes, 
284. 

Spanheim, Ezekiel, History of Casars, 
692. 

Spaniards, Lahontan' s party mistaken 
for, 190, 191; inhabit New Mexico, 
191, 192; savages taken for, 192, 
193; Lahontan inquires for, 204; 
fishery at Newfoundland, 308} port 
of, 308, 

Sparrow-hawks, in Canada, 352c 

Spars, used in canoes, 407. 

Spermophile tridecemlineatus, 348. 

Squanto, Indian warrior, 90. 

Squash. See Citrouille. 

Squirrels, in Canada, 343, 344, 348. 

Starlings, in Canada, 352. 

Sterlets, in Canada, 351, 355. 

Stockings (worsted), in fur-trade, 377. 

Strait of Belle Isle, separates Newfound- 
land, 309, 334. 

— Canso (Campceaux, Canseaux), origin 
of name, 325. 

— of Dardanelles, 680 j ceremony in 
passing, 29. 

— Davis's, discovered, 309, 310. 

— of Detour, location, 153. 

— of Gibraltar, 680; ceremony in pass- 
ing, 29; ship founders off, 289. 

— Hudson, discovery of, 309, 310. 

— of Mackinac, described, 147, 148} 
post on, xx. 

— of Sund, ceremony in passing, 295 
toll exacted at, 679, 680. 

Strawberries, in Canada, 365, 372. 

Sturgeon, described, 156, 361, 362; in 
Great Lakes, 316, 320, 359. 

Sugar, scarce in Canada, 369, 374, 375. 

Suicide, practised by Indians, 530. 

Sulpitians, seigneurs of Montreal, 52, 
55; missions of, 54, 55, 70; semi- 
nary at Montreal, 55; at Paris, $^ 9 
1655 arrive in Canada, 55} fiefs of, 
55; in New World, 1455 sketch, 55. 



794 



Index 



SUL 
Suite, Benjamin, "Le Regiment de 
Carignan," 36; "Pierre Boucher 
et son Livre," 98; "Pretendues 
Origines des Canadiens Francois," 
375 "LaRiviere desTrois Rivieres/' 
5 1 5 Histoire des Canadiens Franfais, 

4i, 33°- 
Susquehannock Indians, 321. 
Swallows, in Canada, 350, 352. 
Swans, in Canada, 350. 
Swift, Jonathan, Gulliver's Travels, 

xlii. 
Sword-blades, in fur-trade, 377. 
Sword-fish, struggle with whale, 30. 



Tabitibi Indians. See Abittibi. 

Tadoussac, location, 31, 261; history, 
31 } seigniories near, 260 } fur-trade, 
xxxviij English fleet off, 242, 244, 
249. 

Tahuglauk Indians, habitat, xxiv, 195; 
characteristics, 194, 1965 manufac- 
tures, 194, 195; wars, 196. 

Talon, Ottawa chief, 153, 317. 

— Jean, intendant of New France, 42, 
163; befriends Perrot, 53 j succes- 
sor, 228; brings back Recollects, 

4 . x . 3 * 
Taniias striatus, 348. 

Tanner, Herbert B., "Early Kau- 
kauna," 174. 

Tazou, Indian measure of distance, 
192. 

Teals, in Canada, 109, 351. 

Tecumseh, precursor of, 149. 

Teganissoren, Onondaga chief, sketch, 
222. 

"Tempest," carries Lahontan to Can- 
ada, 26. 

Temple, Sir Thomas, grantee in Nova 
Scotia, 265. 

Tench, in Mississippi River, 359. 

Temiscaming fTemiskamink) Indians, 
characterized, 342. 



TOB 
Teton (Atinton) Indians, Siouan tribe, 

342, 343. 
Tetu, Henri, Palais episcopal de Quebec, 

Texas, La Salle's expedition to, 145. 

Thallassartos maritimus, 348. 

Thegarouhies, Seneca village, 131. 

Thevenot, Nicolas M., Receuil des Voy- 
ages Curieux, 412. 

Thomas, Cyrus, "Maya Calendar," 
428. 

Thornbacks, in Canada, 358. 

Thread, in fur-trade, 378. 

Three Rivers (Lake Superior), 316. 

Three Rivers (St. Lawrence), 48 ; de- 
scribed, xxxvii, 49-5 1 ; governors of, 

5 J > 9 8 > i3 J > 2(5 6, 3 8 3> f° rt > 2 39> 
courts of justice, 392; commerce, 
376. 

Thrushes, in Canada, 350. 

Thwaites, Reuben G., Down Historic 
Waterways, 178; Early Western 
Travels, 93, 304, 417, 433, 457, 
510, 514, 7345 Hennepin's New 
Discovery, 70, 136, 137, 176, 335, 
413, 460; Hovj George Rogers Clark 
Won the Northwest, 92, 146, 315; 
Original Journals of Lewis and Clark 
Expedition, 343, 427, 431, 474, 483} 
"Story of Chequamegon," 315; 
"Story of Mackinac," 92, 146; 
Withers* s Chronicles, 506. See also 
Jesuit Relations. 

Timber, of Canada, 366, 373, 374. 

Tobacco, raised by Indians, 474; In- 
dians prize Brazilian, 140, 169, 207, 
373, 377, 4745 m strongest known, 
474) 475 5 Canadian resembles Span- 
ish, 3645 differs from Brazilian, 474} 
amount raised, 373; imported, 373; 
tariff on, 373; cargoes, 287; price, 
373, 375; Lahontan gives as present, 
169, 174, 1765 boxes imported, 

375- 
"Toby," vessel. See "Joli." 



Index 



795 



TOM 

Tomahawk (casse-tete), defined, 402. 

Tonty, Henri de, La Salle's lieutenant, 
125, 133; in Illinois, 125, 133, 207; 
granted Fort St. Louis, 125, 133, 
207; Lahontan accompanies, xviii, 
*33> 2 °7> at Detroit, 133; in Louisi- 
ana, 133; at Fort St. Joseph, xx, 
1395 respected by Indians, 207; 
sketch, 133. 

Toronto, portage, 318. See also Lake 
Simcoe and Georgian Bay. 

Torontogueronon Indians, language of, 

733- 
Townsend, Capt. — , English naval 

officer, 650, 651. 
" Tract Scuyt," Holland boat, described, 

652. 
Tracy, Alexander Prouville, marquis 

de, governor of New France, 52, 

59- 
Treaties, French shore of Newfoundland 

( I 9<H)>333>334>Ryswick,236,265; 
Utrecht, 5, 314, 334. 

Trochilus colubris, 354. 

Trout, in Great Lakes, 148, 316, 359; 
Newfoundland, 333; River Long, 
1905 Lake Erie, 320; size, 148, 
362, 363; inferior to whitefish, 1485 
enemies of armed-fish, 362; man- 
ner of catching, 148, 363 ; used 
as bait, 1135 as food, 467, 482, 
491. 

Troyes, Chevalier de, commandant at 
Niagara, 131, 162. 

Tsonontouan Indians. See Seneca. 

Turbots, in Canada, 358. 

Turcot, — , coureur de bois, 141. 

Turenne, Count de, his son, 11. 

Turkey wheat, 139, 140, 199, 202. 

Turkeys, furnished by mission Indians, 
705 in Canada, 350; near Lake 
Michigan, 2105 in Illinois, 2065 De- 
troit, 161 5 Missouri River, 200; 
Lake Erie, xix, 138, 320, 322. 

Turtle doves. See Pigeons. 



VIN 

United States Bureau of Ethnology, 
editions of Lahontan in library, liii- 
xciiij Bulletins, 4285 Reports, 47, 
169, i75» 435, 468, 499, 509, 510, 
512. 

— Geological Survey, Contributions to 
Ethnology, 418. 

Upper country (pays en haut), route to, 
95, 164,- Indians descend from, 241; 
French take possession of, xviii 5 pro- 
ject for fortifyiug, xxix, xlv, 271- 

*73- 
Ursulines, in Canada, 44. 

Ursus americanus, 347. 



Vaccinium eanadense, 372. 

Valrennes, Philippe Clement Duvault, 
sieur de, commandant at Fort Fron- 
tenac, 226, 233; returns to Montreal, 
226} defeats English, 2625 sketch, 
226. 

Vaudreuil, Philippe de Rigaud, marquis 
de, governor of Canada, 119; rescues 
Lahontan, xxv, 2195 notified of En- 
glish attack (1711), 222; pursues Iro- 
quois, 270, 271; sketch, 119. 

Vaugiraud, birthplace of Sulpitian order, 

55- 

Vaugondy, Robert de, map of, xxxviii. 

Vermillion, in fur-trade, 378. 

Verazzano, Giovanni da, discovers Can- 
ada, 303. 

Versailles, Lahontan visits, xxvii, xxx, 
xxxiii, xlvi, 252-257, 279, 280; 
court described, xxvii, 254-257. 

Vetromile, Eugene, Abenakis and their 
History, 328. 

Victor (N. Y.), Indian village near, 127. 

Viele, Arnout Cornelisse, peace messen- 

. g er > "57- 
Ville Marie. See Montreal. 
Villedonne, Etienne de, captured by Iro- 
quois, 224. 
Vincennes, Jean Bissot, sieur de, 244. 



796 



Index 



VOL 



Voltaire, Franchise Marie Arouet, dit, 

anticipated by Lahontan, xlvii. 
Vujer, John Nider de, works of, 703. 
Vultures, in Canada, 350, 352-354. 



Wahpeton (Ouadebaton) Indians, 

Siouan tribe, 342, 343. 
Walnuts, on Lake Erie, 319; in Seneca 

country, 131. 
Wampum, use of, 43 1 ; belts, 75, 76, 93. 
Wapiti. See Elk. 
War, Frontenac's (1689-97), 55, 60, 

61, 69, 70, 118, 125, 149, 209, 

239, 240, 275, 328} Queen Anne's 

(Spanish Succession, 1702-13), 5, 

12, 99J officer in, 209. 
Washington, Maj. George, visits French 

on Allegheny, 209. 
Watches, imported, 375. 
Water-fowl, in Acadia, 331; in New- 
foundland, 332, 355, 356} near Lake 

Champlain, xiv, 108, 109. 
Watermelons, in Canada, 364, 368, 369. 
Waupaca County (Wis.), Indian village 

in, 175. 
Wayne, Gen. Anthony, victory over 

Indians, 461. 
Wea Indians. See Ouiatonon. 
Weasels, in Canada, 343, 380. 
Weir, Robert Stanley, Administration 

of Old Regime in Canada, 34, 45. 
Wells, H. P., "The Beaver," 479, 483. 
West Indies, French possessions in, 26, 

288, 289, 334; French officers in, 

59, 236; death of Iberville, 236; 

Spanish treasure, 244 j English fleet, 

288, 289; commerce, 374. 
Whales, struggle with sword-fish, 30; 

off Newfoundland, 333; in Canada, 

358. See also Balenots. 
Wheler, Sir Francis, besieges Placentia, 

288, 2895 sketch, 289. 
Whistlers (sifflers), described, no, in, 

344- 



WIS 

White, Andrew D., Warfare of Science 

<with Theology ', 704. 

Whitefish, at Mackinac, 1475 as food, 
147, 148, 169, 363} netted, 1475 in 
Great Lakes, 316, 359. 

White-wood, of Canada, 365, 371,372. 

Wildcats, called "children of Devil," 
344; Lahontan hunts, 1155 skins, 
376, 3 8 °- 

Wild rice, Indian food, 174, 175. 

William III (Prince of Orange), king of 
England, 3, 2175 orders attack on 
Placentia, 278; invades England, 
12. 

Williams, Commodore — , attacks Pla- 
centia, 275-279. 

— Roger, writings of, 734. 

Wines, exported to Canada, 373; made 
in Canada, 3685 value, 3755 of Ara- 
gon, 721 j Denmark, 6715 Germany, 
6635 Holland, 663. 

Winnebago Indians, Siouan tribe, 398; 
significance of name, 146; habitat, 
398; bay and river named for, 167, 
168. 

— Rapids (Wis.), 174. 

Winship, George Parker, aid acknowl- 
edged, liii. 

Winsor, Justin, Narrative and Critical 
History of America, lii. 

Winthrop, Gen. John, commands Cana- 
dian expedition, 240. 

Wisconsin, early exploration of, 209; 
fertility, 168; route to Mississippi, 
168, 177, 178; Indians, 77, 168, 174, 
175, 341, 3985 Indian wars, xlvi; 
Lahontan visits, 167-178; mission 
in, 168; territory of, 178; Historical 
Society, staff of, xlviii; editions of 
Lahontan in library of, liii-xciii j erects 
monument, 168; Historical Collec- 
tions, 77, 82, 99, 139, 140, 146, 

i74> I 75> J77, 3 I2 > 3!5> 3^, 343> 
460, 461, 506} Proceedings , 168, 174, 
312. 



Index 



797 



WIT 

Witchcraft, Lahontan on, 696-710; pen- 
alty for, 562-564. 

Withers, Alexander, Chronicles of Bor- 
der Warfare, 506. 

Wolf Indians. See Loup. 

Wolverine. See Carcajou. 

Wolves, Canadian, 343; on River Long, 
183; do not attack beavers, 480; 
traps, 483, 484; price of skins, 380. 

Wood- hens, 351 j as food, 105, 169; 
hunted, 115, 116. 

Woolen cloth, Canadian import, 377. 



ZIZ 

Wrightstown (Wis.), rapids near, 174. 
Wyandot Indians. See Huron. 

Yamaska County (Quebec), Indian mis- 
sion in, 49. 

Yankton Indians, Siouan tribe, 343. 

Yellowstone National Park, beaver- 
preserve in, 48 1 . 

Zeno, cited by Lahontan, 419. 
Zizania aquatic a > 175. 



VOLUMES IN 
McCLURG'S LIBRARY 
REPRINTS OF AMERICANA 

UNIFORM IN STYLE AND BINDING 



McClurg s Library Reprints of Americana 

HISTORY OF 

THE EXPEDITION OF CAPTAINS 

LEWIS AND CLARK 

1804-5-6 

Reprinted from the Edition of 1814. With an Intro- 
duction by James K. Hosmer, LL.D., an analytical 
Index, photogravure portraits, and maps. 

This edition of the famous Journal has been prepared to meet the 
urgent need for a standard, popular edition, something that has not been 
available for years. 

< 'The republication of the complete narrative is both timely and inval- 
uable. . . . Dr. Hosmer is well known as an authority on Western 
history ; hence to see his name on the title-page is to know that the work 
has been well done." — Portland Oregonian. 

"The celebrated story of the expedition of Lewis and Clark has now 
been put in an easily accessible form.'" 1 — N. T. Times Saturday Review. 

"Of the several new editions of this valuable narrative, this is by far 
the best and most complete. 1 ' — Minneapolis Journal. 

"The most complete and satisfactory edition of this classic that has 
come to our notice.' ' — San Francisco Chronicle. 

" We have nothing but praise for this clear and handsome reprint." — 
The Nation. 

r 

In t t wo octavo volumes, boxed, $5.00 net 

Large-paper edition (limited) on Brown" 's hand-made paper, illustrations 

on Japan paper, $ij. 00 net 

A. C. McCLURG & CO., Publishers, Chicago 



McClurg's Library Reprints of Americana 

FATHER HENNEPIN'S 
"A NEW DISCOVERY" 

(NOVVELLE D&COUVERTE) 

Exact Reprint of the Second Issue of 1698. With 
Introduction, Notes, and analytical Index by 
Reuben Gold Thwaites, LL.D., a new Bibliog- 
raphy by Victor Hugo Paltsits, fac-similes of 
the seven full-page illustrations, and two large fold- 
ing maps. 

This particular book by Father Hennepin is generally considered the 
most representative product of his pen, and as a human document it 
has few rivals in our literature. Moreover, it is the only one of the 
Hennepin books now upon the market. 

" None of the many recent reprints of Americana is of greater impor- 
tance to collectors and students than the re-issue of Father Louis Hennepin's 
'A New Discovery of a Vast Country in America. \ . . Mechanically, 
the book is superbly produced, and it seems to us to be the best made book, 
in every particular, that has been offered the trade during the current sea- 
son." — Chicago Evening Post. 

" It should be a subject of rejoicing among those of our citizens who 
cherish the past, that Dr. Thwaites and his publishers have given us these 
two beautiful and scholarly volumes — a presentment which leaves nothing 
more to be desired." ' — Minneapolis Times. 

r 

In t<wo octavo volumes, boxed, $6.00 net 

Large-paper edition {limited) on Brown's hand-made paper, illustrations 

on Japan paper, $18. oo net 

A. C. McCLURG & CO., Publishers, Chicago 



McClurg's Library Reprints of Americana 

GASS'S JOURNAL 

OF THE LEWIS AND CLARK 

EXPEDITION 

Reprinted from the Edition of 1811. With an In- 
troduction and analytical Index by James K. Hos- 
mer, LL.D., fac-si miles of the original title-page 
and the five original illustrations, and a reproduc- 
tion of a rare portrait of Sergeant Patrick Gass. 

G ass's narrative was for seven years the only source from which any 
authentic knowledge of the Lewis and Clark expedition could be ob- 
tained. When at last the work based on the diaries of the Captains 
was given to the world, the earlier book, so far from being set aside, 
was found to be most important as confirming and supplementing 
what had been set down by the leaders. The work originally ap- 
peared in 1807, and ran through three editions, the third dated 181 1 ; 
but no reprint has been made since the somewhat crude edition 
published at Dayton, Ohio, in 1 847, which has, of course, long been 
out of print. 

"It is needless to say that the editing by Dr. Hosmer, who has 
given so many years to a study of the early history of the Northwest, 
is faultless ; and the volume will be a welcome addition to many a 
library collecting data now upon all that relates to the Louisiana Pur- 
chase. ' ' — The hiterior. 

" In some respects, the general reader will prefer the descriptions 
of Gass to the official records." — The Dial. 

In one octavo volume, boxed, $3.50 net 

Large-paper edition {limited) on Brown 9 s hand-made paper, illustrations 

on Japan paper, $9.00 net 

A. C. McCLURG & CO., Publishers, Chicago 



McClurg's Library Reprints of Americana 

LAHONTANS 

NEW VOYAGES TO NORTH 

AMERICA 



Reprinted from the English Edition of 1703. With 
Introduction, Notes, and analytical Index by Reuben 
Gold Thwaites, LL.D.,a Bibliography by Victor 
Hugo Paltsits, fac-similes of original title-pages, 
and twenty-four maps and illustrations. 

The selection of the famous writings of Baron Lahontan for repub- 
lication is a natural one after the success of the reprint of Hennepin 
issued in 1903. It is a logical step in the preparation of the Americana 
series planned by Messrs. McClurg & Co., and the appearance of 
Lahontan's Voyages in a standard library edition will be as welcome 
as that of the preceding volumes. Like the Hennepin, it is a word- 
for-word reprint. 



r 



In t<wo 8<vo volumes, boxed, $7.50 net 

Large-paper edition {limited) on Brown s hand-made paper, illustrations 

on Japan paper, $18. 00 net 



A. C McCLURG & CO., Publishers, Chicago 



THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 



DATE DUE 



APR 3 2001 



JUL 9 2001 



MII| V MH S iiii V .2 F MI CHIGAN 



3 9015 00547 5747 BOUND 

■'■''■■\m 

THE UNIVERSITY OF fMCHKV tiCH 

Y 



DO NOT REMOVE 

OR 
MUTILATE CARD 



