
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized by 



Google 



GIFT OF 

HORACE W. CARPENTER 



^ *■ 





Digitized by 



Google. 



■.■l*i 















57^ 



■^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



AN 

HISTORICAL SKETCH 



PORTUGUESE SETTLEMENTS 



CHINA; 



AND OF THE 



ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND MISSION IN CHINA. 



BY SIR ANDREW LJUNGSTEDT, 

Knight of the Swedish Royal Order Waza. 



A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER, 
DESCRIPTION OF THE CITY OF CANTON, 

Repablished firom the Chinese Repositorj, with the Editor's permission. 

BOSTON: 

JAMES MUNROE & CO. 
MDCCCXXXVI.: : • 



Digitized by 



Google 









^ 



Entered according to an Act of Congress in the year 1B35, 

BY James Munroe & Co. 
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of MaBsachusetts. 



(i.^\t/ 



>-v 



Sainael N. DicUnion, Printer, 
G3 Wadiingtoa BlreoU 



Digitized by 



Google 



#^ i'r 



-/:' ^'Z^'^y 



•> 



PREFACE. 



Placing an implicit confidence in the judgment of 
enlightened friends, who were pleased to think, that 
the two Historical contributions, concerning the Por- 
tuguese settlements in China, and principally of Ma- 
cao, distributed in 1832, and 1834, among them for 
the purpose of gratifying general inquisitiveness, 
might be of some public utility, I resolved to revise 
my Essays, correct mistakes, enlarge the view, and 
connect occurrences in a natural series of chronology. 
That the size of the little work may not swell by 
extraneous digressions, nor by my own individual 
reflections, all my exertions have been confined within 
the limits of a simple and faithful narration of facts, 
leaving to the reader his right to exercise, at discre- 
tion, the faculties of his own intellect on the subjects 
under consideration. They are examined under dis- 
tinct heads, and in chapters, that any inquirer may 
satisfy his curiosity by referring to the place alluded 
to, and decide on their relative merit. 



429831 

/Google 



Digitized by ^ 



.1^' ♦'...*«%%*• ^ 



IV PREFACE. 

In perusing the annexed copy of the preface which 
preceded the first contribution, it will be evident, that 
chance determined the author to seek for informa- 
tion about Macao in books and archives. From 
among the many various and detached hints, the 
most authentic have been recorded with an intention 
that the selection may prove a useful auxiliary to a 
future historian. It embraces for near three centu- 
ries, a succint description of the most memorable 
changes of Macao, and closes at an epoch, in which 
his imperial majesty, Dm. Pedro, Duke of Bragan9a, 
by his heroic and glorious exploits, and by his com- 
prehensive genius, is laying, on the sound principle of 
respect for mutual rights of individuals and nations, a 
solid foundation for the everlasting (I most sincerely 
wish,) prosperity, happiness, and grandeur of the 
Portuguese monarchy. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE.* 



Thirty years ago but few persons doubted that 
the Kings of Portugal exercised at Macao their sove- 
reign authority, in virtue of an imperial grant of the 
place to vassals of Portugal for eminent services ren- 
dered by them to the Chinese empire- The author 
of this Essay entertained the same opinion, when in 
1802, a British auxiliary detachment arrived and of- 
fered to defend, in conjunction with the Portuguese, 
the settlement against an apprehended attack from 
the French ; a friendly proposal, which the govern- 
ment of Macao could not accept, because the Chinese 
authorities interfered. On their part, the same resist- 
ance was, in 180S, experienced, when a British force 
for a similar purpose, with the consent of the Macao 
government, had disembarked and garrisoned three 
forts ; the auxiliaries at last evacuated the place and 
re-embarke^. These results prove, that the Portu- 
guese never had acquired the right of sovereignty 
over Macao, though they have been in possession of it 
nearly three^ centuries. 

* To the Contribution, published 1832. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Vl PREFACE. 

• 

To trace the beginning of this settlement and its 
progress, and to examine on what ground Macao is 
numbered among the ultra-marine dominions oC Por- 
tugal was of consequence. Historians who detailed 
the earliest achievements of their countrymen in Asia, 
and records of the first missionary labours in China, 
gave the clue and exhibited to us the origin. Nation- 
al and foreign authors of later dates describe the ad- 
vancement, prosperity and decline of Macao, the in- 
habitants of which, being principally by birth from 
Portugal, claimed in virtue of their allegiance, the 
protection of their sovereign : it was granted and a 
government instituted. By this concession, the court 
of Lisbon fancied that it had acquired an inherent 
right to the dominion of Macao, though the members 
of the Senate in ^598, assured his majesty, Philip I. 
that "they maintained themselves in the place by 
spending much with the Chinese." Portuguese an- 
nalists, travellers and foreigners, ignorant of this 
confidential declaration, echoed, that the Kings of 
Portugal possessed in China, as absolute masters, a 
spot, denominated Macao. 

The Portuguese were the first Europeans who 
pushed their navigation to the southern confines of 
China, where they succeeded in forming an import- 
ant settlement ; an event, which the Kings of Por- 
tugal meant to improve by diplomatic missions, in 
order to obtain for their vassals at Macao, by the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. yil 



sanction of the sovereign of China, an extension of 
liberty and commercial advantages. Little, however, 
or rather no acknowledged benefit was ever conferred : 
the long voyages and cpstly visits all ended — ^it seems 
— ^in mutual exchange of presents and civilities. 

By the zeal of Portugal, Christianity was trans- 
planted from Europe to the East Indies and China. 
In our account of the Roman Catholic Mission in 
China, we have endeavored to delineate the diflBcul- 
ties the first missionaries had to contend with ; their 
perseverance ; their attention to arrive by unanimous 
proceedings, at their object— the conversion of China 
to Christianity ; then we have briefly described the 
^ lamentable schism, caused by presumptuous foreign- 
ers, who thought themselves better qualified thaji the 
emperor to fix the explanatory meaning of a couple 
of Chinese characters under dispute. In the mean 
tim^ many men of learning and influence embraced 
the foreign creed and favored it ; its opponents more 
numerous, were enabled, now and then, by their re- 
monstrances to put a check to its rapid progress, and 
by reiterated attacks they at last convinced Yung- 
ching of the necessity $o prohibit the exercise of the 
christian religion in all his extensive dominions. Nev- 
ertheless, zealous and obedient Europeans are em- 
ployed in their respective missions, though with little 
expectation to be inscribed on the catalogue of mar- 
tyrs; for on those few, who may occasionally be 



Digitized by 



Google 



VIU PREFACE. 

apprehended in their illicit pursuit, the sentence of 
death is seldom inflicted. 

The rational and innocent ceremonies — except in 
the eyes of the intolerant — with which the Chinese 
are wont to honor Confucius and the manes of de- 
parted ancestors, a tribunal of Inquisitors reputed su- 
perstitious and idolatrous ; as such, the court of Rome 
condemned them. This innovation aimed at intro- 
ducing a schism in government, for to disobey the 
Holy See, the Chinese christians were taught to be 
a mortal sin ; a venial one it was, not to submit to the 
laws of the country, whenever they were not in har- 
mony with the supreme will of his holiness. That 
Itang-he might sanction this anti-social doctrine, 
Clement XI. employed legates. The emperor con- 
descended to receive them, to listen to the propositions 
of the Pope, and even to discuss their merit, but he 
peremptorily refused to alienate the smallest portion 
of his legislative power, and dismissed the legates. 

Considerable pains have been taken in collecting 
the materials which are arranged under the head, 
noted at the title-page ; they are now submitted to 
the critical scrutiny of a few friends, and of those 
gentlemen, who, for the sake of research, may be dis- 
posed to excuse the absence of eloquent language in 
a performance, traced by the pen of a foreigner. 



Digitized by 



Google 



IX 



ThefoUowing Works and Manuscripts were principally consulted 
hy the author. 



De Christian^ expeditione apud Sinas, by Nic. Trigauld. 

Atlas Sinensis, by Martin Martini. 

Legatio Batava, by J. Nieuboff. 

L. Ferraris Bibliotheca canonica. 

Asia, by Jobn de Barros — died 1570. 

Asia, by Diogo de Couta — died 1616. 

Asia Portuguesa, by Manoel de Souza e Faria— -1639. 

Peregrina^ao, by Fernao Mendes Pinto— 1581. 

Vergel de plantas e flores, by Fr. Jacinto de Deal — 1681. 

Historia dos descobrimentos dos Portugueses. 

Commentarios de Afonso Dalboquerque. 

Relatione della Cina, by Alvaro Semedo— 1658. 

Historia de las Islas Philipinas, by Joaq Mart de Zuriiga. 

Historia general de las Islas Philipinas, by Fr. Juan de Con- 
ception. 

Historia de la proWncia del Smo. Rosario, by Vin de Salazar. 

Historia de la provincia del Smo. Rosario, by Dom. Collantes. 

Description de la Chine, by Duhalde. 

Memoires cone, les Chinois, paries Missionaires de Peking. 

Sketch of the history of the East India Company, by B. Grant. 

Hist. Verhaal, v. d. Ned. O. I. Companie. 

Gesants happen aan de Kejsaren Van Japan, by A. Montanus. 

Resche Van Groot Djava, by J. Valentyn. 

Chops, translation of, or authentic documents in China, stamp- 
ed with the official seal of a Mandarin. 

Authentic manuscript documents in Portuguese. * 

Priyate manuscript notices, in Portuguese. 

A 



Digitized by 



Google 



Dom Joaquim Saraiva, Lord Bishop of Peking, took, during 
his residence at Macao, where he drew in 1818, at the Royal 
College of St. Joseph, his last breath, incredible and unrelent- 
ing pains in saving from perdition a host of interesting ac- 
counts relative to Macao. They were recorded in an authen- 
tic manner, but on materials, which by the age of centuries 
had been defaced, mutilated, worm-eaten, and were mouldering 
into dust. With his excellency's friendly permission, I com- 
pared with his valuable manuscript extracts my accumulated 
collections : they were thereby improved so much, that this my 
humble Essay may, in many respects, be considered a reposi- 
tory of facts, of which the archives of the Senate can exhibit 
the originals no more. 



^Digitized by 



Google 



INTRODUCTION TO THE SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER ON 
THE « DESCRIPTION OF CANTON." 



The inflaence, which the commerce and the local goyemment of Kwang- 
tang province have always exercised, and are still exercising, on the Portu- 
guese settlement of Macao, renders some account of the former necessary, 
to illustrate more clearly parts of which I have written concerning the lat- 
ter. To supi^y this want, the Editor of the Chinese Repository has sug- 
gested to me, in a most friendly manner, that I add, as a Supplementary 
Chapter, A Description of the City cf Canton, which was originally pub- 
lished in the second yolume of the Repository, and re-published in 1834, 
at Canton. In gratefully accepting this disinterested proposal, an ample 
scope is afforded to reformers of foreign governments, to historians, a mi- 
nute description of a famous city ] and to merchants, valuable information 
for men of business. 

A. L, 

Macao, January, 1835, 



Digitized by 



Google 



(CrAn Index to the ^Hittorical Sketch of the Portaguese Settle- 
mentfl/' will be found at the end of the yolume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



J 



J 



CONTENTS. 



L TEMPOIVARY SETTLEMENTS. 
' Preliminary. 

1. Liampo-— Lyangpo — Ning-po. 

2. Chinchew — Chan-chow — Chan-chow-foo. 

3. Tamko— dan-shan— St. John. 

4. Lampacdo. 

n. FIXED SETTLEMENTS AT MACAO. 

Chaptbr I. 

Historical NarratiTe. 

Chapter II. 

Topographical Description. 

Chaptsr III. 
Diwian, 

1. Parochial districts, Public Buildings, Churches, viz : Parish Church- 

es, Collegiate Churches, Convents, Monastery, Her- 
mitages, Senate House, Fortifications ; Monte, Guia, 
St. Francis, ' St. Peter, Na. Sra. de Bomparto, Santiago or 
Bai-fort. 

2. Ports. Tjrpa, Inner harbor. 

Chapter IV. 

Population, 

Preliminary. 

1 Classes. Natural Subjects, Free, Slaves, ladustry, Chi-, 
nese Va«als, Four Villages, Four Pagods, Campo, For- 
eigners, Library, Museum. 



Digitized by 



Google 



; 



ZIY. CONTENTS. 

2. PvhUe Edueatwn, Kmg'n Schools, Royal College at St Joieph, 

Seminary and College, ancient, at St. Paul. 

3. C^ariuMe Institution. Miaericordia, Aaylum for Female Orphans, 

Aaylom of Mary Magdalen. 

4. Haapiees. St Lazar, for Lepen, One Ciril, and one Military Hof- 

pital. 

Chaptxb v. 

QovemmeiU. 
Preliminary. 
1. Pure Municipality, 200 yean. Senate, ** Camera." 

1. JRs Domestic InfiuencSj poUtieaUy. On ita members, On its subaltern 

officers. On the Christian population in general. On the mili- 
tary department. On the civil department, On the Chinese 
population. 

2. Its Domestic Ir^uence, economically. Oi^ receipt, On expenditure. 

II. CONSTITUTION OF MACAO. 

Preliminary. 

Senate, members of the. Their prerogatives. 

Oovemor the, presides over the Senate, Is the head of the military, 

His means of defending the place. 
Minister f the. Vice President, Judge of the customs. ^ 

Royal Chest. Its singular fate. Actual administration of receipts and 

disburtements, Its state at the end of 1834. 

Chaptxr VI. 
Foreign Relations. 

With Portugal, With Goa, With the Dutch, With the Brit- 
ish, Politically. 

With China. 1. Politically: Tribute, Ground rent, 2. Judicially, 
In civil cases. In criminal cases, In commercial cases, His- 
tory of the trade, Hoppo, Measurement, Duties, Ship- 
building. 

3. Diplomatically, Envoys, Thom6 Pires, Diogo Fereira, 

Gil de Gk>ys, Ambassadors, Emmanuel de Saldanha, Alex- 
ander Metello de Souza e Meneyes, Frances Xavier Pacheco e 
Sampayo. 

Conventional pact. Mandarin Interference. 

Correlative Intercourse, Suocor against the Eastern Tartars, Aux- 
iliary aid against pirates. 



Digitized by 



Google 



C0RTZHT8. XY 

WUh Jaipany Catholic Miasion, Commerce, Diplomatic Enyoys. 

Wiik ManUla. 

With Timor. 

WUhBaUana. 

With Ooa, commercially. 

With Malacca. 

With Siam, commercially, Diplomatically. 

With Cochin-china, commercially, Political mission. 

Actual state of trade at Macao. 

in. SUBURBAN SETTLEMENTS. 

Preliminary. 

Green Island, Oitem, or Oiteng, Sundry lodges. 

OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH AND MISSION IN CHINA. 

Preliminary. 

Roman Catholic Church at Macao, King's patronage. Hierarchy, 
External rites. Brotherhood, Processions, Burying-ground, 
Chnrch immunity. Bonfire, Objections to Chinese recreations 
at Macao, Actoal state of Roman Catholic Mission upt the Bishop- 
rick of Macao. 

Roman Catholic mission in China. 

Preliminary. 

Missionaries, , Papal Legates to China, Charles Thomas Maillard 
de Tonman, Charles Ambrmse Mezzaharba, Two Carme* 
Utes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



I. TEMPORARY SETTLEMENTS. 



PRELIMINARIES. 



The Portuguese being the first, who, towards the close of 
the fifteenth century, doubled the Cape of Good Hope, the 
assertions of annalists and travellers, that during the reign of 
Hong-che, an Emperor of China, who departed this life 
*(1504,)* Europeans traded at Ning-po and Canton, must be 
X gratuitous and devoid of foundation. The Portuguese, hav- 
ing possessed themselves (1510) of Goa on the western shore 
of Asia, the valiant but intolerant Afonso Dalboquerquef ex- 
tended in 1511, by conquest, the authority of the crown of 
Portugal over Malacca, at that time a commercial depot of 
the first importance in Asia. From thence, with permission 
of George d' Albuquerque, captain of the place, Rafael Pe- 
restellotook (1516) his passage on board a Junk to China; of 
that country he brought back some scanty information, but made 
an immense profit on his adventure. His success gave rise 
to an undertaking on a greater scale. Four Portuguese inps 
— ^besides one belon|png to George Mascarenhas — and four 
Malay vessels were fitted out under the command of Fernad 
Peres de Andrade, who in 1517, entered the gulph of China. 

* We have carefiiUy preserved the dates of eyety material eVent, but, for 
the most part, they are inserted within parenthenSf in order that they 
might not mterrnpt the narration of eventB, bnt be oonaidered objects in 
r^enee. 

t The author proposes t6 preserve the patronymic name, which men in 
their native country were known 1#^ e. g. Dalboqueraue is so called in 
his CommMtarias, instead of D' Albuquerque. F. M. rinto in his Pere- 
grinations writes always Alf. Dalboquerque. In lieu of Boger, a mission- 
ary, we give him his name Ruggiero, &c. 



Digitized by 



Google 



; 



The sight of large foreign ships and the countenances of the 
crew inspired awe ; confidence ensued from their mild behav- 
ior, and principally from the liberal presents the Commodore 
bestowed on the officersiof the Imperial cruizers. The Manda" 
rins on the station reported favorably of him ; six ships of 
his squadron were permitted to anchor at Tamao,* a port on 
the pifo^ d^f^mit^^y.ibie,iiani^f«f£«iv€h|i«ii, 3^-chuen- 
shan and San-shan, the only one at which foreigners were 
then allowed to trade ; with two, Andrade got leave to come 
up to Canton, 

I. HIAMPO— LTiNOPO-*NINO-PO. 

((eorge Mascarenhas, who came with Andrade in his ship 
ito Taimaoy fl^din^ Junks from the Lew-kewf islands at .an- 
QJbpr, determined to keejpxCoo^paiw iirUh themj^nd to visit the 
^eaatem co.a3t oTChini^ He no doubt touched at some ports 
jp the iprovi^e gf Tuh-keen a^d ^Che-keanoji and paved th^ 
wny for his .countrymen to a4)rofitable mercantile intercourse^ 
Itbegan^ inostjikely^ soon after the es^piilsion of the Portu- 
gese frbpTamao in ISai, .^occurrence, of which we intend 
to gjlve |i brief Account jfx a sMbsequent paragraph. For 
'^v^eral yeaics^ the Portuguese could not venture .to iShew 
\themselve9 withopt great peril inthe gulf ,Qf China; their 
.whoie cpJPmercial acti^i^ must, thei:efore, have sougjjt occu- 
jpafioa in the eastern ports oT the empire. There, as ^Ise- 
;Whea*ei the Mandarins for the sake of -emolument, connived, 
^,topgJwtbeydaEed,atthe transactions, which, at intervals, 
^ppk place between Chinese and foreign merchants. At last 
^ 0^^i eippoiium eit Uampo or Ning-po was fprmed. To 
^^t^mpt^assigi^ii^ in w unexceptionable maimer the locality of 
•thisnifrt woulC with mte, be temerityf butto record the few 
trap^Iba^e gtUbered in turniqg over the Perigrinations ^f 

*1fomaA, TOMPf ^aweVt 1?MftH,^» jirajwion<wrfg;iwcd to inf|ic«k» 4he 
iBtbor^Of tte wb4<leM»A4.4}s^-«Mii. XheJr«t Jiliwion«rie3, who «9t- 

soundi yery much Tike San-shan. The rortuguese denominate it J^ Suk- 
dan, the English, by St. John. 

l&»-kQOy<Lelu||w»rMiijrQ^ ]Ueq|iiQ« 

^t» fpriitiitf 49fiWi)«e;glM|ie8 we h»yfi <f MWe4 th^ B^)i<h ^p^IU])g pf Br. 
Morrison, thoogk later Bindlog84i4o]pit A AlS^At ptiH. 



Digitized by 



Google 



to>b9of aome. iMv A 4*ri9g ond «M|vtticstpl«4<cruuier,:AnT 
tbooy do FiUtit, faavihg iolvk^d andvpkiDderada plae^ on thei 
QiateritcQadty.pmd^ftce btde bimwmter atadesfrt iri«nd» 
jPm09 j&i4Ar, .distant fift^M leaguea from tbe sen^of Liioiif 

Ci but» oa xxwaideratioDi lM;fetireft to (ho Untie islaiid BafHUr 
iy .andi baiog Invilad : bgr his catunrymea te anter Li»iopo> ■ 
he set sail, aiid acrived in six days at) thejFoiti (2/'ZrMifi9e9 
^riiich'are two isfaifids^ one just: opposite thft other, dtslaot* 
tbree leagues frDoi' the pkee. Between these two islaeds 
tbeve isa chaanel^ a guo shot dner, aaul.tweoty, five fatbonar 
deep, where incevtata plaoes is verjr goodaBchorage, aodelso. 
a pleasaet river of freab water, . which takes itikrise from the 
topofa mountain. This plaee-oD the north eastern eoast of 
China, is 200 leagues ficom Macao. Faria< departed on itbe: 
14th May^ 1649. '<He employed that ^y and the. night 
following, in gfitting.oiii frooft amongst the islaadsrof ^i^'liir/^ 
I have looked in vabfar those islands on, the map of Che- 
hdmgi made 17i4, by tbe.J|piiii^ but; they. mery ^viasibly be 
fo«»id>o» maps drawn two Inmdred years ^befefe that tifloie and 
consigned 10- the archires at Lisbon^ In ray opbion Ning-po 
and Liiaiiipot ^ie EngliA liyai^pa) wese: never ideotioal'^ 
I rather tUnk tnat>tHey stood isa^similar ratb, in: wtuclrtMa-* 
cao aetnaHy stands in respect 'to^ Kwaogrefaaw<»foo; foreigoevi^ 
had got leave: to: take top their abode at scmbb: disfeiaice-frmn: 
the ybe^.a city of the fu»t class; for ebe: by what mirade 
could Ning-<po-rfoo remab unhurt, when.'Liampo was reduced 
by the Chinese to a heap cS ashes ? 

«In its days of splendor and prosperity Liampo became ;a 
place of safety to people of China, Siam, Borneo, Lewfkew, 
'&c. against pirates, who in great number overran all the sea. 
The place had long been flourishing, but grew from 1542 by 
the trade of Japan exceedingly Tteh. It had two churches, 
a town house, two hospkab, and abqve one^ thousand private 
buiMfngs: though locally subject to Cbina^ it was ruled by a^ 
municipality, coosistmgof sfaerift, eudilon^ jadgesj aldenneff '■ 

*Plnto returnedta Earope I8OB7 heclied in 1S81. Hii Vojaa^ or Hit* 
grfnatioiu wem tfamslated md puUtihtii in 165S, b^ K-C. Gent, who w 
la ftpolog^UcaX defence, confiilet theimpfitatipn of Piato'* bein^^ the prvm 
ofliin. ' 



Digitized by 



Google 



1/ 



and six or seven kinds of officers. This noble and wealthy 
settlement owes its destruction to the provoking conduct of 
Lancerote Pereira, an auditor "ow^irfor." " This man hav- 
ing sold, it is said, for a few thousand Cruzades, goods to 
certain Chinese, of whom he never heard any%ing after^ 
wards, and desiring to make his loss good, and recover it from 
people who were not the cause of it, assembled eighteen or 
twenty idle fellows, with whom under the favor of the night, 
he fell upon a village about two leagues from liampo, where 
be robbed eleven or twelve laboring families, seized on their 
wives and children, and killed, without any reason at ail to 
do so, half a score of persons." This act of violence, in de- 
fiance of the protectmg laws of the country, and in despite of 
the sacred rights of property, was duly resented. The inhab- 
itants of the circuit jomed the sufferers, and in a common 
petition to the Mandarin, complained of vexations these 
strangers had been, and were now again guilty of. The 
criminal case having been legally tried and the facts prov- 
ed, the Tou-yuen, or Governor^ Che-keang, ordered, that 
the place should be destroyed.^ The command was obey- 
ed, " for in less than five hours," an eye witness F. M- 
Pinto^says, " not any thing was left in Liampo, to which one 
could^ive a name." Twelve thousand Christians, among 
them 800 Portuguese, were put to death, 26 ships and 42 
junks-i-others state 35 ships and 2 junks — but according to 
Manoel de Faria e Souza, 80 ships were burnt. This cruel 
punishment was inflicted, it is commonly thought, in 1545, 
and not in 1542, the very year Japan was discovered, and 
nine junks from Liampo, loaded with goods for Japan, were 
lost in a storm. 

2. Chinchew — Chan-chow — Chan-chaw-foo. 

We have mentioned that George Mascarenhas parted com- 
pany with Femao Peres de Andrade, and accompanied the 
Lew-kew junks, probably to the latitude of Fuh-keen. Hav- 
ing very likely, acquired from the Chinese, who used to trade 
with the Portuguese at Malacca, knowledge of the celebrat- 
ed Chang-chaw-foo, otherwise Chin-chew, in this province, 
we may presume that he paid his commercial friends a visit. 
Hb countrymen being forced to seek a new market on the 
east coast of China, touched, in their course to the northern 



Digitized by 



Google 



ports of the Empire, at that of Chin^hew in Fuh-keen, lay* 
mg southwardly of Lyangpo in Che-keang, for there is no 
doubt, that merchants had been suffered to settle somewhere 
about Chang-chow-foo at such a distauce that the calamity 
which befel^he Portyguese^ factory. of Chin-chew, could do it 
no harm. At Chin-chew, gublic officers had winked, for the 
sake of self interest, at the p*ermanent residence of strangers : 
some of them owned i^ips. It is recorded, that the pirate, 
Francis de Sk captured (] 535) a junk, coming from the straits 
of Sunda, and belonging to a Portuguese merchant ; in 1541, 
Anthony de Faria, stood for that port in search of Coia Aiem, 
firom Guzerat, a very famous sea-rover ; and reckoned in the 
harbor five Portuguese vessels. Lyangpo having been laid 
waste, Chinese, and foreign merchants contrived by means of 
bribery, to get leave secretly to deal at Chin- chew, an advan- 
tage, which was soon forfeited by the perpetration of an act 
of foul covetousness. 

"Ayrez Botelho or Coelho de Souza, provisor of the dead, 
seized not only on the estate of an Armenian, who had lived 
six or seven months among the Portuguese at Chin-chew, but 
also the value of 3000 Cruzades in silk, pieces of damask, 
musk, be, belonging to the deceased Armenian ; and under 
the pretext, that all .the merchandise the two merchants had 
brought, belonged also to the Agnenian, Botelho took 8,000 
Cruzades from them. . Retummg home the two merchants, 
accompanied with their wives and children, presented in a 
detailing petition, the whole business to the Mandarin, who 
to do justice to them and many others, who had formerly 
complsuned against the Portuguese, caused it to be every- 
where proclaimed, that no man on pain of death, should con- 
verse with the Portuguese ; whereupon the scarcity of food 
constrained them to go to the hamlets, where ensued such 
disorders, that all the country rose up against them with much 
hatred and fiiry. Sixteen days after the Portuguese were 
set upon by an army and junks, who treated them in such a 
manner, that of thirteen ships, which they had in port, there 
was not one, which was not burned, and of five hundred 
Portuguese which were abiding in the country, thirty only 
escaped, having lost their property of every description." 
This happened, historians say, in the year 1549. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Let mteveri t(^¥^iTra^'Peretk.db'Ahdlnkd^^ 1^ 
at Catttottj OH* oor^ettmg' oat'ftjmTftmtetowwpdS^theeast** 
et» botinckrie^ of th(r empire.' H^ 9oMrifeit'aiNl.-obt»M«l'^ 
(iom tbe locfti govemtneDt, permisrioasitO' trad^Vitb (%ltia' 
afid Ganton; TfaOisaetioiis Imi 'itlreftdy beguH, vrhenthe^j^r^^ 
plexing tiews^, that pkates had attad^ed the Tessddaii^hofed'^ 
ac SanMshaik, reached tbeears of the ComfBodorei Tb protect 
them was a ' sacred diiity. Andrad^ lost' ne^^ime, be settled 
bis concerns in Canton j joined his friends and competed at 
IVimttO his mercantile operations. Anxvous' to take bis d^ 
parture at the commencement of the^ approaching monsoon^ 
lie, like a man of probitjr, prockiined bis readmess to d6 jus- 
tice to every body, who might' have reason toeomplaJn of 
any of bis companions. This candid k)fi^r So enchanted their 
minds> that the Chinese biegan suspecting 'there was nothing 
but unmerited slander, in what they bad beard of the actS'^- 
rapacity and violenoe the Portuguese^ bad been guilty, of in 
India. § 

This favorable opinion prevftiled when Sima^de Andrade, 
a? brother to Fema5y entered 1518 the portwith one ship and' 
three itinks« His character was marked by covetonsness, 
partiality and -despotism. With such a temper^ he willingly 
countenanced robbers^ kidnappers and all sorts of* wicked- 
ness. He built a fort, and ended by arrogating t6 himself 
the perogatives of a sovereign, venturing to condemn a sailor 
to death j and to have the sentence- executed; Hiis act of 
open hostility, and the refusal to witbdhiw from the island, 
filled the measm-e of his iniquity. A Chinese squadron laid 
siege to the port. Simaofwoukf have perished bf hunger had 
not a strong favorable gale most opportunely arisen : he took 
advantage of the accident and escaped (1621) with three of 
his vessels. 

Next year Martin Alfonso de MelloContinho, the same as 
Alfonso Martins de Melk), bearer of a commission from 
Emanuel, king of Portugal, to propose friendship to the Em- 
peror, arrived with six ships. Having compelled Simadde 
Andrade to relinquish bis premeditated 'attack on San-shan, 
the provisional government would not permit the Chinese to 
meet the Portuguese ; oil the^ oontrafy, orders were issued; 



Digitized by 



Google 



17 

tthat 4aof tml tiiMhBr<nHli%iew oribrfeKthe Ghineie ^ram .of 
{mur'aoiUcl jcometnp ^1ldthf ^sfaoiddibe dwtro^ed. ^Deaeijdng a 
dfawiraBseb slMring .towattiB Tamao, tiie ChiiiesG jqimdwi 
(Ulttpcof'tbem (tLSSdyand finoe'd, after an obatiDatetCMmteiil, 
<tiie Gonmiand^r Maotin ^j^oaotto TJeld ;tba vielary : >tl«e 
ihao^VioafiledlbjithistfoctiHaate Treattlt was .great. Afaioj Kkf 
4ii0 Jroctuguese were kiUad in the action, amnj were brought 
.priflODera ito (Canton.; of iham> same perisbed df hunger; 
twentf^hrae were,l)y the'aadteaoe of tKea^tsang, coodemnad 
.tdbe.qtniKteMdvJdke^spidsaiKltpkatas. £vai Junks, ooming 
-finmiMaiaccat^werejasiailBd.; >the vessels and cargoes oaofis- 
^fttedy the tnantfaaowaki prison. 

'Ti«iv> tcm; the iioi}th.iWBSt/ coast of San'^han^ was a renown- 
fed^faarfaor, tO'whiehifireign^and Chinese meicfaasits resorted 
(for .the saJoe of diapoaing of thehr respective investmentB. 
JobttideiBantnjiid odierihistortauB designate it often by the 
Malay woflrd'Bedeagiiior Vemagky which signifies a malt'Or 
ijdaae br inescantHe busiaeBa. The ships iay mooted at tbe 
.fiiot oftheihill m^wihicbiFsapcasXaivier was [165S] inteitred. 
At4he cad'of (tfaednonaoaaaU trattsantirais were suspended, 
aocouats settled, the iportabaadoaed^iand tfae island unoccu- 
^piad, tin the ^ralom of thei masohants. How many years had 
'abq)8edlfixiialM2ibeiiwe AeSBorJugue^ came tnok, I ha^ifie 
.aotJaeen .able to jaflBffltaiD. Thait:a teeondliation bad taken 
place 'We may faiiiy piesun^e from the call of a lew Portugueise 
in 154^ who, fiodiiqr bods of their acquasntancies in port, 
steeeedforLampaDao,* wfaereCrar JmiksfromiMalaeoa, wese 
Ataochon San^shan was still m 15&3 ancultivatied : on tbie 
!0d December this year, Francis Xavier expired, and was by 
.4ns friends buried on that Mand in « hill, distant somewhat 
more than a stODe^oast ifi*om rthe sea shore. In the life <of St. 
fVancis Xaider^ bjyJ. JDryden, <tv)e«re told that a cross was 
«sed and the grar« fiirther signalised by two piles of stones, 
tone at the head, the otber at the feet of the departed apodde : 
the same descripticn F:adier Francis de Souza, has given in 
bis work^t Aitera lapse of nearly one hundred years, a few 
Jesuits, in their way to China, touched at San-shan. Devo- 
tion to a pluce where one of their celebrated membws had 

* Or Lampekao, Lampaco, Lampacau, Lampazau. 
t OorinU eonfuistado d Juu CAmlo.— Lisbon, 1710. 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 

spent some time, and lost his life, imparted the thought ot 
commemorating the lamentable event, by raismg a sepulchral 
monument, the materials of which, should defy for centuries 
the all devouring power of time. A stone of considerable 
height and breadth, performed tU^ office^* One of the two 
flat sides was filled with an epitaph, written m the Portuguese 
language ; the other bore, in the upper part, nearly the trans- 
lation in Chinese, and beneath a repetition of the Portuguese 
inscription. Translated into English it runs thus : ^' Here 
was interred St, Francis Xavier of the company of Jesus, 
apostle of the East, This monument wcu raised in the year 
1639." A lithographic sketchf exhibits the form of the 
stone pillar, and the manner in which the engraving was ex- 
ecuted. About seventy years from this period, Premare, a 
Jesuit, wrote from Canton, that a chapel was to be raised on 
the spot, where Francis Xavier had expired, and consecrated 
to the manes of the Saint. It is doubtful whether it ever 
was built. For want of Christian carefulness this sacred 
building (if erected) crumbled, by the effects of the climate, 
to pieces ; and its sepulchral monument bowed its lofty brow 
and was hid, like Francis Xavier, under a heap of earth. No 
wonder that m this prostrate condition, the bishop of Macao, 
Dm Fr. Francis de Na. Sra. da Luz Easchim and friends, whom 
he had invited to a pilgrimage to the shrine of St. Francis 
Xavier, should meet with disappointment. It required a 
great deal of labor and unrelenting perse verence to discover 
some traces of a place, where a chapel or something like a 
building might have stood, and to dig out the stone tablets, 
clean it, and decypher its inscription. By the assistance of 
the inhabitants of an adjoining village — ^for.the island is actu- 
ally peopled — ^the work was done, and the monument again 
put on foot, because the job was liberally paid for. This act 
of Catholic charity was attended to in 1813. Devotees prom- 
ised to build a new chapel on the old foundation, still it was, in 
1834, not begun. To preserve in future these holy memorials 
from being defiled by infidels, the Bishop had agreed, as he 

* It k six cabicfl, more or len^ in height, ftfar cubiet broad, and thiek 
four punts — Chinese measure. 

i This sketch wUl be found in the Appendix, No. one and two. 



Digitized by 



Google 



9 

himself told me, to allow a fixed yearly remuneration to the 
ChinesQ, who had undertaken to watch over their preser- 
vation. 

4. Lampacao. 

Having o&red to the reader an apology for the epistle just 
finished, we shall resume the thread of our principal narra- 
tive. By the testimony of private chronological annotations, 
we are led to conclude, that the Mandarins shut the port of 
Taroao, and concentrated, in 1554, the whole foreign trade at 
Lampacao, an island so near Macao, that it can, when no 
thick vapor is ascending from the sea, and the atmosphere is 
transparent and bright, be seen by the naked eye from the top 
of the hill, on whicfa the hermitage of Na. Sra. de Penha de 
Franca is seated. It requires, however, more powerful or- 
gans of vision than those I have been endowed with. This 
transfer is plausibly accounted for, by the following rational 
inference. In China the received opinion is, we are told, 
that relatives have a sort of claim upon the ground where 
any of their friends have been buried. Francis Xavier was 
interred on San-shan, an island at which the Portuguese ships 
sailing for Japan, used to touch. In them, came yearly many 
pilgrims to pray at the feet of the departed Saint, an incident 
which roused in the mind of the public ofiicers, an apprehen- 
sion that the Portuguese might possess themselves of San-shan. 
This surmise made the Mandarins assign Lampacao as the 
only place at which merchants were to carry on their business. 
On this island landed (1549) the thirty Portuguese, who had 
the good luck to escape the slaughter of their countrymen at 
Chin-chew. That the Portuguese had on this island fixed 
habitations — ^though they never had any at San-shan — there 
are good reasons to suppose. Besides the hint F. M. Pm- 
to gave 1556, the Jesuit Baltezar Gago, coming from Japan, 
being ship-wrecked (1560) on the coast of Haenan, sought 
refuge at Lampac&o : in a letter to the society of Jesus he 
mentions that 5 or 600 Portuguese merchants were constantly 
dwelling in that place. 



Digitized by 



Google 



U. FIXED SETTLEMENT AT MACAO. 
CHAPTER I. 

Historical NAitHATrrs. 

A few years later, JEuropeans settled at Macao ; by what 
right, is a topic of contention. At the anival of the Portu- 
guese, there issued from innumerable islands, rocks, and 
creeks, along the sea-coast of China, a daring set of adven- 
turers, less intent on exercising lawful industry, than bent on 
plundering peaceful and industrious inhabitants. Merchants 
were peculiarly molested, because a successful attempt on 
them insures to the chief and his crew a valuable booty^ to 
be shared among them. That the trade might be uninter- 
rupted, the Portuguese determined to ajjnoy and exterminate, 
if possible, this race, almost as vexatious to them as to the 
Chinese. Having cleared the gulph of China of free-hooters, 
who had .infested it, the Portuguese sought a quarrel, with a 
Reguloj or potentate of the island, Heang-shan. The griev- 
ances that provoked the war are not mentioned, nor is It 
known when the hostilities began, how long they continued, 
nor even the particulars of its terajinatioa. It is maintained, 
that, after a vigorous resistance^ the Regulo was subdued, 
the island conquered, and the victors put in possession of 
their share. As no covenant or treaty of peace ever ap- 
peared in public, it remains an absolute impossibility to de- 
termine the ultimate limits of the conquest the Portuguese 
pretend to have made on that island. A rocTc towards south- 
west, constituting the boundary of Heang-shan, was of course 
comprehended in the conquest. On that, the Portuguese fix- 
ed their abode, being particularly well suited for the carrying 



Digitized by 



Google 



u 

oak of domestic md fi;ire%p ^de. A tc»¥Q|.e«lled Cidade^ do 
name d$ Deos de Ma^o^ rose faj degrees oa the peninsula, 
not by the grace ^ oonce3^n of any of! the emperors of 
Cliin^, for such is denied, bnt by the success of the cbival* 
rous arms of Pottugal. Tlpe al^ve is copied frocci a mioifiite- 
rial memoramdwny drawn up fifty yeais ago* It is co^tradictn 
ed hy the subsequent asser^j^ Chmese chronologists bav^ 
noted down, that in the S^^var of t|ie reign of K^A-tsingj 
[153&}.one foreign vessel ^Hped, send in [153i7]aqother oi^ 
llie coast of the gulf ofChi^a- . The merchants required and 
obtained penpaissioo to land and to raise, a few huts for tem- 
porary shelter, and the drymg of goods, which had beea 
damaged oa board tbe ships. That this accommodation was 
gnuBled between 1532, when the Portifiguese were driven 
fteea San-shan, and the time taken up for negocia,ting a recoQfr 
cilialion, is by no m^ns unlikely. During tbe lapse of 
eighteen or twenty years» [1537 1557] the Chinese and the 
Portu^se met again, it seems, for trade, either at Tamao or 
Lampacao. In 1557 the parties concurred at Macao, be- 
cause the Mandarins peirmttted strangers to fix themselves on 
a desert island, thai known by the denomination of Aman^ 
g0O. Such is tbe statement Femao Mendes Pinto has 
given us in his pieregrinations or voyages. This assertion is 
not contradicted by any of the coBlemporary authors, who 
wrote of the first exploits of th^ countrymen in China. The 
gentlemen to whom the terms could not be unknown were 
Jesuits, for a few of them came hither in 1562. With themi 
Mathew Ricci coming [1582] firom India, spent some time, 
and must' have been intimate; being a man of learning, of 
an enquiring spirit**-a Jesuit-^-be naturally enough asked on 
what footing foreigners stood, in respect to China. Had they 
been setded by right df conquest, he would undoubtedly i^ave 
recorded on tbe ItaUan Journal be kept> the oa«ise of the wi^ 
and the articles of pacification. Trigaulo, who gathered 
from it many interesting notices, contained in '< Christiana 
expeditio apud Stnas," adverts merely to the impression the 
fleet under the command of Fema5 Peres de Andrade left 
on the mbd of the Mandarins, whose duty it was to protect 
the coast from foreign invasion. John de Barras, who never 
saw Asia, wrote three Decides of "Adoj^ work continued 
by Diego de Couto; both of these historians speak dT the pro- 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 

gress the Portuguese made in India and China. Alvaro 
Semedo, who governed Q691] a koman Catholic Church 
at Nan-chang-foo, in his *< Relatione della Cina/' and Manoel 
de Faria e Souza, in his ^^ Asia Portuguesa," allege, that the 
Portuguese obtained permission to inhabit Macao, because 
they had cleared the island of pirates. Diego de Couto came 
in 1556 to India ; he served Qkft|^years in the army, visited 
Lisbon *!ind came back to God^Ehilip I. proclaimed [1581] 
king of Portugal, comAande^lp to continue de oarros' 
Asia, making him royal chronicler of India. The silence of 
Diego, an accurate engineer, proves evidently the fallacy of 
die above allegation. According to De Giiignes, in his 
" Voyage to Pekin,," the pirates were vanquished 1563, an 
epoch at which the Portuguese had been six years in posses- 
sion of Macao. The mighty sea-rover, denominated by him 
and others Chang-si-Iao, kept the provincial capital, Canton, 
besieged, when Kea-tsing was on the throne, according to 
other writers, during the reign of Kang-he. May not Chang-si- 
lao be a corrupt and foreign pronunciation of Chin-chi-lung,* 
the father of Chin-chin-king or Hoxinga, by changing Chin 
to Chang, chi to m, limg to lad 1 For in the historical abridg- 
ment, by Duhalde, of these sovereigns, the man with whom 
either one or the other must have been cotemporary, is not 
mentioned. However, one of these two emperors rewarded, 
it is pretended, the Portuguese, by whose valor and victory 
the siege of Canton was raised, the pirates destroyed, and 
their chief slain, granting to them in perpetuity the island on 
which Macao is actually standing. But as no authentic act 
of donation ever was produced, the cession, resting merely 
upon traditional presumption,, shall we not be justified in 
agreeing with Frigauld, that the Chinese, having by degrees 
overcome the panic at first sight excited by the tremendous 
Portuguese ships, petitioned the emperor to grant to foreign 
merchants a residence on a peninsula, or rather a rock, con- 
stituting a part of a greater island. " To this proposal the 
sovereigti acceeded, stipulating that the stranger should pay 
tribute or ground-rent, and duties on their merchandise." Of 
this opinion are both the Chinese and Tartars. Neither a 

* The Dutch and Sptniards establMhed on the island Fonnoia, knew 
the man under the name of Ikoan, £<iuan, Iquon, Equam ; and hj the 
name of Nicolas, for he had been baptised, it is said. 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 

km chop^r^oSKM documents — suspended indie Senate housei 
nor those two hundred which Jesuits translated at Goa, by com** 
mand of Marquis de Alorsa, who governed Portuguese India 
in 1744, prove any thing to the contrary ; we therefore wil^- 
Kngly side with La Clede, who, in his << Historia de Portugal/' 
avers that <<the Portuguese demanded leave to move to a 
desert island, called Maca^t was granted, and sometime 
after liberty to build a fe^nfl^Hses ;'' and we likewise agree 
with the opinion of Dom^H^^ander da Silva Pedrosa Gui- 
maraefis, bishop of Macao, who, as acting governor, wrote 
[1777] to the Senate, <^by paying ground rent, the Portu- 
guese acquired the temporary use and profit of Macao, ad 
libitum of the emperor. 

Unwilling to deprive its natural subjects of the advantages 
of trade, and still more unwilling to expose them to the vio- 
lence of rapacious and unruly guests, the government resolved 
(it appears from the concession) to place the strangers in 
such a situation that they may feel their dependence on the 
empire, without forcing it a third time to the extermination 
of men and the destruction of property. ' In my opinion, it is 
safer, to^cribe the possession of Macao to imperial bounty 
rather than to conquest; for the conquerors would be com- 
pelled to give up theP place, were the Chinese government 
but to command the tradesmen, mechanics, and servants, to 
leave off their business and retire, and thereupon issue an 
order not to furnish the inhabitants with provisions^ The 
first settlers were in a less precarious state, if it be fiue that 
many of them held, in the conquered part of Keang-shan, 
landed property, for its produce rendered them (the Portu- 
guese) independent of China, so far as the supply of the ne- 
cessaries of life went. By whose hand the earth was cultivated 
is not mentioned in the memorandum we have noted; but it 
blames the owners for supineness, in not strenuously opposbg 
the Chinese when they began to encroach upon the domain 
of Portugal. The intruders appropriated to themselves, not 
only the whole of this fruitful island, but they likewise drew 
across the isthmus,' that separate it fix)m Macao, a toallf it 
was constructed in 1573, for the protection of the country, 
and to prevent their children from being kidnapped. In the 

* Dom ii an honorary epithet in Portugal, written Dm.—* JDofi is Spanish. 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 

middle idththmmt \b a doer of CQqimiMMig<|to») called pMa, 
daeetc9<^ guarded by a fkw Cittuaese soldiera aod m offiper» 
thai fio stranger may paea this bouada^y. la the b^;M]iiiiig^ 
the door waa^ according' to Doauoic Navarette/^ opeiied but 
twice a mdntb, then^ every fifth day for selling pioviaiooa to> 
the seehided : at present it opena at day light. 



laoiuur^l^it^^BhiJiai ] 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHATTKR n. 

Macao is situated 23 deg. 1 1 min. 30 sec. north ktitude, and 
1 1 deg. 32 min. 30 sec. east ofGreenwicli, on a roc%:^ninsula 
renowned long before the Portuguese settled on it, for itslafe har« 
bor ; ibenby foreign writers denominated Ama-ngao, port of A^ 
ma^ in reference to an idol temple near the Bar Fort, the god- 
dess of which is called Ama. In 1583 the Portuguese gave it 
the name " Porto de nome de Deos/' and " Porto de Amacao,** 
the etymology of Macao: later it was also called '^ Cidade 
do nome de Decs do porto de Macao," at present it is <^C>- 
dade do santo noma de Deos de Macao^^^ The Mandarins, 
I am told, designate the use of the port by the character 
Gaou*mun, and that of the city by Gaou-king : Aou-mun 
is a provincial pronunciation of Gaou-mun.* This hilly 
settlement is dependent on the Keang-shao-keen, city of 
the third class, in the province of Kwang-tung, but sep- 
arated from the large island Heang-shan by a wall drawn 
across the neck of land from shore to shore. Two prin- 
cipal ranges of hills, one running from south to north, the 
other from east to west, may be considered as forming an 
angle the base of which leans upon the river or anchoring 
place. Its level ground, with the exception of a few habita- 
tions of European architecture, is filled by the Bazar, and a 
great many Chinese shops for tradesmen and mechanics : the 
traveller's attention is roused by a variety of public and pri- 
vate buildings, raised on the declivities, skirts and heights of 
hillocks. On the lofty mount eastward, called Charil, is a 
fort, enclosing the hermitage of Na. Sra. da Guia ; westward is 
Nillau, on the top of which stands the hermitage of Na. Sra. da 

* In book* and manowftripti w« have found it deiignatad by the'^xpiei- 
•ioiis Gan-kan, Gliao*kuD, Oan-mtn. 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 

Penha: entering a wide semi-circular bay, which faces 
the east, on the right hand we have the Fort St. Francis ; 
on the left, that of Na. Sra. de Bomparto: and before us, on 
landing, a broad, airy, spacious quay — ** Praya grande," and 
many pretty houses, among which is the residence of the 
Governor, and that of the Minister. To the east of the town 
is a field ^' Campo,'' which stretches itself out to the very boun- 
dary wall, that closes the prisoi^ttf acao. '< The territory is 
scarcely eight miles in circuit. 4Vgreatest length from north 
east to south west, being under mree miles, and its breadth 
less than a mile.* The Portuguese estimate the Peninsula at 
a little more than a league in length ; its mid-breaih at 
less than a mile. The first geometrical delineation of Macao 
was undertaken and executed by Manoel de Agote, chief 
factor of the royal Spanish Phillippine company in China, 
and Mr. de Guignes, the younger. You will find Agote's 
map inserted in the collection of drawings, appertaining to the 
" Account of the embassy of Lord Macartney to China," and 
that of De Guignes in his " Voyage a Peking." In 1808, by 
command of the Supreme Government, a map was made by 
Joaquim Bento de Fonceica. The peninsula is nearly sur- 
rounded by sheets of water, subject to the influence of ebb 
and flood from the gulf of China. The regular monsoon- 
winds, the streams of salubrious water, bursting out at the foot 
of Charil and Nillau, and the benefit of a well stocked bazar, 
render Macao wholesome and comfortable, though now and 
then — ^but seldom — it is shaken by the convulsive motions of 
earthquakes ; it is oftener visited by dreadful typhoons,a species 
of hurricanes. That the reader may get an accurate knowl- 
edge of the climate, we beg leave to refer him to the appen- 
dix,! ^h^ description is borrowed from Mr. J. R. Morri- 
son's Anglo-chinese Calender for 1834. 

* fimbaasy of Lord Macartney by Sir G. Btamiton. 
t No. III. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER III. 

Diyisioi^BF' Macao. 

1. Parochial Districts. A concise description of the prin- 
cipal Public Buildings must convince us, that the ancient 
inhabitants spared neither treasure nor pains to embel- 
lish and protect Macao. Ckurchea. The districts borrow 
their names from their respective Parish churches. The 
cathedral, dedicated to St. Peter, gives to the principal dis- 
trict the denomination of Bairo da Se. When this church 
was raised I do not know. The second and most extensive 
district is called Bairo de St. Loureneoj from St. Lawrence, 
its patron. To judge from an inscription, this temple may 
have been rebuilt in 1618. The third and most limited dis- 
trict is the Bairo de St.^Antonio^ from the church of St. 
Anthony, it was burnt in 1809, and rebuilt by liberal contri- 
butions of both Roman Catholics and non-romanbts. 

Col|egiate Churches. St. Paid.* By a private manjui- 
script we are informed that Francis Peres and a few Jesuits 
had (1565) a house where they used to lodge those of 
their society, who went by way of Macao to Japan. A 
church was coeval with their entrance in China, it was burnt 
by an accident. The noble building commonly designated 
by the name of St, Paul, "St. Paolo," was erected in 1602 
as expressed by 

VIRGINI MAGNJE MATRI, 

CIVITAS MACAENSIS LUBENS, 

FOSUIT AN. 1662. 

an inscription engraved on a stone fixed in the western cor- 
ner of the edifice. The old church was consecrated to our 

* This venerated old edifice was consamed by fire in the night of the 
d6th or 27th January, 1834. 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 

Lady, the mother of God ^'nossa Senhora da madre de 
Deos/' and so is the modern. The frontispiece, all of granite, 
is particularly beautiful. The ingenious artist has contrived 
to enliven Grecian architecture by devotional objects. In the 
middle of the ten pillars of Ionic order, are three, doors, lead- 
ing to the temple ; then range ten pillars of Corinthian order, 
which constitute five separate niches. In the middle one, 
above the principal door, we p^tf^^e a female figure, tramp- 
ling on the globe, the embfem ^Kuman patriotism, and un^ 
derneath we read Mater Dei. L)n each side of the Queen 
of Heaven, in distinct places, are four statues of Jesuit saints. 
In the superior division, St. Paul is represented, and also a 
Dove, the emblem of the Holy Gh^st. In this edifice is a 
clock, which strikes quarters and hours, and to judge from an 
inscription on the principal wheel, Louis XIV. made a pres- 
ent of it to the Jesuit college. 

St. Joseph — " St. Jose." The plan of the church and 
the college is that of the Jesuits. The comer stone was laid 
many years, but the Jesuits had not the pleasure of hearing 
mass at St. Joseph, earlier than in 1758. The church is rather 
^ small but of harmonious proportions. It receives sufficient 
light from a cupola and from a cross-bar window in the front. 
At two exterior angles of the fabric, are two towers, in one 
of them a chime, and in the other, in a lower part, a clock. 

Convents. Capuchins, Augustines, and Dominicans make 
up at Macao the regular clergy, denominated by Ganganelli, 
auxiliary troops. Whether the convent of St. Francis — 
"convento de St. Francisco de Assij," owes its foundation to 
Spanish friars or not, is of little importance. Certain it is, 
that the Portuguese of this community occupied it by order 
of Philip I. in 1584, Twenty Capuchins were to be lodged 
in it: in the beginning of 1834 there were but two individuals 
under the inspection of a Guardian, nominated by the Provin- 
cial of the order, residing at Goa. The view from this Con- 
vent is extensive. The church consecrated to our Lady of 
the Angles — " nossa Senhora dos Anjos " — is roomy, and its 
great altar magnificent. In one of the corridors of this 
convent M. Duch6 de Veney, a draftsman to the Count de la 
Perouse, drew in 1787, on the naked white wall, the image 
of St. Francis with emblems relative to his mission. It was 
considered a master-piece. The pencil of a Chinese could 
not arrest its decay, but defaced it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



lie 

From the Convent of St, AugUstirhe^^^mmenlo dc St. 
Agostinho,'*-^he view is chaining. The Spaniards are said 
td have built it in honor of our Lady of the Grace — " nossa 
Senhora Ha gra^a," but having received orders to withdraw to 
Manila, Portugiifese friars.sucbeeded ( 1 689.^ A prior appoint- 
ed by his Provincial at Goa, has the care of the convent, and 
another Augustine, of the hermitage of Pcnha. The church 
was repaired 1814. Anthoi^Vrcediano,the Superior With two 
other Spaniards came in 1^^ or 1599-^uch is the discrep- 
ancy of historians — passengers from Acapulco in a Mdcao ship. 
They took a house and converted it into a Doininican Convent 
— "cdnvento de St. Domingo." Two years subsequent they 
jfeceived orders from Goa to quit' Macao; and, it being appre- 
hended that the Dominicans might invite their countrymen 
and render themselves masters of Macao, the King command- 
ed, that the institution should be handed over to Pdrtuguiese 
Dominicans ; the Spanish went to Goa and founded there 
the college of St. Thomas. The church, denominated by 
the Dominicans a House of our Lady of the Rosary—-" Ca- 
sa de nossa Senhora do Rosario," — was repaired in 1828. 
The Dominicans are called Preaching friars. Iii 1834 they 
Were in all four, one Commissary, one Vicar and two sub- 
jiects. The three convents are poor. 

We shall now proceed to the description of the female 
convent. Monastery of St. Clare — " mosteirb die St. Clara," 
A nun of Toledo, by the name of Jieronyma de Ascen^ao, 
conceiving that she might, by founding in a heathen country, a 
community of her profession, save rnany souls from etiemal 
damnation, chose the Empire of China for the field of her ex- 
ertions. This spiritual mother left Toledd and arri visd ( 1 62 1 ) 
with a few of her daughters at Manila. Endeavoring to give 
effect to her views, she petitioned, through the Provincial df 
her order, the Viceroy Don Miguel de Noronha, Count de 
Linares, permission to go to Macao arid there to lay the foun- 
dation of a convent in honor of ^t. Clare. Liberty was at 
last granted, and Six nuns with the Abbess Lednora de St. 
Francis, (Jerpnyma being dead,) came to Macao in Novenlber 
1633. They were lodged four days at the hermitagie of Gula, 
and then brought to the house of the Syndic of the convent of 
St. Francis, whose daughter with elfeven other girls were ad- 



Digltized by 



Google 



20 

mitted to the noviciate, which ends at the expiration of one 
year and one day. Meanwhile the buildings of St. Clare 
erected by voluntary contributions and alms of the faithful, were 
so far advanced, that the community took possession of it on 
the 30th April, 1634. The church is dedicated to the Con- 
ception of the virgin mother of God — '^ concei^ao da virgem 
mai de Deos.'^ At the exaltation of the house of Braganza, 
to thethrone of Portugal, the^fcbess Leonora, with three 
nuns returned to Manila in 164dPr Another Abbess was elect- 
ed by the members of the Community, because they have the 
right to nominate any of the professed among them to that 
dignity. This election is renewed every third year and con- 
firmed by the Provincial of the Capuchins at Goa. The same 
Prelate nominates for two or three years a Director of con- 
science to the nuns, and a Commissary for the management of 
the temporal concerns of the monastery. They are supported 
by the receipt of a portion of fifteen hundred dollars for every 
professed nun ; any one serving in the choir must bring half 
that sum to the community. Besides, on certain bulky articles 
of imported goods, one per cent, is added to the fixed Custom 
House duties, half of which goes to the account of the monaste- 
ry, a revenue subject to strange variations, for it has been so low 
as four hundred taels, and again so high as three thousand two 
hundred taels a year : in 1833, it amounted to three thousand 
eight hundred taels. 

In consideration of this assistance, it was (1693) agreed 
that the Senate and Six adjuncts should have the right to 
nominate every fifth year, a daughter of some one of those 
gentlemen, who had been members of the municipality, and 
that she should, with the consent of the Abbess, be admitted 
without a portion. The number of the nuns has been various ; 
at last it was fixed at 40 : in the beginnmg of 1834 they were 
thirty seven. This convent was consumed in 1825 by a con- 
flagration, but is now, 1834, rebuilt. 

Hermitages. Having thus described the principal religious 
establishments to add a few words concerning the hermitages 
may be sufficient. The most ancient is that of our Lady of 
Hope — " nossa Senhora da esperan9a :" it served, tradition 
pretends, for a place of devotidnal meeting to the first Christ- 
ian setders at Macao. At the time the Dutch invaded Macao, 
on the hill called Charil, stood a chapel dedicated to St. Mary, 



Digitized by 



Google 



21 

it was probably converted into the actual hermitage of Ouia^ 
— " ermida da nossa Seiihora da Guia — or Neves." In 1833, 
the Capuchin nuns from Manila passed four days in the church. 
In 1808 the British soldiers who had charge of the fort occu- 
pied it also. On the western hill, denommated Nillau, the 
Augustine friars began (1622) the hermitage of Penha — 
" ermida de nossa Senhora da Penha de Fran^aj^-^evotees 
enlarged it in 1624. Portuayse ships going into the harbor 
are accustomed to salute the Krmitage with a few guns. Its 
revenue depends upon the liberality of individuals, and on 
promises sea-faring people occasionally make in an hour of 
distress, to acknowledge by gratuities the favor, which they 
think the Virgin Mary bestowed upon them, m preserving their 
lives and property. 

The public building, in which the government hold their 
sessions, is designated by the name of Senate House — '< casa 
da Camera." It is two stories high ; its base of granite, the 
rest of mortar and bricks ; so are also the pilasters. On them 
nothing like " Chmese characters, signifying the solemn ces- 
sion of the place from the Emperor of China?' is seen. The 
entablature rests on columns, and the cornice is ornamented 
with green glazed vases. This spacious fabric was erected in 
1784, and cost the sum of 80,000 taeis.* It has a chapel 
consecrated to our Lady of Conception — " nossa Senhora da 
concei^ao" — ^in which the members of the Senate hear mass 
before business i6 entered upon. Above the gates the Arms 
of Portugal are depicted, and beneath we read the following 
honorable inscription : 

CiDADE DO NOME DE DeOS, NA5 HA OT7TRA MAIS LEAL. 

" Em nome del Rei Nosso Senhor Dm*. JO AO IV. mandou 
o Govemadore Capitao geral da Pra^a, Joao de Souza Pereira 
por este letreiro, em fe da muita lealdade, que conheceo nos 
meradores della em 1654." 

We have not been able to discover " the many fine buildings 
ranged in large squares, surrounded by court yards and gar- 
dens," Krusenstein speaks of in his voyage round the world. 
Some substantial houses exist, and a garden famous for a rock 

* One Tael of pure silver is worth somewhat more than six shillings 
sterling. « 



Digitized 



by Google 



32 

deMiimated Olomoenv' C&ftk.^ liad die aJothbr of the 
lAiiaies arrired {n cdl the ^osthomous gloiy of bis immortal 
jcomposition> I dobbt wbetfaer he wduld ha?e met ia single in- 
dividual At Macao, who, at that thxie, would appreciate the 
divine endowments of bis geniie, certainly not one, whotiouM 
conceive the idea of consecratikig a ihonumentto his memory. 
Luis Camoens made a short stay at Max^ao, for iti 1561 be 
was again at Goa. During fai9||pgrace he knayhaVe written 
a few Oantoi inspired by the IRutiful scenery enjoyed from 
the place he is said to have inhabited at Macao. 

J^orti/icflrfioiw.— The Mount of St. Paul, commonly called 
the Monte—" fortaleza do monte de St. Paok).^' Self-in- 
terest made the authorities of India and Macao thwaH any 
direct intercourse between Manila and China^ although, by 
permission t^ the Mandarins of Kwanjg-luug, the Spaiiiards 
traded (1596) at Pinhal. Don Patilo de Portugal, commo- 
dore, " Capitao mor," from Groa, directed, on his arrival at 
Macao, a proteist to Dn. Juan de Zemadio, an envoy from 
the governor of Manila to the high Mandarins of Canton, 
agsdnst his countrymen trading at Pinhal,f and a petition to 
the provincial officers, requesting them to drive the Spa- 
niards from the port, or allow him to do it, a proposal that 
was scornfully rejected. Dom Paulo abstained from further 
violence merely by the remonstrance, that Macao was an 
open unprotected place, which would infallibly be assaulted 
by the imperial fleet, were the empire provoked by a lawless 
aggression. From this apprehension, we infer that Macao 
was at that time neither walled nor fortified. This is corrob- 
orated by the report Captain Matelief, who was sent (1607) 
from Batavia to spy and examine the peninsula of Macao, 
made to the Dutch government on his return. Very soon 
afler this epoch, the work of fortification began without the 
Consent of the Jiigher M atidaritis. In their minds, the under- 
taking excited distrust to such a degree, that the public offi- 
cers gave credit to the absurd tale circulated, (1606) that the 
Jesuits were on the eve of rendering themselves masters of 

* An Elegy. See Appendix No. IV. 

t Finhal is most likely a foreign pronunciation of a bay the Europeans 
actually designate by the name of Harlem bay, in Chinese Ping-hoe on the 
south coast a short distance east from Canton. — J. R. MmristnCi C&mpan' 
ion to the ^ngh Chinese Calendar for 1832. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CbiBsu hi 1613) three^of the piuicipal m^i of Macao en-, 
deavored at Canton, tad^moostrate die necessity of walUtig^^ 
and fortifying Ihe place^ because the Dumb were eneimeft 
both of Portugal and Spain. Though a fcnrmal consent could 
not be obtained, bountiful presents inclined the Mandarins to 
wink a]^ the building of (16^)a wall which runsnorth-east fhua 
the Monte to the sea, near Stb Francis. The fortress of St. 
Paul wa^ (l^ld) so £» advanced, that Friancis Lopes Car- 
rasco came from Goa^ 1616, aid took up his residence within 
the limits of the Monte, (most probably) in the capacity of 
a military captain — " capitad da gente de guerra.'' Fearing 
that Macao might again (after 1622) be visited by the Dutch, 
two hundred Spanish iniantry and some cannon came fiom 
Manila, under the command of a Colonel. By his industry 
and the activity of Dm^ Francis Mascarenhas, a military cap- 
tain, Macao was walled and better fortified. To judge from 
the date engraved on a^stoDe placed above the gate-way, the 
work might have been completed in 1626. At first, military 
captains and Governors resided in the Monte; the last was 
Anthony Joseph Telles de Meneyes in 1749. 

The hermitage of Guia, which we have already described, 
was (1637) surroimded by a wall, that it might be rendered 
a proper place for a small garrison. The fort Guia, <' forta- 
lezadaGuia" — serves, during day-light as a guidance for 
ships, steering for Macao and Canton. When a ship is des- 
cried the Governor is advised by signals of her approach, and 
when her flag can be discerned by a writing, the commanding 
officer sends down to him. On the arrival of a Portuguese 
vessel a bell is rung* This fort, that of St. Francis and that 
of Bomparto were garrisoned in 1808 by British troops. 
The landing beach*-"Praya grande" — ^is bounded by two forts. 
The fort of St. Francis— r-" fortalezade St. Francisco" — situ- 
ated at the foot of a convent of the same name ; it was on 
the 24th June, 1622^ insulted by the Dutch sqiiadfon under 
tiie command of Admiral Reyerskom. A proper revenge 
was taken: "some of his vessels were sunk and seventy men 
killed," we are told by the author of Asia Portuguesa. At 
that time this fortress bad but one battery ; the lower dates 
from 1632. Leaving the little fort of St. Peter in the mid- 
dle of Praya grande, where the signals from Guia are repeat- 
ed, we shall go on to visit the fort> Bomparto-— ^^baluarte de 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 

nossa Senbora de Bomparto"— anciently denominated with 
greater propriety Baluarte do Bomporto. From this fort a 
wall ascends south-west the hill, on the top of which is 
seated the hermitage of Penha de Franca. A little more to 
the south-west is the fortress Santiago, commonly called the 
Bar-fort—*' fortaleza de Santiago." In it is a chapel, dedi- 
cated to the Saint. Ships are not allowed but with the per- 
mission of the Governor to passlhis fort. Chinese junks and 
boats go out and in whenever mey please. 

An attempt was made in 1625,1 believe, to raise a fort in 
a place denominated Patan^, and to connect it by means of 
a curtain with the Monte. This the Chinese so stren- 
uously opposed, that the work was abandoned, and the 
curtain changed into a garden wall, which extends to the arm 
of the inner sea-passage. In this wall are the Gates of St. 
Anthony — " porta de St. Antonio" — and between the Monte 
and St. Francis are the Gates of St. Lazar — " porta de St. 
Lazaro" — ^both leading to the fields. Each has a guard of 
a few town's-men who shut the gates at night and open them 
in the morning. 

2. Ports. Typa—^v the outer harbor. From the time 
the Portuguese were enjoined not to suffer foreign ships 
to lurk among the islands, but ordered to chase them away, 
and especially when a Tsung-tiih in 1732 commanded Ma- 
cao, to report ships coming in, the nation they belonged to, 
their cargo and the object of their voyage, the government 
of Macao was endowed, in my opinion, with a kind of in- 
spective jurisdiction. Typa, being the foremost harbor, de- 
manded a stricter " surveillance," than any of the other bays 
and creeks were entitled to. To tell what ships were ying 
in the Typa inquiries became necessary. Did the Command- 
er think proper to land at Macao, he would, if bred a gen- 
tleman, inevitably call at the residence of the first authority, 
and willingly communicate, in the course of conversation, 
what might be satisfactory to the Governor ; if on the con- 
trary, the captain neglected an act of civility, the Governor 
was bound to invite him to his presence, that he might learn 
the reasons why the ship had ancl^ored in the Typa. Were 
they of an urgent nature, the Governor would take upon him- 
self the responsibility, and consent to a short or longer stay, 
convinced that the government of Canton would approve it, 



Digitized by 



Google 



25 

when informed of the mishap that had befallen the vessel, 
and hindered it from proceeding to Canton, this mvoluntary 
interference has drawn from illnatured and ignorant persons 
much obloquy on the Governor. At the entrance of the 
Typa, men of war of sixty-four guns may anchor ; and at the 
outlet, opposite to Macao, vessels of seven or eight hundred 
tons burden lay safe, sheltered from the north, south, east 
and south-west winds^^^ The distance between the two ports 
is said to be' five miles. 

Leaving the mouth of the Typa, steering towards the In- 
ner port, you pass a piece of ground called "Maria Nuner," 
and near Macao a shelf " pedra dooAreia," visible at low wa- 
ter. Having doubled the point of the Bar-fort, you are in 
the inner harbor, bordered on one side by various beaches — 
" prayas" — more or less spacious, on the other by shores — 
** ribeiras ;"^ — tod a mount, in the bearing from east to north 
called "Lapa." The river is deep enough to receive ships 
of from 3 to 400 tonS with their full cargo, but those of 7 or 
800 tons must be lightened before they attera^pt to liih in. 
The depths of the channel being various, ships and junks 
anchor near tt^e city : they are exposed to south, south-east, 
and south-west wii}ds. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER IV. 

POPUI-ATION. 

Preliminary. 

[ Driven from the eastern provinces of China, Fuh-keen 
and Che-keang, a great many adventurers sought at San-shan 
and Lampac&o, a market for their merchandise, but finding it 
insufficient, they betook themselves to smuggling, and swarm- 
ed all over the gulf of China. To fix their trade and to tree 
themselves firom pirates, and the heavy impositions exacted 
by the imperial cruizers, for their conniving at an illicit inter- 
course, was the simultaneous endeavor of both Chinese and 
foreign merchants. At last, by continued solicitations and 
largesses their desire was complied with, and the desert 
island, Ama, assigned, in 1557, for the residence of the stran- 
gers. Thither resorted directly, in four ships from Lampa- 
cao, merchants, to whom tradition still does the honor to he- 
lieve that they had contributed to " rout" the factious Chang- 
si-lad. Substantial houses began to replace temporary paltry 
huts. Chapels were built and consecrated to Divine service. 
Conscious of their weakness, and of their inability to mam- 
tain themselves by force of arms, the settlers determined to 
continue the old policy. By submission and gifts, petty 
Mandarins were inducea to wink at an increasing population, 
at the installation of a government, and at the influx of priests, 
and their exertions to draw infidels over to Christianity. The 
• higher Mandarins had paid, for twenty-five years, but a slen- 
der attention to what was going on at Macao. 

The inhabitants of Macao are divided into three distinct 
classes, viz: vassals of Portugal, vassals of China, and foreign- 
ers ; of each we shall in turn give a brief account. 



Digitized by 



Google 



27 

1. Classes. 

Natural subjects. — If. what a grave historian asserts — and 
there is no ground for impeaching his veracity— -be true, that the 
" prisons of Portugal were now and then emptied, and the vici- 
ous tenants, and even culprits, who should have finished their 
career in the galleys, were sent on board the royal fleets to 
serve in India ;" — we have less reason to shudder at the enor- 
mities perpetrated by the Portuguese in many parts of Asia. 
Some of this unholy stock respected neither friends nor foes ; 
they seized every opportunity to enrich their commander 
and his horde. They were at times pirates or smugglers ; 
at times strolling merchants. Several of this contaminated 
caste settled, no doubt, at Macao, with men of more correct 
morals. By this mixture, those who had reluctantly run 
the race of vice, were by good example recalled to the com- 
forts of social life, which were soon enhanced by nuptial ties. 
Malay, Chinese, Japanese, and other women became their 
partners in wedlock, and mothers of a generation, the descen- 
dants of which are perhaps still members of the community. 
Their progeny is distinguished by the denomination of 
" Mestizos," or mongrels. Next to this class range those 
whose forefathers were not Portuguese, but either Malays, 
Chinese, or Japanese converts ; but they, like the posteri- 
ty of the Portuguese, are free citizens. In a representa- 
tion, written in 1821, to be presented to the constitu- 
tional king John, as it is averred, that in 1583 there were at 
Macao 900 Portuguese, besides women, slaves, and many 
hundred of Chinese children, that had been purchased ;* also 
a great many people who came from Portuguese ports in 
Asia ; and that at the latter end of the seventeenth century 
the population of Macao amounted to 19,500 souls ; in 1821 
to no more *than 4,600, consisting of free men, slaves, and 
people of all nations, including Chinese converts, who dress 
a PEuropeenne, viz: firee natural subjects above fifteen years 
of age, 604 individuals, under fifteen 473 ; slaves 537 ; and 
women 2693, making a total of 4307. In this sum is not 
comprehended 186 men belonging to the battalion, nor 19 
fiiars and 45 nuns. In 1830 the population was estimated, 

* See " Ooriente conquistftdo k Jesu Chriito." 



Digitized by 



Google 



exclusive of the military and clergy, at 4628, viz., 1203 
white men, 2149 white women, 350 male slaves, 779 female 
slaves, 38 men and 118 women of different castes. The Por- 
tuguese bom in Portugal and in its dominion, residing at Ma- 
cao, in 1834, did not exceed 90 persons.* Neither they nor 
any other vassal are allowed to quit Macao, but by a previ- 
ous consent of government. 

Industry, — ^The actual inhabitants of* Macao take the re- 
verse of the apostolic admonition of Clement XIV, " to work 
is more useful than a continual psalmody." Their ancestors 
understood this meaning, for they worshipped God and did 
not altogether despise the exercise of mechanical arts. They 
employed themselves in manufacturing gunpowder and in 
casting guns. Near Bomparto, within the south-western wall, 
gunpowder was made, and, from 1639, deposited at the 
Monte. Among the artillery of this fortress, guns cast 1612, 
by Manoel Bocarro, are still to be seen ; they were of Ja- 
panese and Chinese copper, and of ready sale all over India. 
The king of Cochin China sent, in 1651, twenty-five peculsf 
of copper for a large gun to be cast at Macao, where the art 
was still practised in the beginning of the eighteenth century. 
To point out the place of the foundry I am not prepared ; 
it was perhaps existing in the valley that separates the con- 
vent St. Francis from the fort, Monte. In our days nobody 
cares for learning any art or for opening a shop. The more 
active of the lower class embrace the sea-faring life ; the 
more idle enlist as soldiers ; those who are worth a little 
money follow the business of a merchant. Many of them 
have in the trade of opium, these fifty years, made a fortune, 
and some acquired great wealth. A scrupulous friar once in- 
tended to deny absolution of sins to dealers in opium ; but what 
casuist, when he chooses, has not a metaphysical loop-hole 
to slip through ? To deal in poison is surely more immoral 
than to deal in slaves. By the first mentioned trade we 
challenge nobody, we act in the dark, and in secret injure 
whole nations ; by the latter a chance of resistance is offered. 
The havoc in on^ case cannot be ascertained, for it works 
uninterrupted and hidden ; in the other it may, because it is 

* See appendix, iv. 

t One j^cul ii equal to 133i lb*, avoirdupois. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ap open hostility ; the rate at which the relative mischi^fil ^^• 
l^Vould^ estimate as an unit to a million. Formeirjy, the 
merchants of ;^acao deatt largely in slaves, kidnapped in 
China, Japan, and many other places, or bought ; they. in\- 
port biit few from Timor and poa. In. the representauons^. 
to ^fing John VL, the houses, ships, goods, movea,bles, afa4 
ready cash of the pppulaiion were [iS21] estinaated at about, 
three millions of Spanish dollfirs. 

Chinese vassals.— Toreiga merchants heing allowed to set- 
tle at ]\tacao, Chinese servants, mechanics, tradesmen, fcc., 
joined them, but they lived under the control of a Mandarin, 
with whose jurisdiction the head-judge, " Ouyidor," of Ma- 
cao, was, by the 30th paragraph oif his instructions, dated 
16th February, 1597, fprbidden to meddle. When the civil 
authority had. been transfenced to the tribunal of Casa branca, 
the Procurator of the Senate took the title of Mandarin, in- 
tendent of Ghao-kim. It precedes tha.t of Procurator, when, 
through the medjum of a pclty, Chinese police-officer; de- 
nominated " cabe^a de ruia,'* a. culprit is transmitted, or a 
petition, that the Mandarin might order the cabe^a de rua to 
attend, and be apprehend<?d to answer, or when an excuse is 
sent for hiaving inflicted on a Chinese a few strokes of cudgel. 
The Procurator is denominated chief of 'the Chinese, living 
at Macao — " cabe^a dos Chinas em Macao." In reference 
to this title we might think that any Chinese entering Macao 
ought to be the bearer of a passport, stating the name and em- 
ployment of the emigrant, and be hound to give security for, 
his good behavior, but such are not the regulations. Old set- 
tlers, straggling merchants, artificers, gamblers, jugglers, 
thieves, good and bad men, go and come without any authori- 
tative check on the part of the Procurator. Repeated efforts 
have been made to extend his influence, and consequently 
that of the Senate, over the Chinese population of Macao, 
though the attempt has always been resisted, and the friendly 
advice reiterated to do nothing but by a chop and resolution 
of the higher Mandarins. The Senate ventured [1787] to 
command the procurator, Philip Lawrence Mattos, to demol- 
ish a few houses newly built in Mong-ha and Patane, (Chi- 
nese villages in the Campo.) That work of devastation began. 
The retailers in the bazar, hearing of it, shut the shops, flock- 
ed together in crowds, cudgeled slaves, ill-used soldiers mak- 



Digitized by 



Google 



30 

iDg the rounds, and at last assailed on, ^' praya pequena/' a 
house belonging to an Armenian, in which the Governor and 
many respectable citizens were assembled. Vengeance was 
demanded, and satisfaction would have been obtained, had 
the Portuguese been able to apprehend any pf the disturbers 
or point them out by name. To assuage the agitated popu- 
lace, the Senate saw the necessity of suspending Mattos, and 
of appointing the Procurator of ihe preceding year, with 
whom the Mandarins were invited to treat. To prevent dis- 
turbance in future, a bazar was opened out of the walls of the 
city, in a place called Patau6, in the Campo, near the gates 
of St. Anthony. This accomnfodation was not of a nature 
to suit the inhabitants, for many of their slaves and ser- 
vants were plundered on going to, or coming from the market. 
The locality of the old bazar answered, the people conceived, 
the purpose best, it was in a place called " Campo de Man- 
darim," for delinquents had formerly been capitally punished 
there. By the consent of Heang-shan, the Senate built there, 
In 1788, a new bazar, and the Mandarin pointed out to the 
different sutlers their respective stalls. Two years elapsed ; 
the Procurator gave the Mandarin warning not to continue a 
building, which was erecting in the neighborhood of the mar- 
ket, for if the worff was carried on, it would be his duty to 
pull it down. In the answer from Heang-shan, we read : 
" the place, denominated by the common people Gento or 
Kan-ti, none but Chinese ever inhabited, and it never de- 
pended on you. Be therefore quiet, and recollect that you 
cannot repair your own old houses, but with our license. How 
do you pretend then to the jurisdiction of an empty place ?" 
The building was finished. The Procurator will find on re- 
cord that many of his predecessors have exercised violence 
on wretched Chinese, and that the Mandarin took no notice 
of it. Why ? because the sufferer being aware that he had 
violated the laws, bore patiently the punishment inflicted on 
him by the decision of the Procurator, without complaining 
to the Mandarin ; for had he been transmitted to the Chinese 
tribunal, he well knew that his crime would have exposed 
him to much severer treatment. 

In the ministerial memorandum, already mentioned, we 
read, "no Chinese shall establish himself or own a house at 
Macao, ^itt by the permission of the Procurator of the Se- 



Dlgitized by 



Google 



31 

nate/' an enactment, in which the Chinese, who had fixed 
abodes among the first strangers, are not comprehended. 
New comers must get fi"om the Procurator, with the consent 
of the Senate, license to settle, a license which he may, with- 
out any contradiction of the Mandarin, withdraw from those 
who prove themselves to be wicked and vicious, for he is en- 
joined not to sufier banditti in the place. But as he re- 
ceives no official information, either of those who resort to or' 
leave Macao, no correct statement of the Chinese population 
can be expected from his office. At the tribunal of the Tio- 
tang, the Chinese civil magistrate at Macao, the influx and 
reflux may be inserted, though he may be ignorant of many 
Chinese who take up among their friends a temporary resi- 
dence. Vagabonds shun him, and, by bribing his satellites, 
endeavor to keep out of his reach. The stagnation of trade 
at Macao these last fifteen years, [1834] has compelled many 
Chinese to seek employment somewhere else ; the population 
is therefore less dense ; still we may conjecture, (including 
the inhabitants of a village near the Bar-fort, those of the 
three villages in the campo of Mong-ha, and the people liv- 
ing in boats on the river,) that the number of Chinese may 
amount to about 30,000 individuals, or at. least six times 
greater that the vassals of Portugal actually are. Several 
Chinese have embraced the Roman Catholic faith, for the 
5ake rather of convenience, it appears, thaq conviction. With 
perhaps a few exceptions of good men, the rest I consider as 
the very dregs of China. Its better and more valuable sub- 
jects follow the form of worship which their ancestors prac- 
tised. They have within the precinct of the city a temple, 
recently renovated, by the name of the Old Pagod, or Ama, 
the origin of which Doctor Morrison, in his Chinese Dictiona- 
ry, page 360, second volume, has given a detailed account. 
This temple is seated on ascending, shaggy rocks, and laid out 
in a most romantic style. 

To the eastward of the city is a field — "Campo" — which 
may be said to extend to the very boundary of the peninsula. 
Passing the gates of St. Lazar, we have to the left a range of 
mean huts, mixed with a few better looking houses, along the 
road leading to the Hermitage of Hope. The first habitations 
built there were occupied by new Christians, whom a Span- 
ish Augustine Friar had, in 1809, congregated. A mass of 



Digitized by 



Google 



ihfhe 6t {Hut hundred Chinese,' by fcecommg Christians, fejid 
set the prohibitory laws of the country at defiance, and by 
dwelling together raised the spirit of persecution. Mandarin 
satellites liurfo'unded them m 1814. Some of them were car- 
ried before their judge, othei's dispersed. At present, old 
and new Christians live promiscuously in ti&e place. Opposite 
^ to it, is a piece of ground ^hich an industrious European Por- 
6iguese haid cleared and cultivated, when the undertatking was 
stopped, till he succeeded in making the Mandarins believe 
thait the rice produced byhis labor was intended fi)r the rdief 
of lepers at St..Lazar. The higher grounds of the Campo are 
used by the Chinese for biirial places ; the lower ^^ comprising 
an extensive space between Mong-ha and Patahe, laborious 
husbandmen render very productive ; it bears rice and a great 
vairiety of vegetables. Believing by tradition that the coun- 
try wats theirs, though the Mandarins have over and oyer 
^gain^ repeated, " because you rent a place to live in, it does 
riot follow that the land is yours," the Portuguese lament- 
ed, in a representation of 1722, to the Tsung-tuh, that the 
Campo was full of tonibs atid uncultivated fields. We haVe 
seen that the attempt in 1787 to check by violence the pro- 
gress of Mong-ha and Patane^, failed.. In both these villages 
is a Chinese temple of worship, weH worth visiting. The 
fourth Pagod, or temple, is constructed near the high road, 
running from Patan^ to the barrier. It is a beautiful speci- 
men of architecture in the Chinese style. The environs are 
romantic ; it has the view pf an arm of the sea and of islands. 
Foreigners. — When historians teach us that almost all 
commercial nations never scrupled to ensure to themselves, 
by negociation, corruption, or S|uccessful wars, the enjoyment 
of an exclusive trade, shoufflTwe not be astonished, that 
merchants, fixed on a barren rock, had neglected any means 
in their power to preserve their existence, and without an at- 
tempt at resistance, have suffered strangers to encroach upon 
the old internationial connexion of Macao with Chinia. If 
this aristocratic Republic feared commercial intercourse be- 
tween Manila and Canton, the activity and daring spirit of 
the Dutch, their declared enemiies, must have inspired serious 
thoughts in the mind of those who had at heart the preserva- 
tion of Macao. A Dutch commander, Wybrand Van War- 
wick, appeared [1604] with a commission to open a firiendly 



Digitized by 



Google 



ss 

communicatioD of trade with Cbina, but the proposal was re- 
jected, through the influence of Macao. J. P. Koen, gov- 
ernor of the Dutch settlements in Asia, resolved to get for 
the company a post in China. He sent Regerszoon to take 
Macao, (the issue of the attempt will be detailed at another 
place) but having failed, the Dutch threw themselves upon the 
hapless island, Pe-hou, one of the Piscadores or Pong-hou 
islands, under the pretext that the Chinese bad assisted the 
Portuguese in the defence of Macao. Documents extant 
prove the fallacy ; but let us suppose that the case had been 
true, would that give a sufficient cause for immediate hostili- 
ties ? The truth is that Governor Koen had given orders to 
seize on any of those islands, should the expedition against 
Macao not succeed, and his instructions were obeyed. The 
Dutch began fortifying Pe-hou, but being in want of work- 
men, ships were sent to the coast of Fuh-keen, on which six- 
ty vessels were taken, plundered and burnt : the prisoners 
were employed in the construction of the fort, where almost 
all of them perished by hunger and hard labor. : an equal 
number, between 14 and 1500 men were sent to Batavia, 
and sold on the island of Java for slaves. These facts are 
copied from Dutch historians. 

The Dutch raised the fort at Pe-hou in 1624, and migra- 
ted to the island Formosa. They erected southwards of the 
capital, on a small island, a fortification that commanded the 
entrance of the port, [1634] and called it " Zelandia Castel." 
This place being neutral, the prohibition to deal with the 
Diitch was revoked, and the Chinese allowed to carry on 
trade with them. Finding that wanton cruelties and unwar- 
rantable aicts of hostility could not force upon the Chinese 
Government, though at tha,t time convulsed by internal com- 
motions, such a convention as the company or their agents 
intended to dictate, it was determined to try the eflfects of an 
envoy. Frederick Shedel came 1653, from Formosa to 
Canton, and demanded a free trade with China. Had not 
Chinese merchants accused the Dutch of plunder, and 
proved their piracy, and the Portuguese been less liberal with 
splendid presents, the two governors of the province would 
have supported the petition ; not daring to do that, they ad- 
vised the Dutch to send an embassy to Pekin, furnished with 
precious gifts and oflfers, worthy the acceptance of the Empe- 
5 



Digitized by 



Google 



3^ 

ror; Twd gentlemen, P. de- GoyeJr and J» de Keyser wem 
appointed ambassadors ; they airrived 1655 froim Batavia, asid' 
set out from Canton to Pekin. They had an audience of 
the Emperor, though two Jesuits were requested by the S^ 
nate to promise, in the name of Macao, any sum necessary to 
disappoint the Dutch and oppose their design. In what' 
manner this recommendation was complied with, a Jesuit, by 
name Ludovigo Buglio, designated in Olgiby's Cfaina^ Ludo^ 
vieus BuUionies, informed A ntlK)ny da Camera Noronba, 
military captain of Macao [1656.] The ambassadbrs, aware 
of the intrigue, pretended that they were sent merely for the 
purpose of congratulating the Emperor on the important con* 
quest of China j which he had just achieved. Pleased with 
the compliment, Sbun^hej in token of his imperial beneva*' 
lence, gave liberty to the Dutch to s^d every eight years to 
Canton one ship for the purpose of trade. 

By the following event this favor' was extended. Shun-, 
che left to his son, Kang-he, a formidable enemy at sea, a 
man from Fuh-keen^ of mekn birth, having been a servant, it 
is said, at Macao, and also to t^e Dutch at: Formosa, became 
a merchant, then a pirate to escape oppression. Chinn^hi- 
lung* became in a short time a powerftil man. The disaffected 
to the Ming dynasty, and -the enemies of the eastern Tartars, 
who pressed violently on China, flocked in such numbers to 
his standard, that he had, (historians conjecture,) at his com- 
mand a fleet of three thousand vessels of different descrip** 
tions. A rumor, generally entertained, that he fought in the 
defence of his country, made a pretender to the throne ap-^ 
point him commander-inHshief against the Tartars, who were 
invading Ffih-keen ; this trust Chin-chi-lung betrayed ; he 
secretly promoted theviews of the Tartars j in the expectation 
that he would be acknowledged by the king of Fuh*keen, and 
Kwang-tung entertaining the hope that he, by this acquis!* 
timi, might be ablb to free Ghinal from a for^gn sway, and 
seat himself on the Imperial throne. TJie Tartars noticed 
tfaisambitrmi. Ghin-chi-lung wcmld not be vanquished by 

* Dtihalde gives hiitt the name of Tchin-si-lao : by Oleatlcrs, in his voy- 
age of the amba«aaik)ra, he is oi^ed Chin-ohi-lung. . Joaquin Martinesde 
Zaiieffa, in his '^Historia de Filipioas*' describes some what < differently 
the life of Chin-chi-limg, we follow the Jesuit, Martin Martini, who left' 
China for £itf ope in IdA. 



Digitized by 



Google 



85 

fierce; recottne was tb«refii«e had to stsatagem. Heaping 
on/Jbim presents,' digDities, promises, Gfaiii-cbi<lung was out- 
witted!^ the Tartar general,* who drew him from his fleet 
and took Um [1646] to rPekin, where Sbun-che had him 
T thrown intoa tkrk arid narrow, prison. 

Chinrchin?kong*ior.Kuesing succeeded his father in the 
/command of the fleet, stationcdrat Fuhf«howrfoo, the metro- 
polis of Fiih-keen. He continued to wage war against the 
Tartars, and. in Older to. wreak; his vengenee on the Dutoh, 
who had insulted his . squadnxi, he wrested from them, in 
1662, : their settlement on Formosa. To avenge this :1qss 
the ) Dutch ofiered to coroperate with Kang-^he in the reduc- 
tion of Formosa. A succor of twelve ships, each carrying 
from 11 to 32 oanaons,'was, m 1662,^ accepted. Though the 
parties disagreed very soon, the Elmperor gave [1664] per- 
mission to die Dutch to trade at Fuh^bow^oo, denominated 
by the Dutch at that time Hock-chew, and at Changrchow- 
foo, and in 1666 at Cantcm, once every second year. This 
restriction ceased in 1685, by Kuig-he's declaration, that 
foreigners should be at liberty to carry on their commercial 
pursuit in any port df China they.might choose. 

The lEnglish and French were also opposed by the 
authorities of Macao, for they could not help apprehending 
. that, the.iadmission of foreigners: to the trade at Canton should 
be prejudicial to the the. merchants of Maoao. 

From 1665 all contention would have beenuseless, for in 
that year Kang-he determined, that all commercial nations 
should be freely admitted in all the ports of his vast empire. 
And in 1696, the xxxviith year of his reign, he declared, 
''that Macao depends onthe jurisdiction ofCanton, and that 
everybody who is civilized and comes to his dominions shall 
be considered a son of the emperor. At that time, merchants 
resided commonly at the place where they transacted busi- 
ness. This encroachment on old customs spread gloomy 
presages over men oft pusillanimous or acute minds. A mili- 
tary Mandarin, by the name of Ching-maou, who pretended 
to be well acqainted with the.cbaracter of Europeans, depict- 

* Duhalde calls him Tebin-tchin-eoag. Martin Martini) in his work 
'^De bello tartarico/* denominates him Quesingus. J. M. de Znnega 
gives him the name of ** Cogsing,*' the etymology of *' Kozxnga," we pre- 
sume. 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 

ed them in a memorial, presented to the Emperor, as men of 
unruly, fierce, and savage passions, and that ^^ free trade" 
was pregnant with danger. His specious arguments were, by 
a competent tribunal weighed, and an edict, dated Kang-he's 
Ivith year, [1717] came out, limiting the access of foreign 
trade, confining it at last to the sole port of Canton. 

The Mandarins being unwilling to allow strangers to stay 
at Canton after the ships had been despatched, these gentle- 
men turned their thoughts towards Macao, and sought from 
the governor permission to take up their shelter among the. 
Portuguese. The accommodation was granted ; but there 
immediately came an Imperial order, that nobody, except the 
individuals who were inscribed on a list, handed, I believe, 1724 
to the high Mandarins, should be suffered at Macao. Then 
the Senate petitioned the court of Goa to invest them with 
authority to send away, at pleasure, both foreigners and Por- 
tuguese. In the reply the following discriminating phrase 
deserves our attention : " Intendo com tudo que deve repre- 
sentar na corte do Lnperador as razois que oporrem para 
che (ao Senado) conceder, que possao filar nessa cidade 
algumas pessoas, que vao a Macao a seu negocio, ese 
nao podem recolher na mesma mongao. With all this, I mean 
that you should present to the court of Pekin the reasons 
which oppose immediate compliance, that the Emperor may 
grant you (the Senate) discretionary power to let such per- 
sons, who came for the sake of trade, and cannot return the 
same monsoon, remain at Macao. Does not this hint from 
a supreme government authorize us to argue that the resi- 
dence of strangers at Macao depends more on the concession 
of his Imperial Majesty, than on the arbitrary will of the 
Senate of Macao ? Notwithstanding, this body never ceased 
strenuously to oppose the admission of foreigners, nor the Chi- 
nese authorities to insist upon it. At length both parties 
came into a closer contact. A chop, of 1750, fixed the rules 
to be observed by the Senate in their proceedings towards 
strangers, who came fix)m Canton with the permission of the 
Mandarins. Still contention and strife lasted, till the Senate, 
in the presence of the Governor, Anthony Pereira Coutinho, 
resolved on the 9th February, 1757, to grant, for the sake 
of hospitality to foreigners, a temporary residence at Macao ; 
this resolution was sanctioned by the Governor of Portuguese 



Digitized by 



Google 



37 

India. It was permitted to house-owners to let houses, with 
the consent of the Governor and Senate, to strangers, and 
particularly to the " Supercargoes of the companies, who are 
a kind of representatives of their respective nations." In 
consequence of the regulations of 1750, the Mandarin of the 
district is bound to inform the Senate, through the Procura- 
tor, that a foreigner is coming to Macao with a passport from 
the Mandarins of Canton. When the same gentleman shall 
wish to return to Canton, a chop is sent down to him ; this 
must be produced to the Procurator, that, by his signature, 
the Mandarin may know what individual goes back to Can- 
ton. Strangers are likewise in the habit of claiming the as- 
sistance of the Procurator, when disputes and misunderstand- 
ing with the Chinese take place. If the quarrel is about a 
trifle, the Procurator succeeds easily ; if of any importance he 
occasionally sacrifices some little of his property, that it may 
not be said that he has no influence over the Chinese. 

Self-interest, it is rumored, made a certain Tsung-tuh, 
about seventy years ago, deny to foreigners the liberty of 
choosing any merchant of Canton they wanted to deal with. 
He drew up six articles, which became the invariable rules of 
conduct between foreign merchants and those of China, 
whose number he fixed at ten: they were confirmed by 
Keen-lung, on the xiith day, xiith moon, xxivth year of his 
reign, [1760.] The first article absolutely prohibits strangers 
from residing at Canton after the shipping season is over; 
orders were consequently issued that they should move to 
Macao. An altercation took place on that subject between 
the Dutch and French Supercargoes, each pretending that 
the other should obey and quit Canton first, a wrangling 
which was the more ridiculous as neither of the nations had 
an existing convention that had been violated by the new re- 
gulations. At last both left Canton, and came, in 1762, to 
Macao. The English, Danish, and Swedish supercargoes 
got leave, about the same time, to take houses ; but the Span- 
ish factors obtained this permission not before 1792. This 
indulgence has latterly been extended to Americans, private 
merchants, and other foreigners. 

The advantage of a familiar intercourse has begun to be 
felt. The rent for houses, paid by foreigners in 1832, ex- 
ceeded thirty thousand dollars. Besides, several Macao men 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 

and women find means, to support tbemselTes aadfamilies-bf 
attending on gentlemen, ladies, and children. Macao owes 
also to the philanthropic feeling of thetnemhers of the Briibh 
.Honorable Company, an institution which has ispread useful 
knowledge among the inhabitants. iWe allude'toa^^Ltbrary," 
founded in 18Q6 : it contains nearly four thousand volumes, 
in various languages, principally tin the English. . From this 
^valuable collection we have drawn considerable information, 
enlarged by the books, to which our friends, a Dutch gentleman 
and a Spanish Dominician Friar gave us free access. So as- 
sisted^ we have been able to fill up a partof those chasms 
whicth we fell in with in our extensive researches. Another 
interesting foundation was laid in 1829, by young English 
amateurs of natural history. " The Museum" was progress- 
ing, and posterity would no doubt have been indebted to it 
for many rare specimens of nature's produce and marvels, 
had not the founders of it been obliged, by the dissolution t)f 
the British &ctory at Canton, to separate. * 

Foreigners, during their residenee:at Macao, are protected, 
and tliey ou^ht, as local subjects, to conform to the dictates 
of the laws of Portugal, unless liberated fix)m their influence 
by privileges and conventions. ByeJaws bind > dependents, 
but they do not justify i members of any corporation in. setting 
at defiance public authority, instituted for the protection of 
peace and harmony. Attempts of this kind are resisted by 
the Governor and Minister, 'whose duty it is to make the 
laws of their sovereign respected. Though there is no ab- 
solute necessity of waiting on either of tbem, a gentleman, 
we think, will feel satisfied when he complies with the custom 
every where observed, of calling, at least, at the Governor's. 
Cin^mstances nwiy render protection necessary, and in that 
case it is surely more agreeable to meet a gentleman with 
whom we are acquainted, than to ask a fevor of, or justice 
firom a man we never saw. 

2. Pvblic Education. — 'We shall first advert to the royal 
bounty, by which children of an inferior, and even of the 
lowest caste, are invited to cultivate their minds. In "one 
5cAooZ" children are taught reading and writing the mother 
language, — in "«no^Aer" a Professor explains the Portu- 
guese and Latin grammar, and continues his lectures in the 
Latin language, for the benefit of those who are desirous of 



\ 



Digitized by 



Google 



beeoming' oonvers&nf ^th its beauties. The only expense 
att^ding is the purchase of books. Some Friars also oo'*^ 
cupy their leisure hours in teaching. Portuguese and Latin; 
no' wonder> therefore that almost all boys read and writer . 
though seldom without (sinning against the roles of grammar. 
We shall now proceed to the principal, seat of learning, in 
which the progeny of those who claim the first rank in socie^ 
ty, may, as it were, be led by the hand to the fountain of 
mental improvement.—- We allude to the " Royal College of 
St. Jo9€phi>" The Jesuits were: the founders; but at their 
expulsion' [176^] its activity ceased, and was not resumed' 
till at the expiration of more than twenty years. In 1784' 
the Court of Lisbon transferred this establishment to the 
^^'Congregation' of Missions,'' and in 1800, the charges to be 
paid by the Senate were definitively settled. The priests 
belonging to this college are all European Portuguese, com- 
monly six: their superior is-appointed firom Europe. Of this 
institution, the principal aim is to provide China with Evau'^ 
gelic teachers. Young Chinese, not exceeding twelve in- 
number, are admitted, and furnished with what they necessa- 
rily want. If they evince a sincere desire to become priests, 
their education is directed that way; but it generally requires 
ten years^ befbre the candidates can receive the first order. 
Those whose vocation is dubious wait longer, or leave the 
college-, others, who 'want application j or are noted for a mis- 
demeanor, are sent* away. The Professors give instructions 
in the Portuguese and Latb grammar, arithmetic, rhetoric, 
philosophy, theology, &c. Many children of the inhabitants 
participate in them^ thoiigh few of them are made priests. 
The Chinese language is taught, and English and French oc- 
casionally. Parents, who can afford to pay for their chil- 
dren a small remuneration monthly, for food and a cell^ fix 
them at the* college, where the students learn to speak 
genuine Portuguese, and acquire sometimes a taste for the 
improvement of their minds. Some children dine at the 
College, and join their families at night ; others attend the 
lectures dehvered " gratis" by the Professors at distinct hours. 
In 1815 eight young Chinese, two Malays, and sixteen boys, 
bom at Macao, were settled in the college. In 1831, seven 
young Chinese, two boys from Manila, whose fathers were 
Portuguese, and thirteen bom at Macao. 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 

" Seminary of St. PawZ."— Jesuits had, at an early period, 
settled at Macao, for the sake of teaching religion. Devotees 
furnished funds for the purchase of a house contiguous to the 
ancient church ; in this house infidels were instructed and 
young vassals of Portugal educated. This had, before 1594, 
been converted into an extensive Seminary, where, often more 
than ninety children of the inhabitants were taught the rudi- 
ments of learning. A " College" was afterwards founded. It 
had two classes for Latin, two chairs for theology, one for 
philosophy, and one for belles lettres. The circuit of the 
Seminary contained a large hall for the library, one for astro- 
nomical purposes, and an apothecary shop. Missionaries 
going and coming were lodged in the Seminary, which could 
accommodate 70 or 80 individuals. This celebrated seat of 
learning in the east was broken up [1762] by order of Joseph 
I. King of Portugal, and their members dispersed. 

3. Charitable Institutions. — " Misericordia" — ^^Donna 
Leonora, consort of King John II. founded in Lisbon [1498] 
a Brotherhood of Mercy, known by the appellation of " Con- 
fraria de nossa Senhora da Misericordia." The foundation of 
the " Santa Casa da Misericordia" — ^the Holy house of mercy at 
Macao was laid in 1596, and its first Provisor — " Provedor" 
— was Melchior Cameiro, Governor of the Bishoprick of 
Macao. To assist fellow men, whose means .of subsistence 
are too small and inadequate for the maintenance of a numer- 
ous family, to relieve bed-ridden, respectable people, and 
those who reluctantly go abroad asking for alms, and to 
bring up orphans and foundlings ; these are the sacred duties 
which this worthy society profess to impose upon themselves. 
In any country where Portuguese ever settled, having but 
one church, their next tho.ughts were bent, it seems, upon form- 
ing benevolent institutions, like that we are alluding to. 
Reformed rules for its management were drawn up, [1617] 
and confirmed 1649 by John IV. who took the Santa Casa da 
Misericordia" under his immediate protection. In compli- 
ance with the " compromise" of 1627, the collective mem- 
bers nominate electors to choose a Provisor, Secretary, and 
Treasurer, with ten Deputies to form a Board of thirteen. The 
individuals thus selected are at liberty to decline the trust or 
to accept their respective charges for the period of one year, 
ending on the third of July. The Provisor may, with the 



\ 



Digitized by 



Google 



41 

concurrence of a majority of the Board, take certain resolu- 
tions; but in fixed cases, such as in the election of new mem- , 
bers, a general meeting is required. About fifteen' years ago, 
none but a Portuguese, or his descendants could be admitted; 
since 1821 it has been otherwise. The board meets twice a 
week in a spacious hall, not far firora the fine church, dedi- 
cated to our Lady of Mercy — "nossa Senhora da misericordia," 

The members of this brotherhood do not contribute, duty 
bound, to the formation of a productive fund ; they engage 
merely to act as trustees. On certain bulky articles of trade 
one per cent, being added to the regular custom-house duty, 
half of its total amount is, at the end of the year, received by 
the Treasurer ; the other half goes, as already mentioned, to 
the monastery of St. Clare. In 1833 the receipts were 3806 
taels ; besides this, stock, which is of course subject to much 
fluctuation, the members of the Board manage all those sums 
which livmg or deceased persons may choose to throw into 
the coffers, for purposes fully explained in writing. Con- 
scientiously to execute the will of a testator or donor is an 
inviolable duty of every honest man ; to a philanthropic as- 
sociation it is also an advantage ; of an opposite behavior, bit- 
ter complaints are recorded. " The Provisor dissipates and 
squanders away the money left by testators for the benefit of 
their souls, and legatees are deprived of their property." 
Sea-risks are taken without due discrimination, and by a 
criminal connivance at recovery, both principal and premium 
are lost. A brotherhood, which shall endeavor to stand ac- 
quitted of these charges, must fulfil the charitable commands 
of bringing up children and foundlings ; of redeeming, by 
trifles bestowed on wretched parents, Chinese infants from 
death ; of assisting poor, though respectable members of the 
community with periodical succour in money or rice, or medi- 
cine in case of sickness. 

Asylum for Female Orphans. An institution of this kind 
was an early thought of the Brotherhood of Mercy, but no 
efficient means could be devised for its duration. A tempo- 
. rary foundation for thirty widows and orphans began in 1726, 
they were fed, and the orphans taught to manage a liouse. 
One of the most deserving of the inmates, was annually en- 
dowed with the amount of one half per cent, on the whole 
importation of trade, which the Senate had set apart for a 
6 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 

nuptial portion : this half per cent, rose in 1726, to 406 taels; 
^ m 1728, to^hardly 60 taels. From this epoch, the institution 
remained suspended till in the year 1782, the Brotherhood 
made a proposition to establish a new one in conjunction 
with the Senate : the proposal was accepted. The Senate 
gave four thousand taels and the name of Asylum of Sta. 
Rosa de Lima — " Recolhimento de Santa Rosa de Lima." — 
This stock, increased by liberal gifts and legacies, is lent at 
respondentia. The net proceeds of the premium, determines 
the number of girls who can be admitted. No one is receiv- 
ed but with the consent of the Bishop, who appoints a Priest 
(for there is a chapel in the house,) an Inspector, and a woman 
of good reputation. Regent of the community. A school- 
mistress teaches religion, reading, writing and needle work. 
Female children, whose fathers can afford to pay a certain 
allowance for food, lodging, fcc. are not refused admittance 
when places are vacant, and the Bishop does not start any 
objections. Orphans there educated, may with his consent, 
accept the situation of a teacher in any family, and the pro- 
posal of a matrimonial union, (should a suitable match hap- 
pen to be offered.) In this event, a portion is bestowed, but 
the amount depends on the resources and the good will of 
the Bishop. 

Asylum of St. Mary Magdalen. Relying on ancient 
documents, a Vicarrgeneral Anthony Joseph Nogueira pre- 
sumed that he might imprison women, who by their libidi- 
nous conduct gave, as he thought, scandal. This conceit was 
adopted and matured (1791 ?) by the Bishop Dm. Marcel- 
lino Joseph da Silva. The slander of invidious enemies, or 
of disobliged greedy informers was listened to. The episco- 

f)al gaol, bearing the name of " Asylum of St. Mary Magda- 
en," soon harl)ored many females, "whose guilt had not been 
ascertained by a legal previous process, sentenced to a con- 
finement " ad libitum" of the diocesan. The property of 
the recluses was mismanaged. Commonly, no inventory 
of it was taken, no responsible person appointed, whose duty 
it should be to collect the goods and prevent them from being 
plundered, in order that they might be restored to the releas- 
ed. This inexcusable neglect left many of those who had 
been reclaimed through repentance, contrition or protection, 
without means of living, and forced them to submit again to 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



43 

a condition they had probably learned to deprecate. Those 
immured lived under the spiritual direction of the Vicar of 
St. Lawrence, and in the domestic concerns they were under 
the inspection of a woman, who taught them to spin, weave, 
knit, &^c. The produce of their labor being insufficient for 

. the maintenance of the prisoners, gratuitous contributions 
made up the deficiency. This *' imperium in imperio," con- 
tinued till it was by a provision dated, 12th March, 1800, 
of the Prince Regent of Portugal, dissolved. The hierarchy 
remained with the Church discipline, and the province of 
civil administration reverted to the chief justice of Macao. 

4. Hospices. Among the acts of charity, for which the 
public has to thank the Brotherhood of Mercy, I think 
that the Lazar-house^ contiguous to the Hermitage of Hope, 
might have been one of their first foundations. Its utility 
had been fully ascertained, when a few Spanish friars, ship- 
wrecked iii the act of smuggling themselves into China, 
came from Canton to Macao, with orders to embark for Ma- 
nila. This command they eluded, and hid themselves (1579) 
in the receptacle of Lepers, watching an opportunity to break 
as interlopers, the prohibitory laws of China. In 1834 there 
were 69 patients. The Civil Hospital^ if not coeval with 
the above mentioned establishment, was an effect of an early 
thought of the Brotherhood. A high wall separates the section 
of men from that of the women. To be admitted, a petition is 
presented to the Provedor, whose report, if favorable, assigns 
a place, not only to forlorn diseased Christians, but likewise 
to the Heathen. They are received, taken care of, and, if 
possible, healed by the physician attached to it : Christians 
are consoled by hearing prayers in the '^ Chapel." This 
hospital is for males and females, and contains 40 beds* To 
render the establishment alluded to, less subject to vacilla- 
tions, a new method has been adopted at the Board pf the 
Brotherhood of Mercy. Rents, alms, bequests, and the 
distribution of money on sea-risks, are regularly accounted 

.for. The Provisoris, by an order of 1787, bound to lay the 
state of administration before the Minister, but even this 
salutary provision cannot always protect the funds from being 
plundered. At the foot of the Civil, is the Military Hospi- 
tal^ which owes its existence to an order from Qoa in 1784. 
It is attended by a Surgeon, and has rooms for three officers, 
ditto for eight subalterns, and a hall for fifty eight soldiers. 



Digifized by 



Google 



CHAPTER V. 

Government. 
Preliminary. 

The Merchants, iiiUy aware that their settlement at Macao, 
was due, neither to any conquest achieved by the arms of 
Portugal, nor as a return for services, which the Portuguese 
ever afforded by co-operating in the destruction of dreaded 
pirates, bore in mind two principles, namely, to be on good 
terms with the provisional authorities, and to improve as 
much as possible their exclusive trade with China. To se- 
cure these advantages, interested merchants suffered with 
resignation the extortions which public officers were wont to 
exercise, as rewards for their conniving at the infraction of 
Imperial decrees and laws. The actual government of Ma- 
cao is compelled now and then, to adopt the same method, 
though in a measure, which bears no proportion to what the 
bribes were in ancient times. However, at the expirati<Mi of 
nearly three hundred years, the Senate may, without any 
material exaggeration, copy the expressions their ancestors 
used in a letter (1593) to Philip I. ^' Para aqui conser* 
varmos gastamos muito com os Chinas gentios" — ^to maintain 
ourselves in this place we must spend much with the Chinese * 
heathen. 

The Portuguese well knew, that, as local subjectSi they 
were bound to obey the laws of China, but, like other stran- 
gers, they aspired at living under the protection of their own 
laws. In6uential members determined, for the purpose of 
order, and impression on the minds of an increasing rude 
cksB of itolBS9» to cbooG6 fiom amoog thenunlves a Laao 



\ 



Digitized by 



Google 



. .W^ , J ^ 



46 

or Place Captain — " capitao da terra" — ^to admit a head- 
judge — ^^ ouvidor," — ^whose power was confined within the 
narrow influence of a justice of the peace, or of an umpire : 
a Bishop was also recognized. A few enlisted soldiers act- 
ed by the direction of the governing, party, as police men for 
keeping the pluce quiet and guarded. Of this assumed au- 
thority, a small portion was allotted to the Commodore — 
" CapitaS m6r da viagem do Japao," — of the Portuguese 
ships fit>m India, when the fleet touched in her way to Japan 
at Macao for trade. During his visit the functions of the Gov- 
ernor were suspended, the duty of the military depended on 
his direction, nevertheless, he was fain to coticur in the poli- 
cy of the arbitrary colonial regency. To give to these organic 
elements a fixed form of civil order, the merchants, with the 
sanction of the Governor, of the Bishoprick, and the Com* 
modore, then in port, resolved that Macao should have a reg- 
ular government. Their relative influence on its fomoiation^ 
shall briefly be explained in the sequel, but the features are 
less antiquated than they would be, were it in our power to 
delineate them fi-om original documents, such as they were 
three centuries ago. 

Every fi^e subject of the crown, of Portugal bom at Ma- 
cao, possessing the necessary legal qualifications has a right 
to vote at the election of members of the municipal govern- 
ment ; a privilege, which free men fi^m other parts of the 
dominions of Portugal, unless disqualified by the laws, can 
obtain by marrying and settling at Macao. A class, called 
" Homens bons," — ^i. e. citizens, who have been Senators^ 
and another class of municipal ofiicers, subordinate and de- 
pendent on the Senate,denominated "Almota^es," fi-om among 
whom individuals may, by election, be raised to Senatorial 
dignity, are every third year convened, and meet on the day 
appointed by the Chief Justice, who presides over the meet- 
ing. Those assembled in council, name among the most 
distinguished, experienced, zealous, and ancient citizens, elec- 
tors, and the Chief Justice having selected six, who have the 
greatest number of votes, administers to them the oath prescrib- 
ed by the laws, and divides them into three classes, each con- 
sisting of two electors, who must be neither relations nor 
kinsmen. Remaining at the Senate House, each pair, sepa- 
xitad bxm the twoothers^ sets down in three rolls, the names 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 

of those of their countrymen, whom they consider best quali- 
fied to become principal officers of the municipality, including 
the Treasurer for three years to come. To this end, each pair 
points out twenty-one individuals, and signs the rolls. The 
three rolls of each pajr of electors, being delivered to the 
Chief Justice, that gentleman, having lawfully ascertained that 
no collision took place at the elections, compares the three 
rolls, and selecting from among them, persons, who are not 
related, forms one roll, called " Pauta," containing the list of 
the candidates to the government for the three next following 
years. Three lists, drawii from the Pauta, are transcribed at 
Goa, signed by the head of Portuguese India, sealed and sent 
to Macao, where one of the lists, on the cover of which is 
marked the subsequent year, is at a general meeting oa the 
31st December, opened, arid the appointments, with the 
name of the appointed read by the Secretary in a clear and 
audible voice. The members of the new Senate, take the 
oath given to them by the Chief Justice, faithfully to discharge, 
during the course of a year, their respective callings. The 
gentlemen who resign, cannot be re-elected until three years 
have elapsed, except when there is a want of persons proper 
for the office, in which case, they may be called in again at the 
expiration of either one or two years. The collective body is 
composed of two Judges " Juizes," three Aldermen — " Ver- 
eadores," and one Procurator — " Procurador." The alder- 
men preside and manage the various concerns, properly muni- 
cipal, according to existing orders and regulations ; the judges 
fulfil the commands of the Senate, provided they do not mili- 
tate against established rules and laws ; they also decide upon 
certain civil and .criminal cases, but from their decision an 
appeal lies open, eitiier to the audience of the Chief Justice 
of Macao, or to the supreme tribunal at Goa, called " Rela- 
cao," composed of six Ministers, including the Chancellor, 
presided by the Viceroy or Governor General ; its decisions 
are definitive, and conclusive in most cases. The Procurator 
proposes and inspects the necessary repairs of the public 
buildings, streets &tc. ; he executes the written orders of the 
Senate, and signs with his colleagues, their resolutions. He 
is besides, the organ of communication of the city with the 
Mandarins of the district. To collect the revenue falls upon 
^ the lot of the Treasurer. Whenever he presents at the end of 



Digitized by 



Google 



47 

six months and at the end of the year his accounts to the 
Senate, he has a seat at the Senate, but not among the 
Senators. 

1. First Municipality — 200 Years. 

Senate — " Camera,^' 

Under the presidency of Melchior Cameiro, Governor of 
the Bishoprick, the inhabitants of Macao, who had a right to 
vote, assembled in 1583. This is maintained in the Repre- 
sentation, written, I am told, in 1821, to be laid under the eyes 
of King John VI. and the Cortes, meeting at Lisbon. In 
another old authentic manuscript, I have read, that, by per- 
mission of Dm. Duarte de Money es. Viceroy of Portuguese 
India, the assembling took place in April, 1585. Being best 
acquainted with the municipal franchises, bestowed by the 
munificence of their sovereign, on several eminent trading 
places in Portugal, the plurality voted for a municipality : 
they proceeded to mould it, by selecting from among them- 
selves two Judges, three Aldermen, and one Pirocurator. 
This transaction was first approved — the representation allud- 
ed to above, affirms — ^by Dm. Francis Mascarenhas, Count 
de Santa Cruz, so called, in the catalogue of Viceroys I am 
in possession of, and ratified by his successor Dm. Duarte de 
Moneyes, Count de Tarouca. He granted to Macao on the 
10th of April, 1586, the liberties, privileges and rank, with 
which Sta. Cruz de Cochim, on the coast of Malabar, bad 
been honored. This concession did not satisfy ambition. 
Her worshippers entreated (1593) father Gil de Matta to ob- 
tain fit)m Philip I. " that citizens of Macao, who by election 
had filled situations of Senators, should in prerogatives 
and dignity be on a level with those of Oporto." His Ma- 
jesty resolved, however, by a provision of March 3d, 1595, 
that the citizens of Macao were to possess equal immunities 
with Evora, the same that had been assigned to Cochim. 
Rightly to judge of their merits, an authentic copy of the 
royal grant, must have been obtained, either from the archives 
at Lisbon, or from those of Cochim. The expression which 
a magistrate, delegated from Goa, Anthony Moureira de S*u- 
ro used in one of his addresses (December 23d, 1726) to the 
Senate, saying, "it is not proper that the settlement should be 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 

without Foral," we are inclined to construe, not as an abso- 
lute want of such a document, but rather as a reflection on the 
members of the Senate, for having neglected to get it confirm- 
ed and sanctioned by the then ruling monarch of Portugal. 
The document actudly existing in the Senate under the title 
of Charter — " Foral," — contains twenty-eight " Alvaras" — 
letters-patent, confirmed by King John V. The Senate, 
composed of two judges, three aldermen and one procurator, 
were invested with the exercise of fiill power. In a Constitu- 
tional deed — " carta de declara^ao," — issued by John V. un- 
der date January 6th, 1712, the attributes of the Senate are 
thus defined : '^ the political government of the Senate com- 
prehends all those cases, which have any relation to the well 
being of the city, the preservation of its peace and tranquillity, 
&c. Its economical government consists in collecting the 
revenue ; in expending it ; in apportioning the assessment of 
tribute to be levied on ships ; in paying the salaries to publie 
officers, and in discharging all other necessary expenses. 

One of the Aldermen presides alternately over the Senate. 
Their resolutions, taken at the plurality of votes from the elec- 
tive body, had the virtue of municipal decrees. Its members 
managed the election so dexterously, that the ancient families 
remained year after year, with the pre-eminence and direction 
of pubUc affairs. The Senate recognized at Macao no con- 
trolling poweror supremacy. ' When any business of great 
importance was to be done, the decision of which the munici- 
pal government would not take upon their own responsibility, 
a Council was convened. The Bishop, men of Senatorial 
rank, the Governor — " Capitao da terra" — the Prelates and 
the Ouvidor or Chief Justice, and the Exalmontaces were in- 
vited ; opinions pro and con were ascertained, and the con- 
clusion signed by all the members in council, even by the dis- 
senting, under protest. Though a gentleman from Goa, Dn. 
Augustin de Assevedo Monteiro— " Desembargador Syndi- 
cante," — endeavored in 1712 to stem the torrent of iniquity 
by fixing regulations, which the Senate were requested to ob- 
serve, and likewise rules for fiiture Ouvidors, to what length 
the Senate stretched the latitude of their power till 1784, an 
epoch, at which the balance of a ruined government began to 
work, the reader may decide, by taking into consideration the 
following memorable facts. 



Digitized by 



Google 



49 

1. Domestic Political Influence. 

On the Members. Besides a few enrolled stipendiaries, 
whose duty it was to watch over the common police, inhabi- 
tants, having a right to vote at the triennial elections, attend- 
ed also, when summoned by the Land-captain and Governor, 
for the purpose of checking any irregular tumults, that tend- 
ed to interrupt private and public security, or of repelling 
foreign aggressions. The little cohort bearing arms, was 
'(1616) placed under the command of a Military Captain — 
"Capita© de gente da guerra," — and we may conjecture, 
that in 1622, (the place of military captain was vacant,) it 
amounted to as much as 150 men, for we are authentically 
informed, that 60 Portuguese, and 90 Macao-born, were not 
able to prevent the landing in the port of Casilhas of a naval 
force, which the Dutch had fitted out to secure to themselves 
the possession of Macao. The population of the place, hav- 
ing considerably fallen off by the migration of those, who 
found no employment or means of subsistence from the mo- 
ment the trade with Japan was lost, (1639) Malacca captur- 
ed, (1641) and the port of Manila shut (1644) against all 
communication with the Portuguese, the difficulty of making 
new levies in the settlement, was acknowledged. Fifty and 
more soldiers came, therefore, (1667) from Goa to Macao 
with Emanuel de Saldanha, a Portuguese ambassador to the 
court of China : he commanded, that the military body should 
be composed of 120 foot soldiers, disciplined by a Captain, 
a sub-lieutenant, and a sergeant. 

Free men were enrolled among others. By this change, 
the Governors and Captains-general flattered themselves, 
that the Senate might by degrees be so put together, that the 
members might be glad to pay due respect to the repeated 
commands of Viceroys, and to the decree of John V. (30th 
December, 1709,) directing that the Governor should 
have the principal seat, at any time he might have any thing 
of importance to lay before the Senate. To attain this ob- 
ject, several of the Governors had been in the habit of send- 
ing military freemen to the general elections, that they might 
exercise their right of voting, an innovation that caused much 
dissension and embarrassment. Diogo de Pinho Teneira 
proposed to himself to conquer the resistance, and humble 
the proud independence of the Senate, by annulling the 
7 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 

choice made by the electors of new municipal officers, and 
by commanding another election to be made, a step so ille- 
gal and contrary to old Custom, that the Senators actually 
serving, resolved to continue the^ discharge of their public 
duty. Aware that their houses would be invaded by the sat- 
ellites of the Governor, and their persons apprehended, they 
sought an asylum first in the Convent of St. Francis, and then 
at the College of St. Paul. The Governor claimed from the 
Jesuits the surrender of their Senatorial inmates. His instan- 
stances being rejected, Diogo threatened to blow up, by the 
guns of the Monte, both the Church and College, a profana- 
tion he gave up through the friendly intercession of some re- 
spectable ecclesiastics. However, hardly was the Governor 
aware, that the Senators had proceeded to a meeting at the 
Senate-house, held by the Bishop, who, when invited, always 
presides over the Council — ^where the Prelates, Citizens and 
Commons joined them, to consult on the means of stopping 
all further progress of molestation and strife, than he, accom- 
panied by his partisans and military, directed his steps (June 
29th, 1710) to the same place. But no sooner had the as- 
sembly perceived his approach, than they armed themselves, 
descended from the Senate-house, and despising the Gover- 
nor's order to separate, fell upon him and drove both him, 
his adherents, and soldiers to the Monte. From that fort 
Diogo had three guns fired in the direction where a dense 
mass of people were assembled before the Senate-house. 
This murderous attempt provoked them ; the tocsin was rung, 
blood would have been spilt, had not the Bishop ordered, 
that the Eucharist — " O santissimo," — should be carried in 
procession. At the sight of this divine and venerated emblem, 
the irritation subsided, an agreement was drawn up and sign- 
ed (July 3d,) by both parties, but the Senators returned to 
St. Paul's, and did not leave it until the 28th of the same 
month, the day on which the ceremony of installation of the 
new Governor took place. Diogo was impeached, convicted, 
arid punished, I presume, according to the laws of Portugal. 
In a letter, dated 1714, Vasco Femandes Cezar Meneyes, 
Viceroy, expresses himself thus: "considering that your 
place is actually experiencing want of men and subjects, I 
hereby permit soldiers and officers to be employed in the 
public service, notwithstanding any order previously issued 



Digitized by 



Google 



61 

to the contrary." Ig consequence, many of the officers duly 
elected, took by permission of the Governor of Macao, their 
seats among the Judges and Aldermen of the Senate. No 
pains were spared, even so early as 1717, to get this order 
rescinded, but neither the petitions of the Senate, nor the 
proposal (1773) of Diogo Fernandes Sallema de Saldanha, 
Governor of Macao, to send 50 Sepoys and 50 European 
soldiers from Goa, as substitutes to the turbulent and noisy 
military voters, proved successful. The remedy came from 
Goa, in 1784, for the Government determined at last to es- 
tablish at Macao a company of 100 Sepoys and 50 artillery- 
men. 

Though no vassal (except a few,) elected by the consti- 
tuted authorities, be exempted before seventy years of age 
fixun serving the public, the Senators have it in their power 
to excuse, for weighty reasons or continued ill health, any of 
their coUea^es, from exercising a too laborious and trouble- 
some occupation : they may assign to him a less burdensome 
one. Having (1775) made the discovery, tliat one of the or- 
dinary Judges happened to be an ex-Jesuit, the Senate, with 
the concurrence of a Council, annulled, by virtue of an ex- 
isting decree, the election, and directed the other Judge to 
proceed against the intruder ; a measure very much applaud- 
ed by the Court of Lisbon. 

On the Svialtem Officers. Among those provisionally 
appointed by the Senate to be confirmed by letters-patent 
from the King of Portugal, is the " Secretary," a man, who 
always ought to be endowed with a considerable share of 
knowledge concerning the rules, proceedings and doings of 
past times ; of the standing orders from Goa, of the com- 
mands received from the Court of Lisbon; a man of a sound 
unbiassed judgment, influenced by no other motive than those 
of promoting directly and indirectly, by honorable means, 
the welfare and prosperity of the settlement. Such a public 
officer, deserves at all times great esteem, but among superiors, 
who have not had the advantage of an elementary education, 
the general information which such a gentleman can afford, 
must be of high importance. About seventy years ago, 
some of the municipal members were constrained to sign the 
resolution, taken in the " Verea^ao,"— the assembly of Sena- 
atois, presided over, alternately, by one of the Aldermen — 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 

with a cross, under which the Secretary wrote the man's 
name. Among those illiterate and staunch republicans, we 
must class several individuals of brilliant merit and distinguish- 
ed talents. Of this truth we are convinced by the perusal of 
a few scraps or remnants of old manuscripts, the principal and 
most valuable part of which was by order of Dm. Rodrigo da 
Costa, Viceroy, sent, if we are not mistaken, from Macao to 
Goa, in the year of 1690. 

V Almotaces, They may be considered like police officers 
and justices of the peace. Their number for a year amounts to 
twenty-foUr ; two of them serve a month together in turn. 
This duty devolves for the three first months of the year on the 
SenatorSjWho on the 31st December, gave up their situations to 
their successors. Eighteen individuals are then chosen for 
the service of the remaining year. Those two, who are to be 
employed conjointly, are inscribed on a distinct roll for every 
month. Should any of them depart this life, or be unable to 
attend to his duty, the Senate fixes on a substitute. King 
Joseph I. in a letter, dated 15th January, 1774, commands the 
Senate to elect fi'om among the natives every year, six Almo- 
taces, declaring, ^' that his vassals born in India and baptised, 
provided no disabilities of the laws intervene, shall possess, 
without any diflference, the benefit of all the privileges confer- 
red on those bom in Portugal." This just and paternal so- 
licitude for the enjoyment of common rights, belonging to 
common subjects, aristocratical ambition is generally ingenious 
enough to elude. Their meritorious ancestors expired long 
ago, but patrician progeny still look down on the plebian 
class, firom the attitude to which ignorant aristocracy, heredita- 
ry or monied, is wont to cling. 

On the Christian population generally. Of many heinous 
oflTences, the collective members of the Senate have rendered 
themselves guilty. Dm. Francis Mascarenhas, a military 
Governor, by repeated encroachments on the rights of the 
Senate, and on the safety of the inhabitants, caused a tumult 
in 1624, which ended in his assassination. Twenty-four of 
the ring-leaders were by the Supreme tribunal xit Goa, sen- 
tenced to death, but in 1632 the King's pardon was received. 
It is recorded that the Senate, now and then, arrogated to 
themselves the privilege of Sovereignty, by venturing to de- 
- prive some citizens of their rights, and to send others to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



63 

Dutch, English and Spamsh settlements. In the archives 
of the Senate, existed several orders from the Viceroys, con- 
tradictory one to the other, " of them, you avail yourselves, 
[writes John the 1st.] as you think proper and your passions 
suggest." John de Saldanha da Gama made Anthony Mour- 
e^rade Souza, already mentioned, "protest (1126) against 
the Senate's persisting in the practice of banishing and trans- 
porting persons." As an instance to what length the Sena- 
tors stretched their authority, we shall translate a proclama- 
tion, dated 13th of April, 1712. " Nobody living under the 
jurisdiction of the Senate, whatever may be his qualifications 
or situation, either citizen, inhabitant, pilot, boat-swain, sailor, 
or common man, shall be allowed to transfer himself from 
one quarter or place of abode b the town to another, without 
permission from the Senate, in accordance with a royal pro- 
vision, under the penalty of being held and treated like a 
suspicious person, and enemy of the laud, and punished with 
the loss of his property." A list of those to whom the Sen- 
ate granted license to leave the country was presented by the 
procurator to the Governor. 

The lucrative trade of Japan and Malacca being lost, three 
places, Manila, Batavia, and Timor, offered a profitable mar- 
ket. The Oligarcks resolved in 1720, to explore it them- 
selves, leaving the minor ports to merchants of inferior credit. 
This barefaced selfishness was reproved by the court of Goa, 
and it was commanded, that a ship should in its turn go on a 
voyage to the places above mentioned. 

The following edict, may probablj elicit a smile. It is of 
1744, and " forbids under a pecuniary mulct of ten taels, the 
natives from wearing a wig and covering themselves with a 
paper umbrella.*' Matheas de Soiza petitioned the Sen- 
ate, and was allowed the use of both, for he proved himself to 
be by the side of his mother, from the lineage of a Portuguese. 
Other natives petitioned the Viceroy, Marquis de Castello 
Novo, arguing, '< that the petitioners &nd their ancestors, had 
from time immemorial been habituated to treat thenaselves 
like Portuguese, who by intermarriage were nearly allied to 
them, and that the petitioners were the first, who contributed 
to the relief of any pressing want of the community." In his 
reply, the the Viceroy commands, <' that the proclamation 
alluded to, shall have no efiiect, for the Senators in this case 
have overstepped the limits of their jurbdiction." 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 

On the military department. — ^The liberty which the first 
inhabitants of Macao allowed themselves, when they [1560] 
choose for Place-captain — " Capitao da terra" — Diogo Pere- 
ira, a royal decree [Nov. 24th, 1563] tended to abolish ; still 
in 1 587 this captain owed his situation to the confidence of 
his countrymen. Further edicts, one dated 25th February, 
1595, confirmed by those of 16th January, 1665, and 2d 
March, 1675, commanded, that the viceroys should keep 
among other factories — so the Portuguese used then to call 
several of their settlements in Asia — ^the Government of Ma- 
cao at the disposal of certain distinguished females, whose 
parents had perished in India, either by the arms of the infi- 
dels, or in the civil service. Of this description many young 
ladies came from Portugal to Goa, in the expectation that 
they might meet in Asia with a suitable matrimonial settle- 
ment. To advance this laudable desire, the Viceroys publicly . 
notified that the pretenders should produce their respective 
titles. Their claims were examined : if considered of equal 
weight, the prize was adjudicated to her whose father had 
died in the conflict against the enemies of Portugal in India. 
It consisted in bringing to her future husband, in lieu of any 
other marriage-portion, the right of governing Macao when 
his turn came. If he did not live to enjoy the favor, he 
could, by his last will, bequeath it to his son or widow: when 
still living, he might pass his title to any other gentleman, ap- 
proved by the viceroy, ip consideration of a sum of money, 
settled by arbitration. What the salary of a governor of 
Macao amounted to in Barly tunes I have not been able to 
trace. In 1636 it was 1000 taels per annum, in 1740 ninety 
taels per month ; now it is 2000 taels yearly. Like many 
other public officers of Portugal — ^asserted by the annalists of 
the Portuguese discoveries — the Governorof Macao wielded, 
at the same time, the sword and jerked the scales ; he had 
ships and ware-house? ad libitum. Merchants complained, 
" the Governor manages his business so dexterously as to 
secure to himself the benefit of profitable sea and trading 
voyages." This eagerness for gain King John IV endeavor- 
ed to stop, by a letter dated 3d September, 1720, in which 
he declares, " that the Governor is allowed to trade neither 
in his own name nor in that of any other person." So long, 
however, as we shall continue to hear in society the utterance 



Digitized by 



Google 



65 

of this metallic query, "how much is he worth," instead of 
this moral one, " is the man beneficent, virtuous, meritori- 
ous," similar prohibitions will be of little or no avail. 

In the beginning of the eighteenth century " Governors 
and Captains-general" came from Goa, with the intention of 
balancing the overgrowing preponderance of the Senate. 
Violent party disputes arose, but the Senate got generally the 
better of their antagonists. Count de Sandomil, viceroy, pre- 
tended [1735] that the Governor should preside ; it was de- 
nied, alleging a royal provision, that the Governor shall have 
neither a seat nor a vote in the Senate. To them belonged 
all political and economical concerns ; to the Governor the 
military department. In concurrence with the newly ap- 
pointed Governor, a day for his installation is fixed and pro- 
claimed by order of the Senate. In the case of vacancy by 
death, the corpse is deposited in the Cathedral, to which 
place the municipal officers, attended by a medical gentleman, 
proceed. The presiding Alderman of the month approaches 
the coffin and calls three times on the deceased by his name : 
The physician having declared that the man is dead, the lists 
of succession are brought from the Senate-house : that one, 
the superscription of which refers to the current year, is 
opened ; it contains the name of the person or persons who 
shall succeed. That question being decided, the Alderman* 
takes out of the hand of the deceased the cane, held as signal 
of command, and delivers it to his successor. From this mo- 
ment he is considered to be invested with the power and 
authority which the deceased had a right to exercise. Of 
this transaction the Secretary of the Senate draws up a public 
document which is signed by him and the new Governor. 

On the civil department. — ^The application of the statutes 
of Portugal was for a length of time managed by laymen and 
lawyers, either of Macao or from Goa. The former had 
100 taels, the latter 200 yearly. Of those who were sent 
from Goa, the Senate, in a letter to his Majesty, the King of 
Portugal, says, " they keep the place in constant coranKi- 
tion and disquietude ; they are miserably poor. That they 
may return at the end of three years well off in point of for- 
tune, they are not over-scrupulous in treading justice under 
foot, and in embezzling deposits in their trust." The Senate, 
therefore, requested that the office might be entrusted to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 

oldest of the Aldermen ; but John V. determined by a resolu- 
tion, dated 16th April, 1740, " that the office of Ouvidor is 
superfluous in a place, the jurisdiction of which does not ex- 
tend beyond the compass of the town-walls. Let the ordinary 
judge and the judge of orphans give their sentence in law- 
suits ; from them the contending parties may, as formerly, 
appeal to the supreme tribunal, "a Re]a9a5,', at Goa. 

The Senate enjoying already, through the brotherhood of 
mercy, great influence on the election of the man who should 
be one of the managers of property, left by the deceased — 
" Provedor dos defuntos" — Provisor of the deceased ; the 
other judge of the orphans — " Juiz dos orphans" — had now 
by the intervention of their own officers, the entire jurisdic- 
tion in their hands. But these men being almost always illit- 
erate, the civil affairs became at last so embroiled that the 
Senators themselves found it indispensable to solicit Queen 
Mary I. to appoint a gentlemen regularly bred to the law, as 
chief justice. Previous to that epoch [1787] controlling ma- 
gistrates — " Syndicantes" — were delegated every third year 
from Goa, with power more or less comprehensive, as cir- 
cumstances required. Though these ministers were bound to 
act according to laws, orders, and instructions, " they applied 
them merely for the purpose of ruining" the place, as the 
Senate expressed it in 1725. The rich and mighty slip, with 
their crimes, through the lawyers' cobweb ; the poor and misera- 
ble are caught to prove, at Goa, that justice has been duly at- 
tended to, during a short residence of a few months at Macao 

At present the Chief Justice, acting likewise as Judge of 
the customs, receives yearly 2000 taels. His perquisites, in- 
cluding those from the custom-house, may be estimated, I 
presume, at about 1000 taels per annum. This magistrate 
has always been forbidden to engage iu trade ; and the royal 
regulations, dated 26th March, 1803, carry on their face re- 
newed prohibitions, which lay slumbering till 13th December, 
1824, because the gentleman,* who was, during a period of 
twenty-two years, at the head of the civil Government, came 
to Macao destitute of property, with the ambition to enrich 
himself, though he failed. 

* See a bombastic paneygeric — " Eloffio" — of that magistrate, printed in 
Lisbon, J826. The same author published also at Coimbra a meagre work, 
called ^ Memoria sobre Macao." 



Digitized by 



Google 



67 

On the Chinese Populatipn. — ^The Portuguese from their 
first settlement at Macao, have constantly been at variance 
with those Chinese who wanted to establish themselves there, 
because it was thought policy to limit their number. From 
ancient records we are led to believe that, all those Chinese 
who had no fixed abode, went out of the town at night ; that 
not only the gates of the districts, but also the street doors 
were shut. In 1697, it was resolved, that no othet* Chinese 
than those whose names were inscribed on the registers at 
the Senate should remain ; the rest had orders, by a procla- 
mation, to leave the city in three days ; the refractory were 
to be handed over to the Mandarins, as vagabonds. No more 
than 90 coolees,* selected by three petty Chinese police 
officers — " cabe^as da rua." — ^were siififered to stay. The 
Senate, favored at times by the Mandarins, or locaJ magis* 
trates, has succeeded in limiting the number of even useful 
Chinese residents. That this ill-timed policy may operate, 
recourse has been had to violent measures. In 1711 the 
Senate commanded, that several houses, let to the Chinese, 
contrary to the prohibitive publications, should be demolish- 
ed. Some built and owned by Chinese were, by order of 
the Mandarins, pulled down. On this occasion, John Mou- 
rao, a Jesuit, made the following sound speech to the Sena- 
tors : " There will always be," he said, " proprietors who 
will let or sell to the Chinese their houses, for it is well 
known, that even royal edicts are slighted, and insufficient to 
stop the eflforts of individual convenience, then even when 
the common edict is exposed to suffer injury." The pre- 
diction was verified ; for, although the Senate, by repeated 
commands from Goa, had taken steps to redeem houses, 
shops, hc.y mortgaged in the hands of the Chinese, the en- 
deavor proved unavailing. In 1749 the Senate obtained the 
consent of Mandarins, that only 70 workmen in wood and 
bricklayers, 10 butchers — ^^ porqueires" — 4 blacksmiths, and 
100 coolees, should live in the town ; and to prevent them 
from fixing themselves in the place, the Senate published an 
order, that no house-owner should either let or sell bis house 
to a Chinese ; expecting that, by this measure, many of them 
would evacuate the place. Other expedients were also tried 

* Common workmen. 
8 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 

for tbe same purpose, but all proved ineffectual. At last, 
Francis da Cunhae Meneyes, the Governor General of Goa, 
granted by this letter, dated 29th April, 1793, permission for 
the inhabitants to let their houses to Chinese. 

2. Domestic Economical Influence. 

For more than two hundred years, or to 1784, the Portu* 
juese financiers of Macao were continually groping in the in« 
tricate recesses of taxation. The rule was, that at the end 
of the current, or in' the beginning of tbe ensuing year, the 
rate of customs, to be paid on all sorts of goods imported, 
should be fixed in a meeting of the Senators and the princi- 
pal citizens — '^ homens bons." — A great deal of vacillation 
in this point is obvious. If the duties levied produced more 
than was required to meet the discharge of public burdens, 
the Senators were-**the representation of 1821 to the king 
and Cortes afiSrms — in the habit of dividing among them- 
selves the surf^us ; if inadequate, they took upon themselves 
to make good the deficiency, except when it was caused by 
ship wreck, or brought on by unexpected unforeseen calls : 
in those cases, the Senate borrowed money of the citizens, or 
these contributed voluntarily, in certain proportion to the 
common expenses. The ways and means adopted for col* 
lecting the duties and spending the revenue will be illustra* 
ted by the facts, which we are going to transcribe, under the 
head of receipts and expenditures. 

Receipt. — ^The assessment fixed on importation was paid 
in specie, i. e. in kind. The moment a ship belonging to 
Macao, appeared in the roads, the Procurator, being also 
Treasurer, went on board, where he left some guards of his 
own creation. They began by drawing up a list, containing 
a declaration of tbe quantity, quality and weight of the goods, 
mentioning the name to whom they belonged. This job being 
ended, the merchandise was sent by the guards to the ware- 
houses of their respective owners, and to the stores of the 
Procurator and Treasurer that part which was assessed for pay- 
ing the duty. These guards are described as being unfit, dis- 
loyal, fraudulent. Instead of first registering the contents of the 
chests and boxes on deck, the goods in the hold of the ship 
were unloaded, and those on deck suffered to disappear 
during the night. Mean, miserable dependent, they often 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 

wentonshore, leaving the owners to act as they pleased; the 
cargo was sent home and no duty paid. A Viceroy threaten- 
ed, that those who ventured to disembark any thing without 
satisfying the customs, should pay double the amount, and be 
sent as prisoners from Macao to a fortress, there to be seclu- 
ded for six years ; but what threats can intimidate practical 
knaves ? The Procurator received the duties with weights 
five per cent, better than those he sold by ; permitted liis go- 
downs* to be cleared by public sales, at which none of the Sena- 
tors were present, he improved his situation with so little scru- 
ple of conscience, that be paid off all his debts and remained a 
rich man. Besides, as Treasurer, he had in his hands for 
thfee years the deposit of cash, with liberty to take sea-risks 
on strong staunch ships, and grant respondentia to able and 
substantial people. Of these, his individual transactions, he 
afterwards bad to lay a statement of particulars before the 
Senate. The city bore any loss happening to a vessel, and 
for private debtors of it the public money, the Treasurer 
stood security. He charged, by consent of the Senate, two 
per cent, premium for loans, as his own emolument. 

The effect of such sweeping peculations of public property 
began to be seriously felt in 1636. The expulsion from Ja- 
pan, the loss of Malacca, the exclusion from the Manihi mar- 
ket, Kang-he's prohibition, [1662] and his public declaration 
[1685] that all commercial nations should be welcome to 
China, brought on the necessity of borrowing money to re- 
lieve pressing exigencies. So early as in 1630, the natuml 
subjects refused to advance at small sums ; the Senate got it 
from the Spaniards. At a later period [1660]the King of 
Siam sent to Macao 605 catteesf of silver. Then the per 
centage claimed by the Misericordia and St. Clare, were kept 
back. For money belonging to orphans and public deposits, 
seven per cent, were allowed and sums raised, at as high a 
rate as ten per cent, on bonds signed by all the members of 
the Senate. At last the revenue was so reduced and penu- 
rious, that to encounter the annual necessary disbursements, 
a tax, fixed by arbitrators, was imposed by the Senate, at one 

* A go-down if the bMement itory of howef where goodf are etoved, 
•ervante livei &c. 

t A cattee ia equal to 1^ pooDd ardurdupoia. 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 

dme on the population, including citizens, irtars, and priests, 
at another, on houses and shops. These subsidies were sus- 
pended in 1706, for the customs had then rendered 5,756 
taels; they amounted, in 1718 to 150,000 xeraphins.* In 
1726 the trade had so fallen off that the city wanted to bor- 
row again, and in 1735 it was indebted to the amount of 25,000 
taels. 

Notwithstanding the commands of John V. that the Pro- 
curator should lay a yearly account of the revenue of customs 
before its magistrate — ^Ouvidor — ^inveterate knavery con- 
tinued, till the viceroy. Count de Sandomil, who resigned in 
1741, resolved upon separating the occupation of Procurator 
from that of Treasurer. His rules were superseded by those 
of Don John Jose de Mello, Governor General, [1768] and 
these finally set aside by the regulations, dated 29th March, 
1784, concerning the custom-house at Macao* From the 
time that the office of Treasurer became a distinct trust, the 
electors proposing every third year municipal officers, had to 
select from among their most respectable and substantial 
countrymen three individuals, who, if confirmed by the Su- 
preme Government at Goa, could serve as Treasurer, each a 
year in turn. 

Expenditure. — The fifth of all customs belonged to the 
king, the xest to acivi! fund; both under the direction of the 
Senate, from 1714. In that year, Vasco Fernandes Cezar 
de Meneyes, Viceroy, gave orders that the Procurator should 
collect the King's fifth, hitherto gathered by the King's 
factor ; and he laid the Senate under the obligation to employ 
its amount in paying the Governor, repairing the fortifications, 
. and keeping the artillery and arms in good order. The 
Senators had to present to the Governor of Macao, annually, 
a statement, and to Goa a summary, that it might be examin- 
ed and approved. The share in the customs, surrendered 
by the King's munificence to the city, served to clear the 
yearly ground rent to tlie Chinese ; to discharge to the clergy, 
to the members of the Senate, and inferior servants of Gov- 
ernment their salaries; to bestow on Misericordia, and the 
Monastery of St. Clare, on the convents, churches, and hos- 
pices assistance, relief and alms ; in one word to pay all the 

* A zeraphin ii eitimated, in Vieira'i dietlon8]y,at 300 Portugoeiereea. 



Digitized by 



Google 



61 

civil expenses of the place. Under the head of extraordina- 
ry charges, it is well worth remarking, that the Senators had 
adjudicated to themselves one hundred peculs of sandal wood, 
sold to adventurers at from 100 to 120 dollars, which they 
divided, that they might have a new suit of clothes at the 
procession of Corpus Christi. Later, the public chest was 
ransacked : one hundred dollars were appropriated to apparel, 
that the Senators might appear neat and well dressed. At 
last, the income being so reduced, that the garrison could 
htrely be paid, the Senators did not scruple to apportion 
among themselves 500 taels. Fees, contrary to the prohibi- 
tion of Count de Sandomil, [1734] were still, in 1742, dis- 
tributed. These arbitrary unlawful gratuities have been 
abolished ; the Senators were at all times rewarded, and are 
actually so, by trifling fees, seldom exceeding six hundred 
taels per annum. 

Having set apart a certain sum to meet unexpected de- 
mands against the royal chest, the Senate gave [17S0] leave 
to the Procurator to allow to ship-owners, of good credit, 
S,000 taels ; in the subsequent years, citizens, inhabitants, 
bachelors, married, and unmarried men, and widows also had 
a share in the respondentia, at 20 per cent. In 1761 the 
remaining cash was to be distributed at sea-risks, and in 
1764 at local interest. Count de Ega commanded [1765] 
that one half of the remaining fund should continue a perma- 
nent stock, and jthe other half given at respondentia, and on 
interest. His successor confirmed this resolution, and com- 
manded to place more money at the local current rate of in- 
terest. To this disposition, ancient citizens had [1764] start- 
ed objections, and experience soon taught, that lending and 
borrowing money under those regulations, would finally de- 
stroy the revenue. The truth is, that the grand debt to the 
royal chest, amounting, in 1791, to 450,000 taels, oripnated 
mostly from claims, which had no relation to sea-risks. 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 

II. Constitution of Macao. 

Preliminary. 

The preceding disquisition has offered us iustances of 
repeated vexations, which the superior order of citizens 
allowed themselves, in despite of laws, royal mandates, 
and threats from the supreme government at Goa, to prac- 
tice on the inferior class of their countrymen. In my ex- 
tensive researches, I have met but with a single example of 
popular efforts to resist iniquitous attempts. A decree of an 
Emperor of Japan, having commanded that the ships from 
Macao, then in the port of Nangasaki, should be detained, 
and the owners compelled to pay a considerable debt, due by 
bankrupt Portuguese to Japanese merchants, the su&rers, on 
their return, invoked the protection of the laws. In lieu of 
decreeing, that the property should in proportion be restored, 
the Senate, in conjunction with the Ouvidor, resolved, (1636) 
that no restitution of the loss, inflicted on innocent people 
by Japanese violence, should be imposed on any of the other 
merchants," a shocking tyranny which disgusted everybody. 
The people rose, dragged violently the Senators to the Sen- 
ate-lK)use, forced them to take their seats, and compelled 
them to ratify their demand, '< protesting, that they would in 
case of infraction, make the Senate respect conventions." 
This revolutionary procedure, was lost upon the next muni- 
cipal officers and their successors, for more than a century, 
till Dm. Federic William de Souza, Governor General of Por- 
tuguese India, by an order of Mary I. Queen of Portugal, 
prescribed rules, dated 12th April, 1784, to be in future ob- 
served by the constituted authorities at Macao. 

Senate. This body is elected and composed as formerly, 
of two Judges, three Aldermen, and pne Procurator. At the 
meeting called ^' Verea^ao," one of the Aldermen presides 
alternately for a' month'; they manage various concerns prop- 
erly municipal, according to existing orders and regulations. 
Matters under consideration, are decided by the plurality of 
votes. Documents, having any reference to Government, 
must be registered at the Secretary's office, in the Senate, 



Digitized by 



Google 



69 

such as letters of credence of a Governor, the Commission 
of a Chief Justice, and even the Pope's Bull, and the King 
of Portugal's Writ for execution, to the elected Bishop. — 
The day and the hour being fixed, when either of these gen- 
tlemen are to be lawfully invested with the exercise of his of- 
fice, the Senate sends an invitation to the clergy and to the 
nobility : the common people are apprised of the ceremony 
by a proclamation. We shall not give you the trouble to as- 
cend the steep flight of stairs leading to the fort Monte, at 
the gates of which the installation of a new Governor takes 
place ; nor those more easy steps in the Senate-house, where 
that of the Chief Justice is performed, tut you may enter the 
Cathedral, should you be desirous to hear the inaugural oration 
of a Bishop. 

The high sounding distinctive honors, said to have been 
bestowed by John IV. and confirmed by John V. on those 
individuals who had been members of the municipal govern- 
ment, are now very seldom a matter of conversation, for they 
are obselete, and would rather excite in the audience, a sar- 
donic smile. The actual progeny of past and present Sena- 
torial rank, contend for the attributes of noblemen, and claim 
at Macao, the prerogatives of nobility. 

Governor. " The Governor shall preside in all cases, 
economical, political, civil, or military," viz : in all discus- 
sions concerning the public money, the preservation of peace, 
and harmony with the Chinese and foreigners : communica- 
tions relative to the military department, come from him. 
He is commonly sent by the Viceroy, from Goa to Macao, for 
the period of three years, or till he shall be relieved by a suc- 
cessor : his salary is two thousand taels per annum, besides 
a decent residence on Praya Grande. His duty is to report 
to Goa, the doings of the Senate. All matters under discussion 
ought in justice to be decided by the majority of votes, but at 
Macao, when the Governor and Minister coincide in opinion, 
the other members have merely to sign resolutions. May 
not this rule lead to collision, to the prejudice of the royal 
chest of municipal independence ? Though the Governor 
has not the casting vote, he may upon his own responsibility, 
oppose any motion, militating against regulations, laws, or 
commands from Lisbon and Goa. Should it so happen, that 
the Senate and Governor cannot agree on any point under 
discussion, and delay be firaught with danger, the Bishop, and 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 

those who have a right to vote, are convened, and the ques* 
tion is settled by the majority of votes in Council. 

On the day of his installation, the Governor and Captain 
General, promises by an oath, to protect the place : for this 
purpose a body of Se|)oys from Goa, and young people at 
Macao, are enlisted. The whole force ought to be 400 men, 
and sixteen officers: in 1834, it amounted to 240 men, with 
corresponding officers. A soldier receives six dollars per 
month, and new regimentals every second year : the officers 
are paid according to their seniority. To this cohort is en- 
trusted the guard of five fortresses, and a fort, nearly opposite 
to the Governor's residence. The fortifications are mounted 
with 130 guns of different calibre and metal. 

Alinister. Convinced that a thorough reform in the juris- 
prudence had become inevitable, the Senate petitioned Mary 
L to name a gentlemen, bred to the law, who should be at 
the head of the civil government at Macao : the ^ueen ap- 
pointed Lazar de Siiva Ferreira, who was installed in 1787. 
He and his successors, are distinguished at Macao, by the 
epithet of Ministers, who in the absence of the Governor, pre- 
side as Vice President over the Senate. They ai'e also 
Judges of the Customs. The powers of a Minister are great, 
but anybody dissatisfied with his decisions, may appeal to the 
supreme tribunal at Goa. 

Vassgjsof Portugal at Macao, were forbidden (1689) by 
Dm. Rodrigo da Costa, Viceroy, and by John V. (1712,) to 
obey the summons of Mandarins. The common Chinese are 
now in the habit of pleading their causes against the Portu- 
guese, at the audience of the Minister, who does them justice ; 
but by havinjr no lawful means, by which he can compel the 
refractory Chinese, to appear and answer before his tribunal, 
no effectual protection against subjects of China, ought to be^ 
expected from him in favor of foreigners. 

By an order of the Prince Regent of Portugal, in 1803, 
no homicide shall be given up to the Chinese : the cases shall 
be tried by the civil authority of Macao ; if the criminal be 
found by the laws of Portugal, guilty, he shall suffer death 
by the hands of a Christian executioner. This command was 
attended to for the first time, 1805. 

Royal Chest. The occasional deficit in the royal chest, 
and the consequent necessity of borrowing money, that the 
Senate might meet the current expenditure, can be traced, 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 

rather less to the want of comniercial activity, than to the 
improvideoce and dishonesty of administrators. The follow* 
ing statement conroborates this surmise. Lazar da Silva 
Ferreira, examining by command of Queen Mary I. the state 
of the King's coffers, and the accounts of the Senate, found 
(1784) a deficiency of no less than 320,000 taels, because 
many fraudulent and insolvent securities, he conjectured, had 
been accepted: consanguinity, friendship and patronage bad 
winked at not cancelling the loan by reimbursement, but bad 
suffered it to grow year after year, more important and oner- 
ous. It then became wholly impossible to cancel it, for 
many a debtor was dead, or completely bankrupt. Should 
honest men, who had stood security, be required to reimburse 
the principal, with premium, the means of carrying oa their 
own business, would be drained, or at least, so extenuated, that 
the place, the existence of which depends principally on the 
exercise of navigation and trade, might be brought to the 
very verge of perdition. The magnanimity of Queen Mary 
saved Macao. Her son, the Prince Regent, announced in a 
letter of the 7th March, 1799, to the Senate, that the debtors 
to the royal chest, at Macao, were graciously liberated of a 
sum of money, not less than 291,193 taels. Meanwhile the 
Regulations, dated 29th March, 1784, concerning the Cus- 
toms at Macao, had been duly attended to, and operated a 
beneficial change in the financial department. The duties 
being fixed by public tax laid upon all importations, the 
Treasurer of the Senate receives, in accordance with the cer- 
tificate of the Custom-house, at the end of every month, the 
amount, and delivers it to the royal chest at the Senate-house. 
At the expiration of six months, and of the year, the Treasurer 
presents to the Senate, presided over by the Governor, and 
assisted by the Minister, his accounts. All disbursements are 
made by the commands of the Senate, and an order written 
by the Secretary, and signed by the Governor, Minister, and 
the Senators. Aiming at nothing more than to protect in 
future, the King's revenue from undue losses, Lazar da Silva 
Ferreira, and his successor, Anthony Pereira dos Santas, used 
their influence, and the Senate granted sea-risks only to citizens 
and merchants of known credit and substantial security. The 
recovery of principal and premiura,was regularly enforced thirty 
days after the ship's safe return to Macao. These measures 
9 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 

countenanced by the pre.^illiig Governor, operated as a salu- 
tary check on deceit. The revenue was economized ; for 
showy parade, unsound projects, strange favors — imported a 
few years later — were at that time unknown. Public money 
was employed for the discharge of salaries and extraordinary 
calls. To meet them, about 35,000 taels more were requir- 
ed, the surplus income was again sent to sea, ait respondentia, 
the national moving capital increased year after year. In 
1802, it amounted to 173,690 taels. In 1 809, 159,400, taels 
were by the constituted authorities, dbtributed at responden- 
tia, at a premium from 20 to 25 percent. In 1817, no more 
than 40,400, went on bottomry and respondentia. That very 
same year, the ordinary and extraordinary expenses rose to 
upwards of 80,000 taels. In 1826, the city bore a debt of 
more than 122,000 taels. In 1830, the customs yielded 
69,183 taels, but the disbursements were 109,451 taels. In 
1832, the royal chest, or the city, had against it, a claim of 
no less than 150,000 taels. On th^ 31st December, 
1834, the debt amounted to 

Taels, 165,134,688 



The Receipts of that year from the Customs, 
were, Taels, 75,283,613 



The Expenditure, civil Hst,Taels, 29,210 : 866 
Ecclesiastic " « 8,092:666 
Military " « 28,881:834 

Ordinary Expenses, 66,185 : 266 
Extraordmary Expenses, 

Taels, 4,434 : 778 
Do. paid off on the 

debt of the City, 1 9,580 : 645 



23,715:420 

89,900686 



Digitized by 



Google 



67 

The inhabitants of Macao are burdened, neither with a poll- 
tax, npr with taxes on houses, windows, &c. The resources of 
which the government can dispose, for meeting the expenses, 
and paying the debt of the city, are all derived from duties, 
paid on goods, imported principally in ships, belonging to 
Macao : no export duty is paid by the merchants. 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER VI. 

Foreign. Relations. 

With Portugal. Politically. — ^Whether the Sovereigns of 
Portugal number Macao, among their ultra-marine posses- 
sions, by the reason the Jesuit Nicolas Trigauld alleges in 
his ^< Christiana expeditio apud Sinas,"* or because the 
strangers, who had settled at Macao, and were natural sub- 
jects, claimed protection from their King, is a matter of 
speculation, which I shall leave to antiquarians' to settle. 
Certain it is, that early relations between the mother-country 
Goa and Macao, existed. In a preceding page, it was hinted 
that the Court expressed its displeasure at the inhabitants of 
Macao, for having chosen of their own accord, a Governor or 
Capitao da terra, (1 560.) Four years previous to this epoch, 
Sebastian I. succeeded to his grandsire, Emmanuel, and an 
empty treasure, though Portugal had at its command the 
most extensive and lucrative commerce at that time. How- 
ever, constant emigration and the unnatural state of celibacy 
of the secular and regular clergy had so debilitated the coun- 
try, that the home produce of arts and manufactures, being in- 
adequate for the consumption of the conquered and trading 
provinces in India, recourse was had to foreign industry, so 
that the riches of Asia flowed through Portugal, to England, 
France, and the Netherlands. Sebastian, too, began and 
carried on an unnecessary war against the Moors, and levied 
heavy contributions on all classes of his subjects. He passed 

* Quein in finem, Lusitani reges (Amacao) locnm civitatis appellatione 
donatum, auctoritate pontificia, pnesule adornaacunt, quo facUior, nee sine 
ecclesiafltica majestate, sanctorum adminiatratio in eztrema orbia plaff&y 
redderetur. — De Christiana ezpediUone apud Sinas f. 156. AwU. Aic. 7n* 
gmdio. CoUmiiB, 1616. ' 



Digitized by 



Google 



69 

over to Africa^ and having perished, a ruined kingdom fell to 
the lot of his uncle. Cardinal Henry, weak, decrepid, on the 
brink of the grave. The reins of goveijiraent were relaxed. 
The right of succession was worth contending for. After 
some struggle, the Duke of Bragan^a yielding, the crown of 
Portugal fell to the lot of Philip II. King of Spain. He 
was acknowledged and proclaimed (1581) under the name of 
Philip I. The ultra-marine dominions of Portugal followed 
this example. To Macao, described by Diogo de Couto, 
** a fnelhor i ma$ prospero columna que os Portugueyes tern 
em todo o oriente,'' — ^the best and most important pillar the 
Portuguese possess in the east, — the proposal of submission 
was carried from Manila, by Father Alongo Sanches. By 
his management, the principal authorities assented, and hav- 
ing been taught from the pulpit, obedience, the common people 
consented. The acknowledgment of Philip I. in 1582,was the 
consequence. After a lapse of sixty years, Portugal separated 
from Spain. Valuable portions of that monarchy, had risen 
in arms against the mother country. The politics of Europe 
were in favor of the independence of Portugal. A few indi- 
viduals contrived a restoration, and the Duke of Bragan^a, 
was in 1640, proclaimed King of Portugal, under the name 
of John IV. This news, an English ship tradbg to Canton, 
brought,(l 641 .) The Governor of Manila, desirous of com- 
bining the interests of that place with those of Macao, author- 
ized his ambassador Dm. Juan Claudio, to negociate the 
union with the crown of Spain. The advantage was obvious 
to all men of sound understanding and impartiality. . The 
minds of the less enlighted wavered ; but the ungrate&l an- 
tipathy, roused by the contents of an official letter from Count 
de Aveiras, viceroy of Goa, and an address of king John IV. 
to Macao, caused two hundred and fifty-seven members of 
the city to declare their adherence to the new d3masty« An 
oath of allegiance was taken on the If^h June, 1642 and 
John proclaimed the lawful sovereign of Portugal. To sig- 
nalize their attachment to the royal family of Bragan^a ** the 
inhabitants made a great donation m ready cash to the king ; 
of two hundred brass cannon, and all sorts of aoimunition. 
The author of ** Portugal restaurado" says, <* Anthony 
Fialho Ferreira and Goi^calo Ferras, principal pei^sons of 
Macao, arrived at Lisbon for the offering to the kingdbeisttiee 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 

in the name of the city/' but not a word of the rich donation 
that had been voted, and of which the representatives ought to 
have been. the beare];s, had the remittance of those presents 
ever taken place. We may record a similar instance of af- 
fection in our days. Hardly was it known that the Queen 
and Prince Regent had taken their departure from Lisbon to 
Rio de Janeiro, than it was resolved in 1809 to send an am- 
bassador to Brazil with congratulations to the royal family, 
and such tokens of respect and memorials as the financial 
state of Macao could afford : the expenses amounted to 5500 
dollars. 

With Goa. Having condescended to grant protection to 
the natural subjects of Portugal, established in China, the 
Court of Lisbon thought proper to render Macao, in the first 
instance, dependent on Goa, with permission to appeal, in 
certain cases, to the Sovereign himself. To his ministry, or 
more properly to «the minister of ultra-marine affairs, the 
Senate presents yearly, detailed accounts of their municipal 
doings, economical concerns, and political relations. Copies 
of these reports are forwarded to Goa, for revision, approba- 
tion or amendment. The rumor, that a new era of happi- 
ness and prosperity, by the convocation and meeting of the 
constituent Cortes at Lisbon, was dawning over the nation — 
caused serious domestic broils at Macao. Those in power 
and their friends contended for the preservation of their pre- 
rogatives ; the lower class— 4n all parts of the world — ^the 
most numerous and turbulent, from ignorance— -cried out for 
a change, for preferment. Both parties had their mounte- 
banks. Were people in general taught, besides the catechism 
of their religious tenets, the recognized precepts of social 
contracts, those political incendiaries from the pulpit, in the 
newspapers, and at camp-meetings, would be despised and 
their eloquent pathos laughed at. A tutored understanding 
comprehends the true meaning of the imperishable rights and 
duties, which all members of a community are required to 
comply with, and scorns revolutionary projects, till either of 
the contracting parties has, in a most arbitrary manner violat- 
ed the compact. In this case it is but justice to avenge treason. 
This discriminating intellect was as little the lot of the citi- 
zens of Macao, as of those of almost all other countries. 
After some delay, an oath of adhesion to the basis of a fiiture 



Digitized by 



Google 



71 

Constitution was (I6th Feb. 1822) taken: what was further 
to be done, orders from the King, Cortes or the supreme 
government at Goa, should determine. This judicious and 
rational proposition, was unpopular. Vague accusations 
against members of the Senate, gained ground ; the high 
clamors and the feelings of the public mind, made a general 
meeting unavoidable. It took place on the ] 9th August. 
A noisy multitude vociferated for the dismission of the King's 
minister Miguel de Arriaga Brum da Silveira : the Senators 
reluctantly assented, and resigned. A new municipal gov- 
ernment was elected and installed ; the Senate endowed as 
before 1784, with legislative, executive, and judiciary power. 
The defeated party, had recourse in September and Novem- 
ber, to insurrectionary movements ; but their plan was ill di- 
gested, and the leaders unqualified to carry the point by a coup 
de main. Mr. Arriaga, in the opinion of many, being the 
principal promoter of all commotions, to save him from 
insult, and perhaps from the peril of losing his life, by the 
rage of an infuriated mob, it was resolved at a meeting, that 
one of the Senators, should take him under his protection, 
and bring him from his dwelling, up to the Monte ; on falling 
sick, he was allowed to remove himself to his ordinary resi- 
dence. At last, an order, that he and the ex-governor should 
quit Macao, was served : they were to proceed to Lisbon, 
there to answer for the offences, which they stood accused 
of. Both embarked in March, 1823, on board the Vasco 
da Gama ; but Mr. Arriaga took leave of his friends and set 
out for Canton in a Chinese boat. 

That the Governor General of Goa, neither would nor 
could sanction an act, by which a subaltern Government, un- 
thorized withdrew its allegiance, for the sake of bringing the 
poorer inhabitants of Macao, back under the scourge they, 
during two hundred years, had winced, could easily be an- 
ticipated. Those, deposed from their public trust, were 
mighty, their complaints reasonable, their arguments weighty. 
Protection was claimed ; it was granted by Dm. Manoel da 
Camera, Governor General of Portuguese India : he sent un- 
der the command of Joaquim Mourao, the fi*igate Salaman- 
dra, and 69 Sepoys, with a competent number of officers, to 
enforce obedience, should the usurpers contrive to keep in 
their hands, illegitimate power. On the 10th of June, 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 

the frigate arrived, and was refused entrance into the port : 
the naval and militarj commanders, were not allowed to 
land ; nobody would listen to the contents of their instruc- 
tions. Believmg, that by the organization of the ruling Sen- 
ate, on the 1 9th August, the citizens had done no more than 
to adopt the sense in the Basis of the Cortes to the welfare 
of the place, men and patriots of sound judgment argued, that 
the frigate should be sent back to Goa, and in case the com- 
mander ventured any hostile measures, it then became a 
sacred duty of every free born Portuguese to defend the town, 
his own life, property and liberty. Not daring to attack from 
fear of hurting, during the conflict, any of the subjecis of 
China, Mourao, addressed the Viceroy of Kwang-lung, and 
Kwang-se, and Mr. Arriaga, residing at Canton, made like- 
wise his representations. They were, at length, so far attend- 
ed to, that the Tsung-tuh, despatched in the beginning of 
July, to Macao, delegated Mandarins, that he might be well 
informed of what the parties bad to allege, each in its favor. 
Several meetings were held: the Chmese recommended 
peace, and returned to Canton. Coteries had been forming, 
the political tendency of which, was not unknown ; however, 
no efficient measures to check their progress, were resorted 
to. You would think, that the Senators were either slum- 
bering, or fully convinced, that no invitation could be success* 
fril. But a provisional regency, presided over by the Bishop, 
having been organized, the Sepoys, and the artillery from 
Goa, landed at an early hour of the 23d September, 1823 : 
their friends greeted them, the police-men of Macao joined 
them. At the head of this cohort, the commander, Joao 
Cabral d' Estifiquc marched to the square of the Senate 
house. The guardians of public safety were sleepmg. The 
most pernicious of the intruders, Major Punlino da Silva Bar- 
bosa, was made prisoner, when still in his bed, and transported 
to the Salamandra : his comrade-Senators absconded. Anoth- 
er Senate, composed of such gentlemen as Dm. Manoel 
da Camera had chosen from among the individuals, who had 
previously been proposed by the Count de Rio Pardo, suc- 
ceeded ; a new Governor, with his usual attributes, was in- 
stalled ; the Councellor Arriaga, coming from Canton, rein- 
stated in the exercise of all his offices. To free themselves 
at the moment from imprisonment, and prosecution, ex-Sen- 



Digitized by 



Google 



75 

ators, Priests, Friars, Lawyers, and common citizens, fled to 
Canton, Manila, Singapore, &c. A few apprehended, were 
forwarded to Goa, where they had to answer for their crimes* * 
With the Dutch. By the influence of Macao, the en- 
deavors of W. Van Warwick, to open a trade for HoUand 
with China (1G04) were thwarted. In 1607, Matelief came 
to examine the strength of a place, the trade and opulence of 
which tempted the covetousness of his countrymen, fighting 
in defence of their liberty, against Spain, to which Portugal 
had been annexed. At the end of the truce of twelve years, 
(1609—1621) between Spain and the Dutch, J. P. Koen, 
then Governor of the Dutch settlements in Asia, gave ordevs 
to Komelis Reyerszoon, to take Macao : the attempt was 
made, (1622) but failed. Having compared the report of 
the Dutch Admiral, with a manuscript document of the a^r 
in the Senate's archives, and found that both agree in the 
most essential parts, we have resolved to enlarge this ankle 
by presenting a brief extract from the latter. 

'^ A fleet of sixteen sail, commanded by Komelis Reyers* 
zoon, anchored on the 22d June, 1622, in the roads of Ma** 
cao, where he was joined by two ships trading to Japan, On 
the 23d, preparations were made for debarking, and on the 
24th, St. John's day, about two hours aAer the sun had rben, 
two men of war opened their guns on the place, two anned 
vessels cleared the beach called Cassilhas, on which, in spite 
of our fire arms, 800 men landed from 23 boats, with such 
an impetuosity, that 60 Portuguese, and 90 Macao-born, could 
not prevent their landing. Perceiving that our people retired, 
the enemy left on the beach two companies of one hundred 
men, to disembark the artillery, which was to be used against 
the place ; the rest bent their march in good order, under an 
incessant fire, towards the city. The tocsin was rung ; our 
people flew to assist us. The enemy had nearly passed the 
hermitage of Guia, when a heavy gun, and some of less size 
were fired at them from the Monte. This salute made them 
stop, and finding that a great number of men were in fijont, 
the Commander, apprehensive of being surrounded, sought 
some strong hold on the declivity of the mountain at the 
foot of Guia. Of this movement the Portuguese avail- 
ed themselves, they attacked the enemy in the rear, 
with so much resolution, that the Dutch threw away standi 
10 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 

ards, arms, and every thing, that they might get quickly back 
to the bay. The two companies stationed at Cassilhas, en- 
deavored to rally the fugitives, when the Portuguese fell upon 
them so furiously with fire and sword, that the enemy was 
compelled to seek lor safety on board the ships. Many tried 
to reach the boats by swimming ; of them, 90 were drownei, 
and almost as many were slain in the field. The Dutch 
lost five standards, five drums, and a field piece, that had 
been just landed, and more than a thousand small arms. — 
Four Captains were slain, and one taken, with seven prison* 
ers. Four Portuguese, and two Spaniards, with a few slaves 
were killed. Some Portuguese slaves, who had behaved 
bravely and faithfully during the action, were emancipated by 
their masters : the Tsung-tuhof Canton, sent them two hun- 
dred piculs of rice." 

Though the Dutch were foiled in their first attempt to get 
possession of Macao, four Dutch ships came again (1627) and 
stationed themselves among the islands, with a view to inter- 
cept Macao ships, expected from Manila: they also kept the 
place blockaded. On this occasion, says the author of Asia 
Portuguesa, " the rich men went out in their rowing vessels^ 
boarded the chief-ship, took and burnt her. They killed 
37 Dutchmen, and took 50 prisoners ; the booty was 24 can- 
non, 2,000 balls, and some money." The news, that a Span- 
ish squadron was on the way to give succor to Macao, made 
the rest of the Dutch ships take their departure. 

With the English. — ^By the Methuen treaty, of 1703, 
Portugal had placed herself, as it were, under the protection 
of Great Britain. This power never failed to give her ally 
the assistance she stood in need of, either in Europe, or her 
ultra-marine possessions. Apprehensive that the French 
Republic harbored the intention of seizing upon Macao, the 
Marquis of Wellesley, then Governor-general of British India, 
s6nt an English force to the protection of the settlement. It 
was profifered in 1802, and would have been accepted, had 
the united eflTorts of the English commanders and the Portu- 
guese authorities proved sufficient. The Viceroy of Canton 
and his council dismissed the proposal ; the expedition there- 
fore withdrew from China. 

This issue demonstrates, that the Portuguese have no right 
to dispose of Macao ; that ,they are merely local tenants, or 
rather vassals ; that the decision, of receiving or not, foreign 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 

troops, depends on the supreme will of the sovereign of 
China. Unaware of these difficulties, or disregarding them, 
Lord Minto, Governor-general of British India, despatched, 
under Rear Admiral Drury, a powerful squadron of ships, 
and also an armed force to defend Macao against the French. 
The Admiral having resolved to take possession of the place 
at the point of the bayonet, a convention was drawn up and 
signed on the 21st September, 1808, by the Portuguese and 
British commissioners: the same afternoon the first detach- 
liient of English troops landed quietly. We do not pretend 
to enter upon a detailed account of the various expedients 
the supercargoes of the honorable East India Company's 
select committee — " debating advisers" of the Admiral— de- 
vised for attaining the object aimed at by the mission. Suf* 
fice to record, that in the imperial rescript, communicated on 
the 4th December, to the Admiral and the chief-supercargo we 
read : ^< Knowing as you ought to know, that the Portuguese 
inhabit a territory belonging to the Celestial Empire, how 
could you suppose that the French should ever venture to 
molest them. If they dared, our warlike tribes should at« 
tack, defeat, and chase them from the face of the country. 
Conscious of this truth, why did you bring your soldiers here? 
Repent and withdraw immediately, the permission of trade 
shall then be restored ; but, should you persist in remaining, 
the hatches of your ships shall not be unlocked," &c., &c 
The most elegible condition was chosen. By the agency of 
the Governor and Minister of Macao, a convention, dated 11th 
December^ determined that the British should quit the place 
in eight or ten days : the troops and the artillery train em- 
barked in a few days. On the 22d, Admiral Drury dropped 
a friendly line to Bernardo Aleixo de Lemos e Faria, Gover- 
nor of Macao, offering him many thanks for his civilities, and 
set sail in the Russel man-of-war for India. 

With China — 1. Politically. — ^The dynasty, Ming, having 
permitted the Portuguese to settle at Macao, the vassalage 
began, notwithstanding the intimation of the ministerial me- 
morandum alluded to. The government of Macao, like 
that of Corea, Cochin China, Siam, Malacca, &;c., re- 
newed, at stated periods, the obeisance due to their su- 
preme Lord, by sending an envoy, as token of submission 
and a tribute. This surmise is sanctioned by the assertion 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 

of Ffurifl e Souzt, who, in his ^< Asia Portugueza/' sa]rs : << ihe 
gentlemen, who had charge of the present, ranged at pleasure 
over the country, and were always treated with magnificence 
md liberality." Gon^alo Teixera presented, among other 
valuables as a tribute, three guns of the Portuguese artillery, the 
model of which was imitated by Chinese founders. The In- 
stability of court affidrs at that time, in China ; the danger 
that the envoy might be, by the mvading Tartars or their 
adherents, apprehended, induced probably the Chinese Gov- 
ernment, to commute the usual present into a regular sum 
of silver, yearly paid mto the Imperial treasury, as the 
safest measure that could be adopted. The Portuguese of 
Macao having, in 1651, acknowledged the supremacy of the 
actually reigning Ta-tsing family, Shan-che, the first Man- 
chou sovereign over China, was pleased to remit for three 
years the ground rent, being then, it appears, one thousand 
taels, equal, I suppose, to the third part of the triennial tri- 
bute. His son, Kang-he, the theo-philosophic,* required 
from 1691 no more than 600 taels ; a standard to which the 
recognized annual payment of 500 taels, by sundry additional 
charges is still raised. The sum of 500 taels is, in the be- 
ginning of every year, delivered, by the Procurator of the 
Senate, to the Mandarin of Heang-shan, on his presenting a 
discharge, signed by the Imperial Treasurer at Canton. 

That the reader may form an idea of what the tribute 
might have amounted to, we shall first translate a letter of 
submission and gratitude, which the Senate of Macao direct- 
ed, 1719, to Kang-he, and then subjoin a list of presents, so 
^at any minute inquurer may compute, should he think 
worth his while, by approximation, the value of them. 

High and Mighty Lord: 

The Portuguese of Macao, who govern the place, Manoel 
Vicente Rosa, &c., with all the others, have always re- 
ceived immense favors of your Imperial Majesty, whose name 
fills all the world, and lately a new one bestowed upon us by 
not being included in the prohibition of navigating the south- 
ern seas ; we have more than ten thousand mouths to pro^ 
vide for. The favor of not being comprehended in the pro- 

* See a few of hn manini in the Appendix, No. ti. 



Digitized by 



Google 



N 



77 



faibitkui is above all comparison great, and certainly we can 
never acknowledge it as we ought. To shew in some way 
our thankfulness, we have selected a few articles, which we 
at present transmit to the Tsung-tuh, or Viceroy, l>egging 
him to have the goodness to present them to your Imperial 
,Majesty9 and we shall be very happy, &c. Macao, 1st 
March, 1719. 

Signed, M. J. Rosa, tc. 

List. 

4 boxes, each containing 12 square glass-bottl^s, with very 
best European wine. 

4 small boxes, each containing 12 small square glzm bot- 
tles, with pattern snuff — ^' Amostrinha." 

10 large Chinese jars, with pears, peaches; muis, caram* 
bolas and ginger. 

1 small box containing pastils for perfume. 

1 small box, containing 12 square glass-bottles, with can* 
died almonds, candied and sweet pastils. 

12 ounces stone, <^ gaspar anthony," in five pieces. 
4 printed calico covers from the coast. 
4 pieces white fine cloth firom the coast. 
4 fire-locks fi*om Europe. 

2 cases with knives from Europe. 
1 box contfldning Peruvian bark. 

1 tin box containing Roman treade. 
, 1 box containing divine plaster, salves, &c. 
1 box containing tartar of white wine. 
1 box containing Galbanum. 

1 bo \ ^® labels could not be deciphered. 

1 tin box containing Ipecacuanhk. 

2 rolls with gold lace firom Europe. 

In 1720 Kang-he had a son born ; this event was celebni' 
ted at Macao. Two years later the Emperor expired, and 
the Senate having been informed of this sad news fix>m the 
Mandarin of Heang-shan, directed that guns should be fired 
twenty-four hours from the forts and the shipping in port ; that 
the civil and military ofiicers should wear mourning for three 
months. At the exaltation of Yung-shing to the throne, 



Digitized by 



Google 



78 

bells were rang and guns fired: at bis demise (1735) the in- 
habitants wore mourning twenty-seven days ; the fort Monte 
fired a gun every hour for 24 hours, and then a royal salute* 
From that time similar demonstrations of joy or grief have 
not, to my knowledge, been ordered by the Senate, except 
in 1821, at the ascension of Taou-kwang on the throne, 
when the Senate house was illuminated ; it cost 12| taels. 

3. Judiciary. — Report, when speaking of the Portuguese 
achievements in India, was seldom in their favor. Experience 
has also taught the Chinese, that restlessness and a dombeer- 
ing splcit made the prominent features of those adventurers, 
who had left Europe for Asia in quest of a fortune. By 
these previous notions need we wonder at the cautious con- 
duct the Chinese betrayed, whenever a request for future 
concessions became the topic of discussion? Neither did 
the strangers, by their - behavior, conciliate the good will of 
the people. It being one of the principal objects of the Por- 
tuguese to extend the influence of the Roman Catholic faith ; 
the true believers, i. e. men who suspend the use of their 
common sense on all points of religious controversies, did not 
scruple to seduce youth and have them educated by the 
Jesuits ; to purchase children from their wretched parents, 
and conceal those which kidnappers could lay hold of. This 
infamous practice is severely reprobated by writers, who 
have delineated the behavior of their countrymen in Asia. 
During a period of twenty-five years (1557, 1582) that the 
higher Mandarins took little or rather no notice of Macao, 
the settlers might have boasted — ^as the ministerial memo- 
randum affirms — of " being governed by the laws and juris- 
diction of Portugal, without the least dependence on, and 
subordination to, or mixture with, either the Ministers or 
Mandarins of China;'' but an increasing population, and the 
misdemeanors of some mdividuals rendered an accurate inqui- 
ry of what the strangers were doing at Macao indispensable. 
The Viceroy of Kwang-lung and Kweng-se summoned, in 
1582, before him the Governor of the Bishoprick, the Cap- 
tdn or Governor of the place, and the Judge. Fearful of 
what might happen to them they were unwilling to obey ; 
yet the salvation of their infant colony required that some 
person or other should proceed to Shaou-king*foo, the Vice- 
roy's residence at that time. 



Digitized by 



Google 



79 

Matthias Penella, the Judge, a man of age and experience, 
on very good terms witS the Mandarins, and Miguel Rug- 
giero-^called by the French, Michel Roger — an ItaUan 
Jesuit missionary, were despatched with seductive arguments, 
such as in many parts of the world, and perhaps most in 
China, public officers allow themselves . now and then, with 
complacency, to listen to* The two gentlemen arriving at 
Sfaaou-king-foo, were traduced as culprits before tlie tribunal 
of the Viceroy, who, with asperity upbraided them, censur- 
ing their fellow countrymen for the audacity which they had 
evinced, in depending on other laws, than those by which 
China was governed. The ungrateful merchants were to be 
expelled, deprived of the immense advantages of trade, and 
the port forever shut against them. This tone softened and 
mellowed in twenty-four hours, for rich and magnificent pre- 
sents had been heaped on the Tsung-tuh and those of influ- 
ence. They consisted in velvets, mirrors, and a variety of Eu- 
ropean manufactures, to the value of four thousand cruzades. 
The envoys were treated with becoming civility, and ab- 
solved with the gracious sentence, that " the foreigners sub- 
ject to the laws of the Empire, may continue to inhabit 
Macao. 

In civil cases. — Among the foreigners a Mandarin took up 
his residence, and decided between Christians and Chinese 
lawsuits belonging to his office. King Philip I., of Portugal, 
in his instructions, dated Madrid, 16th February, 1587, for 
his " Ouvidor," or chief justice at Macao, commands him, in 
the 30th paragraph, '^ not to intermeddle with the jurisdiction 
of the Mandarin of the place — * a povoa§ao' — exercises over 
the Chinese and Chinehews." Litigious questions, not with- 
in the circle of his jurisdiction, were referred to the cogni- 
zance of superior judges. To substantiate this assertion, we 
shall, in a chronological succession, report a few instances. 
In 1657 Manoel L. Aranha, an Alderman, absconded, pro- 
ceeded to Canton, and laid before the Tsung-tuh a variety of 
accusations against some of the most respectable members of 
the Commonwealth. Armed men were sent to apprehend 
and bring them up to Canton ; an order that spread amaze- 
ment and consternation among the public. The Viceroy 
was convinced by documents laid under his eyes, and the 
promiseof 4000 taels, that Aranha was a perfidious informer: 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 

be was condemned in a general meeting, held the veiy same 
year, to reimburse the sum, but he iftcaped banishment. In 
1686 Pero Vaz de Silveira and Joseph Pinheiro were sum- 
moned before tribunals at Canton, for their having had some 
muskets manufactured by Chinese gun-smiths; the threatening 
subsided at the sight of 224 taels. It must^ hare cost the 
city a greater sum to still the wrath of the Mandarin of Casa 
Branca. He came (1688) to Macao, sent for the Senators, 
and gave them audience in the quality of their judge. He 
lectured them for harboring in the place, people who sold 
and purchased children, both male and female : he command- 
ed them to give up to him the guilty and the kidnapped. 
To make Mandarin of Hean-sban (1690) drop an inquiry, 
and desist fix>m calling before his tribunal at Macao, two cap- 
tains, who had brought some salt from India, and another fer 
sulphur, iniported from Manila; likewise the Ouvidor and 
the adjunct of the garrison, for having given a few blows to 
a Chinese, the Senate had to come forward with 400 taeb. 
It was forbidden in 1611 and 1613 to build new houses or 
mend the old without leave. These edicts were surely as 
little respected as the seventh paragraph of a conventional 
pact, dated 1749. It commands that neither churches nor 
bouses shall be erected on new foundations ; or the ancient 
habitations, churches, f(N:ts, and quays, &c., repaired without 
having previously bought a license from the Mandarin of 
Casa Branca. However, after the parties have agreed on 
the amount of a fee. Mandarin runners, sent about, discover 
foundations sunk in the earth these hundred, or hundred and 
fifty years. To this connivance Macao is owing many 
fine dwelling places. 

Criminal cotes. — ^When a manslaughter or murder takes 
place, a sum of money may clandestinely be proffered the 
parents of the slain— an accommodation very often scorned : 
they rather crave public vengeance, by reporting the case to 
their Mandarin. Meanwhile the suspected person is secured 
and imprisoned ; his case tried, and witnesses heard by Por^ 
tuguese authority. On the arrival of the Mandarin, who is 
come for inspecting the dead body, the Procurator remits to 
him the culprit, that he may examme and make. him confess 
in what manner the nefarious deed was perpetrated. The 
inquest of the coroner was formerly forwarded to a tribunal 



Digitized by 



Google 



81 

of high Mandarins at Canton ; at present it is directed to the 
Viceroy, on whose senteqce the fate of the delinquent de- 
pends ; was it a death-warrant, he was brought to Canton and 
executed. This old custom was changed in 1710, when 
the Mandarin of Heang-shan undertook, for a bribe of 120 
taels, to obtain that the culprit should suffer death by the 
hands of a Chinese executioner at Macao, in the presence of 
Mandarins, parents of the deceased, the Procurator, fcc. In 
1743, the Senate refused to deliver up the guilty, a novelty 
the Mandarin informed the Viceroy of. The innovation being 
new and of importance, was submitted to Keen-lung. The 
Emperor conforming himself to the opinion of his tribunals, 
issued, in the sixth year of his reign, (1744) this rescript : 
** hereafter should a Chinese kill a European, of Macao, sen- 
tence shall be passed on him according to our usage ; when 
a European murders a Chinese he shall suffer death by the 
sword or cord ; other things, such as to examine the culprit, 
to throw him into jail and deliver him to Mandarins, are un- 
necessary." This despatch was imparted by the Mandarin 
through the Procurator of the Senate, though it was in 1773 
set aside in the following trial : 

A Chinese had been murdered at Macao, suspicion having 
fastened on an Englishman, the local authority caused bi/n 
to be apprehended and committed to prison. According to 
custom, the civil government of Macao first heard the case. 
It was tried ; the accused examined, deposition of witnesses 
received, but the slightest evidence, that Francis Scott was 
the homicide, could not be found. In this predicament, the 
man should not have been given up, although the Mandarin 
threatened the city, and obstinately claimed the culprit. To 
bring this perplexing business to a close, a general meeting or 
council was convened. Men of respectability, and among 
them a member of the then rulmg Senate argued, " it will 
be unjustifiable to consent to the sacrifice of an innocent 
man; the most accurate inquiry proves sufficiently, that 
the Englishman is not guilty ; our reasons for refusing to give 
him up must therefore be submitted to the Mandarins, 
and persevered in, till we shall succeed in saving him from 
an ignominious death." The Vicar-general of the Bishoprick 
argued differently. '^ Moralists," he said, " decide that when 
a tyrant demands even an innocent person, with menaces to 
II 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 

ruin the places, the republic can say to any innocent, you 
must go and deliver yourself up, for the sake of saving, from 
inevitable destruction the community, which is worth more 
than the life of an individual. Should he refuse to obey, he 
is not innocent, he is criminal." The Procurator, added, 
'^the Mandarins are forcing away the Chinese retailers, de- 
termined to make us die of hunger ; we, therefore, had bet- 
ter surrender the Englishman." These anti-philanthropic 
sentiments operated : the plurality of votes decided, that 
Scott should be handed over ; the Mandarins made him suf- 
fer death in 1773.* From 1805 a Christian culprit is put 
to death at Macao, by a Christian executioner. 
Jn Commercial cases, — History of the trade. — ^The Portu- 
guese settled in India, contrived to get the whole trade into 
their hands. They attained their object, and enjoyed for 
upwards of a century, the advantage of being the sole car- 
riers between many ports of Asia and Lisbon : fixed on the 
barren rock of Macao, they had, for seventy or eighty years, 
an exclusive market in China. The Chinese being in the 
habit of carrying their manufactures and produce to foreign- 
ers, who trade as interlopers, on the eastern and southern 
coast of China ; continued it even after the Portuguese be- 
gan (1578) to go up to Canton in ships of from two to six 
and eight hundred tons burden. They brought firom Europe 
woolens ; from India amber, corals, elephants' teeth, sandal- 
wood, silver, specie, fcc, fcc, but above all a great quantity 
of pepper. Their annual exports, to which " Asia Portu- 
gueza" adverts, amounted to 5,300 boxes wrought silk, each 
box containing one hundred rolls of velvet or damask, and one 
hundred and fifty of a lighter texture. (Martin Martini, in 
his "Atlas sinensis,*' mentions 1,300 boxes,) 2,200 or 
2,500 " paos de ouro" sticks of gold, each weighing ten taels ; 
Item 800 pounds of musk ; besides seed pearls, precious stones, 
sugar, china-ware, and a variety of trifles. 
Elated by the command of nearly the whole trade with Japan, 

• The above is a most melancholy fact. An atrocity, however, which J. 
Barrow, Eaq.» in his travels to Chma, 2d edition, page 368, lays to the 
charge of the Portuguese Government of Macao, seems to be gratuitous, 
for we, who have deliberatelv ransacked the existing records oi\ homicide, 
oould never discover, that a Manila merchant ever was insidiously betrayed 
into the hands of the Mandarins for justice. Mr. Barrow ought to have 
been so candid as to mention the authority for so heinous an accusation. 



Digitized by 



/Google 



83 

Asia, and Europe, the natural pride of merchants in general 
was shocked at the indifference with which the Chinese author- 
ities treated them. Of this neglect, the Senate complained, 
in a letter (1596) to the Viceroy of Goa, but honestly ad- 
mitted, " it was owing more to the Portuguese themselves 
than to the Chinese," adding, '^ the Chinese require that we 
shall not come to Canton, but do the whole of out business 
at Macao." This hint was despised. Many Portuguese ves- 
sels were rambling on the coast, in spite of reiterated remon- 
strances from the Mandarins against smugglers, for neither 
the measurement of the ships no|* the duties on imports and 
exports could be levied on them. Were any apprehended, 
the strangers cried out against the provincial government, pre- 
tending, by sophistical evasions, that it had no right to punish 
interlopers. This wrangling and brawling ended by shutting 
the port of Canton (1631) aga&st the Portuguese ship- 
ping. An association with Chinese dealers, who were to fur- 
nish the export, and take at Macao the imports, was con- 
cluded. This scheme lasted but a few years, the partners 
fell out, and the Chinese partnership grew hostile to Macao. 
A deputation of six gentlemen went (1637) from Macao to 
Canton : they were commissioned to negociate the return of 
trade to that place, in which they did not succeed. Per- 
petually molested by inadmissible pretensions,, the superior 
Mandarins W Canton had transmitted to the Emperor a me- 
morial, saying : ^^ Macao was formerly an insignificant place, 
it is now a kingdom ; it has many forts, and a great and in- 
solent population. It would be proper to ask, how much 
rice and liquors, which the Portuguese may want, and let 
them have the supply : it would be proper to debar them 
from the commerce at Canton." The Sovereign having as- 
sented to the proposal, his supreme will was signified to 
Macao on the 11th of June, 1640. 

Although Macao ships were precluded from the port of 
Canton, we are not warranted to draw the conclusion, that 
all direct intercourse between the respective merchants was 
relinquished. Even in our days, the Senate of Macao main- 
tains, that their merchants were formerly at liberty " to go to 
and come from Canton, with a passport signed by the Pro- 
curator and the Senate ; also to convey goods to Canton and 
back, paying duties to the Emperor," a privilege which the 



Digitized by 



Google 



84 

Mandarins deny ever was granted ; but they admit, " that 
the Portuguese were not forbidden to go and come with a 
Mandarin chop." The communication found, most likely, 
its way through the numerous rivers and natural canals 
which intersect this part of the province, and is called "the 
inner passage ;" an assumption which, to my knowledge, 
cannot bfe strengtliened by any written national document, but 
by the testimony of a Spanish Jesuit, Navarette, who, in 
1659, came from the Philippine Island to Macao. This mis- 
sionary informs us, that " the merchants of Macao, having 
concluded their transactions at Canton, were accompanied 
by a convoy of ten or twelve Chinese vessels of ten oars, 
each worked by two men, besides a guard of twenty sol- 
diers," an incumbrance that engrafted on the trade heavy 
charges. In what sort of vessels or barges the goods were 
transported, is a subject on whFch the author has not touch- 
ed ; but would it be an unqualified suspicion, that they be- 
longed to Macao, and were adapted to inland navigation ? 
" The fleet," Navarette says, " stopped at Heang-shan, was 
visited and paid duties." 

We have already noticed, that the merchants of Macao 
thwarted for some time the view of the Dutch, to establish 
their trade at Canton. The English came to try their good 
luck. Captain John Weddell anchored (1637) in the roads 
of Macao: he was the bearer of a letter from Charles I., 
King of England, to the Governor and Captain-general of 
Macao, Domingos da Camera Noronha ; but not as a line 
from the Governor-general of Portuguese India. To do 
business at Macao was inadmissible. By an authentic man- 
uscript we learn, " that Weddell resolved to employ bribes, 
cunning, and every means to attain his object." However, 
being described by commissioners from Macao, as adven- 
turers, without any respect for laws and religion ; and having 
aggravated their invidious malice, by the exercise of wanton 
violence on the river Canton, the English were disappointed. 
Milbum pretends that the Portuguese at Macao opposed 
(1680) the English Company. 

The attempt of the Dutch, English, and French, to share 
in the profit resulting from commercial business with China, 
at Canton, caused less the decline of the prosperity of 
Macao than the prohibition to navigate the ships. Kang-he, 



Digitized by 



Google 



• 



86 

anxious to put an end to the war, which the son of Chin-chi- 
lungj already spoken of, waged against the Tartar dynasty, 
commanded, in 1662, that his' subjects, living near the sea, 
should quit their abodes and take shelter thirty Chinese 
miles (four or five leagues) from the coast, and abandon all 
navigation. The penalty of disobedience was death. The 
inhabitants of Macao were, by the mediation of John Adam 
Shal, (not Shall) a Jesuit, dispensed with Hterally obeying 
the general law, notwithstanding a maritime prefect was 
going (1667) to put the edict in execution. Several ships 
hadj after the prohibition of navigating, returned ; and in this 
year, seven more came to Macao. The ships and their cargo 
were, by a sentence from Pekin, condemned : the Mandarins 
by an uncommonly great bribe, eluded the confiscation. The 
natural subjects were (1669) permitted to return to their 
ancient abode and occupations ; this favor was denied to its 
local suhjects, the Portuguese ; their ships could not in 1685, 
go to sea but by a previous hcense from Canton. 

The Portuguese being expelled (1639) from Japan, and 
forbidden (1662) to navigate, there were at Macao, in 1685, 
no more than ten vessels owned by merchants, whose stock 
was small and credit less. Having no port to go to, the ships 
were oflfered no freight, but foreigners letting theirs cheaper, 
Macao (1704) "remained with only two ships, that could 
neither be manned or fitted out." The settlement was nigh 
breaking up, when a temporary relief approached : it came 
from a quarter nobody expected. Kang-he had, in 1685, 
thrown open to all commercial nations the ports of his vast 
empire, and permitted to his own vassals the exercise of a 
free trade. This encroachment on old custom spread a 
gloomy presage over men of pusillanimous or acute minds. 
A sea-prefect (Tsung-ping, i. e. Lieutenant-general) ftamed 
Chin-maou, presented a memorial, in which the Europeans 
were depicted as a people of an unruly, aspiring spirit, and 
adventurous Chinese, living abroad, of a dubious patriotism ; 
both drawing an immense quantity of rice from the country :' 
in one word, free. trade was pregnant with dangers. These 
specious arguments, being pondered by a competent tribunal, 
an edict, dated Kang-he's LVIth year, Xllth moon, 10th day, 
(1717) came out prohibiting to his subjects all communication 
with countries southward of China. The Mandarin of 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 

Heaiig<4han intimated this order to Macao. A deputation 
went (1708) to Canton, patronized by Joseph Perera, a 
Jesuit, the Viceroy and his next man granted permission to 
navigate the southern seas ; the very same year ships were 
despatched to Manila and Batavia. *Tbe concession was con- 
firmed by Kang-he, who, the year before, (in 1717) had 
made, through his Viceroy of Canton to Macao, the offer of 
becoming the general emporium of foreign trade, and that the 
city should receive the duties on all importations. This bril- 
liant proposition, the Senate declined. A similar offer of Yang- 
ching, in 1732, was, by order of Count de Sandamil, Viceroy 
of Goa, also rejected. How many ships Macao owned at the 
time, when the merchants had in their hands almost exclu- 
sively, the whole trade with Canton, I could never ascertain. 
By a command of Yung-ching, the shipping of Macao, was 
restricted in 1725, to twenty-five vessels: each ship was reg- 
istered ; her name and that of the commander has never been 
changed these hundred years past. An anomaly ! 

Hoppo. This is a tribunal, that has in charge the collect- 
ing of imperial dues on navigation and trade, and remitting 
the amount to the Grand-hoppo at Canton. Its local situar 
tion is on " Praya pequena." The chief officers of this 
custom house owes his appointment to the Grand-hoppo at 
Canton ; at Macao, the Portuguese designate him by the 
epithet Grand-hoppo, in contradistinction to another, seated 
on " Praya grande," of this we shall say a few words hereafter. 
To the Grand-hoppo of Macao, the Procurator, on the arrival 
in port of a vessel, transmits a manifest — ^it ought to be genu- 
ine—of the cargo ; a similar one to the Tso-tang, and to 
the Mandarin of Casa Branca." Of the ship's departure, the 
Hoppo is informed. No regular Hoppo was for nearly one 
hundred and fifty years established; but two years after 
Kang-he had declared the ports of China to be open to for- 
eign nations, or in 1597, Hoppo-guards chased a boat loaded 
with goods. In 1688, a Dutch ship directed her course to 
the inner harbor of Macao, but the Bar-fort prevented it by 
firing on her. Informed of this act of hostility, the Hoppo- 
chief sent for the Procurador and asked, " by whose authority 
dared the Portuguese elude the commands of the Emperor," 
declaring, " that strangers coming to trade shall enter the port 
any where they please." Spanish vessels came in 1698 and 



Digitized by 



Google 



87 

1700. A French vessel from the north-west coast of Amer- 
ica, being chased (1793) by an English armed vessel, in the 
roads of Macao, run into the harbor. The Senate intended 
to make her a good prize, for Portugal was at war with France: 
the Mandarin of Heang-shan, having reported the case to the 
higher authorities, an order was intimated, that Macao should 
restore to the owner back ship and cargo, " if you do other 
wise you shall not be allowed to remain in the place, on the 
same footing as before." The Grand-hoppo collects the 
amount of measurement from Macao, and foreign ships, and 
the duties on goods sent to, or coming from Canton. 

MeamremeTvt. On a fixed day, the principal officer of the 
Hoppo, or his deputy, goes on board the vessels to be meas- 
ured, attended by the Procurator and the commander of the 
ship. The duty of the anchorage depends on the size* of the 
ship, and is paid in cash. This branch of port-polity, was 
for many years left to the discretion of a subaltern officer, 
whom the Grand-hoppo of Canton chose to depute every 
year, for the sake of measuring the ships of the monsoon, and 
sending the revenue to Canton. As late as 1685, no fixed 
rules for the discharge of this impost, being published, ship 
owners made, through the agency of the Procurator, to the 
Mandarins, entrusted with collecting tke duties on navigation, 
the proposal to accept of a valuable private gift, with the 
condition, that the biggest ship should be charged at 500 taels 
measurement, and the smaller in proportion ; terms, which 
both parties it seems, agreed to, because the Senate became 
security, for the punctual fulfilment of the contract. At last, 
Regulations, dated 1699, or in Kang-he's XXXVIIth year, 
Xllth moon, 2d day, determined that the measurement of 
Macao ships, should be rated at that of vessels of Fuh-keen, 
Che-keang, and the rivers to the eastward. By this direction, 
the Macao shipping was divided into three classes, and the 
anchorage duty began to be, and is in proportion to their rel- 
ative burdens. Whatever this sum may be, a vessel, once 
measured, has always % of the original amount remitted, a 
favor, which no ships except those of Macao, inscribed on the 
Imperial register, can claim : European ships, though measur- 
ed, are not entitled to this indulgence. That the Imperial rev- 

* Appendix, No. VII. 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 

enue might not be defrauded, the Mandarin of Heang-shan, 
intended (1712) to mark the ships, but for an emolument of 
200 taels, he gave up his intention. Twelve years later, the 
twenty-five ships which Yung-ching had consented that Ma- 
cao may own, were marked with numbers. 

Considered as vassals of the empire, the owner of any 
vessel going to sea, may request the Hoppo of Macao, to de- 
mand for it at the office of the Grand-boppo at Canton, a 
passport in the Chinese language. On presenting this docu- 
ment, the civil authorities, in whose district an accident has 
happened, are bound to tender all the aid and service within 
their power, for saving men, ship and cargo ; and for that pur- 
pose, the Procurator of the Senate, may correspond with the 
Mandarins. This benevolent and humane protection is ex- 
tended to ship-wrecked foreigners by a law, dated the 2d year 
of Keen-lung, 1737.* 

A Hoppo on Praya grande, (the great landing place,) a Vice- 
roy of Kwang-lung, and Kwang, &c., commanded (1732) the 
Portuguese of Macao to report to a civil Mandarin, the 

* The following is a translation: 

" Along the whole extent of our coast, people are driven on shore by 
gales of wind. It is hereby ordered that the Governors and Lieutenant- 
governors of provinces shall take the lead and cause officers to be particu- 
larly attentive in affording compassion ; that they employ the public mo- 
ney to bestow food and raiment on the sufferers, and to refit their ships. 
After which, that they cause the goods to be returned, and see that they 
are sent home to their owt countries. This is done to manifest tender 
feelings towards men from remote regions. Take this order and command 
it to be everlasting law." — Clan. ReposUoryy Vol. 11. JVb. 11. 



Is there in Christendom any government that can glory in any similar 
provident and disinterested regulations.^ May not the unusual calls, 
these three years past— of foreignt'rs at the eastern coast of China for as- 
sistance rouse suspicion ? Shall government never be informed, that 
the pretext of their being in want of materials for repairing ships, of pro- 
visions for a crew, &c. bas for object nothing else than to gain admittance 
at different ports, where incessant and pressing solicitations are used by 
the foreigners to dispose the subjects of the empire to set its laws at 
naught, by purchasing a drug severely prohibited, because the use of it is 
iirjurious to the faculties both of body and mind, and by distributing tracts 
of a proscribed doctrine. Finding that the Europeans are willfully mis- 
using the tenor of the humane law of Keen-lung, is there no apprehension 
that this edict may be repealed, or European vessels at least, excluded 
from th*« benefit, which by their lawless conduct, the commanders shall 
have forfeited } But do smufgleis ever care for the distress of posterity .' 
and ought any bod v, who endeavors to engraft vice upon nations, be num- 
bered among morally good and honest men } 



Digitized by 



Google 



89 

arrival of any foreign ship, her force, the nation she bek>iif6d 
to, her errand, &c. This troublesome commisgion was re- 
luctantly complied with* The superior Mandarins acctised 
their inferiors of remissness, thesef threw the odium on the 
stubbornness of the Portuguese. To put an end in future to 
idl crimination and recrimination, a subaltern Hoppo was setf> 
tied on Praya grande, the landing place, in a barrack. The 
government of Macao, removing it, (1779) furnished the man 
with a suitable house, in which he is actually living. This 
Hoppo levies on foreigners, coming and going, an arbi- 
trary tax on their persons and baggage. . He is assisted 
by compradors, pilots and others, and gives to his superiors 
" the information incumbent on the Portugue^ ;" but in all 
cases of importance, the Procurator must also make his report, 
a duty which was exacted in 1802 and 1808, when the Brit- 
ish squadrons and transports were lying in the roads of 
Macao. 

No man-of-war is required to pay measurement, if not 
armed "en guerre et marchandise"— -of this kind were the 
Galleons, which were sent from Goa to give convoy to ves^ 
sels trading with Japan ; they were measured : in a letter 
(1612) the Senate complains of having been compelled to 
pay for them, 4870 taels : in 1698, the measurement of a 
frigate amounted to 1020 taels. 

Duties. From 1557 to 1578, inclusively, Chinese mer- 
chants, bartering at Macao, foreign goods, principally for silk, 
bore the duties of imports to, and exports ifrom China. The 
Portuguese began in 1678, to resort to Canton. The mer- 
chants, who were properly deputed from the Senate, to man- 
age the mercantile concerns of the city, waited on the Man- 
darin, to whom the concerns of the place was entrusted, with 
a present of 4000 taels; nearly double that sum was prof- 
fered, when the ships were loaded and despatched.* Such 
guests deserved attention. At first, the market was open dnoe 
a year ; but from 1580, owing to the two different monsoons, 
twice. The managers of trade, spent from January, in mak- 
ing purchases for India and other places, and from June, for 
Japan, every year two, three, and sometimes four months. 

•Histor. Reichr. der. Reisen. Deel VIII. 177. Hittdr. Deseriptioa of 
the Travel.. Vol. VIII. 177. 
12 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 

The imported cargo, were appraised, and the duties paid in 
specie, till 1682, when silver was refiised. From 1579, ac- 
cording to an old manuscript, the Portuguese had to pay 
export duties at Canton. 

Can reliance be placed on an assertion of the ministerial 
memorandum often alluded to. " The Portuguese had the 
privilege of paying on all articles of trade bought at Canton, 
and carried to Macao, § less duty than other nations." The 
mouldering manuscript just mentioned, informs us, that in 
1679, the duty was "12 maces per pecul, for fine silk, and 
8 maces for coarse ; 2 maces per pecul, for all other kinds of 
merchandise." Assuming this to be one third, other mer- 
chants must have been charged at the rate of 4^ per cent. 
When this favor ceased, and the standard rose to six per cent, 
it has not been in my way accurately to discover before 1699. 
That the toll-gatherers gave the Portuguese credit for some 
parts of the Imperial dues, is evident from records, stating 
that Macao was (1637) indebted to the Emperor in the sum 
of 90,000 taels, an arrear, which had probably begun to accu- 
mulate from the year 1631, the period at which the provin- 
cid government resolved to exclude Portuguese ships from 
the port of Canton. That a similar deficiency in the re- 
ceipt might not recur, the duties to be levied on exports to 
Macao, were in 1637, formed by a company of merchants at 
22,000 taels per annum. The regulations already quoted in 
reference to measurement, stipulated also, that Macao mer- 
chants should pay no higer duties, than those of Fuh-keen 
and Che-keang pay their respective custom offices. By a 
letter, dated 1724, from the Senate to the Viceroy, we learn, 
" that the Supreme Majesty, the Emperor, had granted to 
the city of Macao, the privilege of paying a duty of six per 
cent." and by a reply of the Procurator to the Grand-hoppo 
of Canton, who intended in 1792 to raise this impost, the 
Senate declares, that " it shall be discharged in conformity 
with the tariflFof 1699"— Kang-he's XXXVIIth year. 

Ship-building. Abimitio^ — an old manuscript assures us 
it was under a heavy penalty forbidden to build ships at Macao. 
This injunction was no doubt enjoined on the first settlers, for 
had it began at the ascension of the Manchan family on the 
throne of China, or after the inhabitants of Macao had recog- 
nized the supremacy of the new dynasty, we may be assured 



Digitized by 



Google 



91 

that the then existing recorders of events would have gravely 
accused in their writings, the Tartars of illiberal encroach* 
ment on an ancient privilege, conceded by the Ming govern- 
ments. Tradition — ^an ingenious antiquarian — does not hes- 
itate to maintain that on Oitem a place was set apart for build- 
ing and repairing ships. Had that ever been the case, the 
owner of the settlement, the Jesuits would undoubtedly have 
acquainted posterity with its locality, origin, progress and 
cessation. However, on a plan-*— of which we shall further 
speak in another place— of Macao, delineated one hundred 
and eighty years ago, a situation on the Priests' island at 
Macao, called Lapa, is assigned for a dock, and another for 
a battery ; the existence of either we do not venture to affirm 
nor deny. As instances of this jealousy, with which the Man- 
darins opposed ship-building, we shall refer the reader to the 
following particulars. The. Mandarin of Casa Branca, hear- 
ing that a priest, Anthony Nunes de Sa had, in his premises 
built a vessel, deputed three of his colleagues to verify it. 
The Senate, (20th January, 1668) conceived that the dele- 
gates must be admitted, and that the Magistrates of Casa 
Branca — negociating with him, i. e. bribing him — should be 
taught to believe, that out of a truncated small vessel, the in- 
habitants were making a barge for the purpose of bringing 
fuel to Macao. In 1713, the Senate begged leave to build 
a brigantine, " embarca^ao de vigia," — the Chinese pretend- 
ing to obstruct the work some Portuguese had begun, for 
repairing their ships, a petition was by Joseph »Pereira, a 
Jesuit, then at Canton, presented to the Viceroy, who issued 
orders to the two Mandarins at Heang-shan, to publish at 
Macao a chop, prohibiting everybody from stopping the Por- 
tuguese in refiting their vessels. Should anybody dare to diso- 
bey this command, he was to be imprisoned and punished. 
The very same year, (1722) Kang-he's permission to buy 
oil, nails, &dc., for repairing old ships was renewed, but the 
prohibition of building any new ones, also reiterated. At 
present, an owner stating that his ship wants repairing, ob- 
tains permission from Tso-tang, a civil magistrate, residing aX 
Macao ; to him, a Chinese shipwright, when employed, pays 
a certain fee for the license of doing the job. 

3. Diplomatically. Envoys. — ^The information, which 
Raphael Perestello, sent, not by the conqueror of Malacca, 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 

Afonso Dalboquerque, who died 1515, at Goa, but by George 
d' Albuquerque, in a Junk from Malacca to China, gave on 
his return, respecting this famous country, induced Lopes 
Soares d' Albargaria, Governor of Portuguese India, to ap- 
point a man of comely figure, insinuating, intelligent, not 
illiterate — essential qualifications in a negociator — and em- 
barked him with Commador Femao Peres de Andrade, who 
bad orders from his Sovereign, to survey some parts of China. 
Having removed temporary cavils, Peres had (1517) an au- 
dience of the three Governors of Canton, to them he men- 
tioned that he had brought with him an Envoy, commissioned 
by his master to wait on the Emperor, and propose friend- 
ship with the King of Portugal, and free trade with China. 
Thome Fires, the Envoy, and seven of his countrymen, his 
retinue, landed ; they were accommodated as foreign ambas- 
sadors usually are, and provided for. The Court acquainted 
with the object of his mission, took time to consider. A vas- 
sal of the late Sultan of Malacca, claimed at Peking, protection 
against the Portuguese, who six years before, wrested from 
his master, a vassal of China, his capital and dependencies* 
The Emperor had requested the Portuguese to restore to 
Mahdmet Mahmet, or Mamadio, his sovereignty ; perceiv- 
ing that the recommendation was slighted, policy suggested 
the expediency of admitting the Portuguese envoy, who after 
a lapse of three years, set out (1720) from Canton to Nan- 
king and Peking. John de Barros says : '* TJiome Pires 
partid levando tres navios, o ramo coneertados a nosao mO' 
do de bandeiras e tolda de seda — Somente por honra deste 
reino hvava as bandeiras com armas e divisa delle,^^ — Thomi 
Pires set out with three rowing vessels, adorned in our way 
with flags and silk awnings — ^he carried for the sake of the 
honor of the country its armorial ensigns. The Mahometans, 
to examine when and why they came to Canton, is foreigti to 
the subject in hand — ^meanwhile discloses the design of the 
Portuguese, — ^^ they aim, it was told, at ruining all foreign 
shipping, that they alone may carry exports and imports all 
over the world." This invidious insinuation gained credit 
by the wanton provocations, which Simao Peres de Andrade 
had made himself guilty of, from the moment he landed 
(1518) at San-shan, till his escape in 1521. Describing this 
commander's wilful despotism, and his inflexible obstinacy, 



Digitized by 



Google 



9S 

the Governors of Canton observe in a memorial to the Court 
—"the Portuguese have no other design than to come under 
the denomination of merchants, to spy the country, that they 
may hereafter fall upon it with fire and sword." Has this 
early impression, by a more philanthropic behavior of other 
European nations, been mitigated ? The Chinese recollect 
the seizure of Perhou by the Dutch, their plunder and vio- 
lence on the eastern coast of China, their trade with Ching* 
chin-kong, or Koxinga. Have the English behaved better ? 
Captain John Widdell is not the only one, who near two cen- 
turies ago, insulted, with four ships, the river of Canton* 
Similar and other examples — on record, of later dates— of an 
offensive character prove, that at the end of three centuries, 
the boasted European civilization^ is still unwilling always to 
Inspect international laws and rights. But let us return to 
our Envoy. Unrelenting diplomatic representations from the 
ambassador of the dispossessed Sultan of Malacca, and accu- 
mulated reports of the iniquitous proceedings in India, with 
which the Portuguese were charged, moved an Emperor, who 
soon after departed this life, to order a competent tribunal to 
examine whether the embassy was legitimate or spurious : it 
was decided that Pires and his companions were spies, and 
deserved death. Kea-tsing, who succeeded, sent the Portu- 
guese back to Canton, prisoners, to be kept in custody. Were 
Malacca restored by the Portuguese to its lawful sovereign, 
no harm should be done to the Envoy and his retinue ; they 
should be allowed to leave unmolested the country : were 
the surrender of Malacca refused. Fires and his friends should 
be dealt with according to law ; by its tenor Thome Pires and 
others suffered death in September, 1523. Pires had no au- 
dience, the ceremony of worshipping, described by Barros, the 
Portuguese were merely occular witness to. The court re- 
ceived no presents, nor gave any ; those intended for the Court 
of Peking, Pires, during his imprisonment, was robbed of. 

* If cmlizationcontiats in dancingr, drawing, fencing, hunting, warring, 
romance-writine, and in nseful arts and sciences. £urope has a claim to 
pre-eminence ; if civilization means respect for mutual rights of individa- 
ala and nations, freedom from despotic, ciTil and religious opprension, I 
apprehend she is iar from that devotion of mind, which all good men most 
sincerely wish her to attain. The popular, " thorough, practical and 
moral," education, recommended bv an American philanthropist, will 

Snatly advaooe the wovk of civilisation — Sse AbriA Jmmam Rmrietc, M, 
XXVilLp.n, 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 

Francis Xavier — ^he was not yet made a saint-r-^enom* 
inated the apostle of the East, suggested to Dm. Alfonso da 
Noronha, the expediency of opening by means of an embassy, 
an entrance in China, to Christianity ; the plan was listened to 
and approved. Noronha chose for this mission a wealthy man 
of probity anxl consideration, Diogo Pereira, who procured 
and bought on his own account, an assortment of suitable pres* 
ents ; some more magnificent, the royal treasury, by order of 
Dm. Alfonso administered. They were to be delivered by 
the Envoy, in the name of King John III. to the Emperor. 
In this journey Francis Xavier, embarked : they left Goa, in 
1552, and touched at Malacca. Whether it" were because 
Pereira, had at one time or another, refused to lend Dm. Alva* 
ro de Ataide (or de Taide,) da Gama, the sum of 10,000 cm* 
sades, or were from jealousy of Diogo's honorable commission, 
the Prefect of Malacca, Dm. Alvaro, took upon himself, under 
pretext that the places was threatened by enemies, and wanted 
assistance, to deprive Pereira's ship and others in port of their 
rudders. Thus the project to proceed to China was aban* 
doned. 

King John III. being, by letters from Francis Xavier in- 
formed before his death of the impediment the Prefect of Ma* 
lacca had thrown in the way of the embassy, which Dm. Al- 
fonso de Noronha had, in the name of his Sovereign, directed 
to the Emperor of China, and of the sacrifice Diogo Pereira 
had made of his property, by laying in presents, which were 
destined for the Court of Peking, the nephew of John III. 
King Sebastian I. determined to reward the zeal and patriot- 
ism of Diogo. He commanded his Viceroy, Dm. Francis 
Coutinho, Count de Rodundo, to send Diogo Pereira, as Por- 
tuguese ambassador to China, but hearing on his arrivpl at 
Goa, that Diogo governed Macao, the Count despatched next 
year, (1562) Diogo's brother-in-law, Gil de Goys, with per- 
mission to Pereira, to accept the embassy, or remain as Gov- 
ernor. Diogo preferred the Governorship, and Gil, who was 
by a special command of Sebastian I. to take Jesuits with him 
to the Court of Peking, could never manage matters with the 
Mandarins, so as to be permitted to proceed : that the embassy 
was mean, unimportant, destitute of pomp and grandeur, was 
alleged by the provincial authorities. The two Jesuits, Fran- 
cis Peres and Manoel Teixeira, who came in company with 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 

Gil, took up their residence at Macao/ near the Monte ; this, 
we had before an occasion to mention. 

Ambassadors, Kang-he inherited the throne of his father , 
and an obstinate maritime war. A plebeian from Fuh-keen, 
Chin-Kjhi-lung, had declared against the invading Tartars. 
He was at jSrst a merchant, but became soon the head of a 
mighty fleet, composed of those, who would bear neither do- 
mestic nor foreign oppression. The Mari-chows called him a 
rebel ; his adherents a General. A Tartar commander over- 
came Chin-chi-lung by cunning, and took him (1646) a pris- 
oner to Peking. His son, Chin-ching-kong, a valiant, but 
violent man, sumaraed Koxinga, took up the concerns of his 
father, avenged his imprisonment on the Tartars, and wrested 
(1662) from the Dutch, their settlement at Formosa. Chin- 
chin-kong died, Dutch reports say, within two years after this 
conquest, leaving to his son Ching-king-mag, or simply Chin- 
king, his command and ulterior views. Formosa in the 
bands of a naval power, which the Tartars could not cope 
with, was a dangerous neighbor. To check further progress, 
Kang-he commanded in 1662, under pain of death, that those 
of his subjects, who v/ere dwelling on the borders of the sea, 
should withdraw from their abodes and settle in the interior, 
thirty Chinese miles — Le — from the coast, and totally sus- 
pend every kind of sea-voyages towards the South. Kang- 
he was, by the intercession of the Jesuit J. A. Shal, as al- 
ready averred, pleased to except the inhabitants of Macao, 
from moving to a new place, but to navigate remained forbid- 
den. Macao, having no other means of subsistence than 
trade, merchants ventured upon sending their vessels by stealth, 
partly by bribery, in pursuit of their business ; the under- 
takmg proved to be so hazardous a:nd uncertain, that the 
Senate resolved to make John Nunes da Cunha, Count de 
St. Vicente, acquainted with the miseries that threatened the 
place with ruin. The Viceroy, in expectation, that a diplo- 
matic mission might alleviate the hardship, chose Emanuel 
deSaldanha, and sent him in the name of King Alfonso VL 
Saldanha arrived in 1667, the very year, in which seven ships 
with cargoes, were by sentence from the Court of Peking, 
ordered to be confiscated. 

Did the presence of the Envoy mitigate the severity, pro- 
nounced against the ships and their cargoes, or shall we as- 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 

cribe the lenity — for neither were confiscated-— to.. large 
bribes bestowed on the Mandarins ? We shall not pretend 
to solve this question. Saldanha, on his arrival, requested 
the Senate to appoint intelligent men, from whose experience 
he might collect the subjects of complaint, and likewise sug- 
gestions for a remedy. For this purpose, six gentlemen, with 
whom he during his stay at Macao consulted, were chosen. 
From Goa, the ambassador brought no presents, either for 
the Court or tlie Mandarins at Canton ; the Senate had to 
provide them all. An authentic document still extant, de« 
monstrates that those intended for the Emperor, were esti*^ 
mated, besides fractions, at Taels, 1,983 
For the Empress, 1 ,269 

3,652 

For the Mandarins, 1 4,382 

17,634 

Furnished with these ^valuables, Saldanha, accompanied by 
two Mandarins, set out for Canton, where he was detained 
fourteen or fifteen months, and at last despatched in a boat, 
^^ qui portoit banderoUe avec cette inscription, cet homme 
vient pour rendre homage." The embassy consisted besides 
the Envoy, of a chaplain, a counsellor, a secretary and anoth- 
er gentleman, of twelve pages, a captain lieutenant, com- 
manding twenty Carbineers, two interpreters, and servants 
not included. Of the ceremony which Saldanha on his re- 
ception underwent, I can give no notice, for I have met with 
none in my investigations. 

To the amount of the presents, being Taels, i 7,624 
Macao had to add the passage-money of the 

Envoy and retinue from Goa and back ; 

besides a payment of some small expenses 

incurred (1668) at Canton, 12,731 

30,365 



The result of the embassy so little answered the expecta- 
tions of Macao, that the Senate solicited His Majesty not to 
intercede in behalf of his vassals at Macao with the govern- 
ment of China, were it not in a momentous and urgent case. 

Such a case, it was thought by the Court of Lisbon had 
arrived. The impertinent strife and disgraceful feud about 
certain ceremonies in China, with which the Roman Calh- 



Digitized by 



Google 



97 

olics incessantly annoyed. Kang-he made him write (1713) 
by thei Portuguese ship, Sta. Anna e Joaquim, a letter, ai^d 
send (1721) the Jesuit, Anthony Magalhaens, to King John 
V. for the purpose of inducing by the King's mediation, the 
Pope to put an end to the polemic animosity of Missionaries, 
and to grant to the Chinese proselytes, permission to practice 
the established customs of the empire. These had been by 
four members of the Inquisition, condemned: their opinion 
Clement XI. confirmed (1704) by a decree, which the Court 
of Rome fortunately refused to rescmd. From this moment 
China escaped becoming in fifty or sixty years, comparatively 
a desert, for a worship which requires an almost daily attend- 
ance, shortens the means of subsistence, and consequently 
those of bringing up families. At last, Kang-he was convinced 
of the necessity to put a stop to the progress of a sect whose 
teachers raised disaffection against the existing rules of gov- 
ernment, and taught their converts to obey rather the com- 
mands of priests, than those of the Sovereign. Yung-ching, 
his son, forbade at last, by an edict, (1723) the exercise of 
Christianity in his dominions. In oraer to soften the sever- 
ity and calm the mind of the Emperor, this most faithful 
Majesty sent, as his representative, Alexander Metello 
DE SonzA E Menetes, with father Anthony Magalhaens to 
Chinai; they arrived at Macao in 1726. The Procurator of 
the Senate wrote directly to the Mandarin of Heang-shan, 
" the King, our lord, being informed of your Majesty's ac- 
cession to the throne, has deputed a great man to congratu- 
late you with all his heart.'* The high Mandarins of Canton 
pressed the ambassador to proceed without delay, but his 
Excellency desirous to preserve unimpaired the respect due 
to his representation, solicited over and over, of the Tsung- 
tiih to forward to the Emperor a letter, in which Metello, 
having alluded to the difference between a vassal-king, and an 
independent Monarch, expressed his confidence, that he 
should, by the commands of the Emperor, be treated by all 
public officers, with becoming deference. The excuse for 
not forwarding the letter was, that, had the proposal been 
made directly on the ambassador's arrival, it might have been 
sent ; but since the Emperor had received advice, that the 
ambassador was on his way to Peking, it became inadmissible. 
During the correspondence with the Tsung-tiih. his Excel- 
13 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 

lency held conference with a Junta, composed of two mem* 
bers of the Senate, two assistants, chosen by the electing 
body of the people, together with the Governor and Captain- 
general, that he might fully be informed of the oppressions 
and wants the city was laboring under, and solicit at the foot 
of the throne of China, redress and cessation of all unjust and 
vexatious practices. A superior Mandarin, commissioned to 
attend on the ambassador from Macao to Canton, gave his 
Excellency the most solemn assurance, that in the *< Kang- 
ho,'' or pass-port, prepared by the Tsung-tiih, neither the 
word "Tsin-kong,'' nor any other, implying inferiority, should 
be inserted. Still Metello hesitated, but was at length pre- 
vailed on by the Jesuits, to return his visit to the Mandarin, 
with whom he then fixed the 18th November, as the day of 
their departure.* 

Four days previous to that, on which the Ambassador and 
the Mandarin intended to embark for Canton, a copy of the 
Imperial rescript to a memorial of Tsung*tiih, was handed to 
Metello. Among other expressions, it contained the follow- 
ing : <^ the European Ambassador has passed many thousand 
miles to come here. The Tsung-tuh of Kwang-lung must 

8've him servants and provisions during his journey and a 
andarin to, attend on him, and to take care of him. In 
reference to the departure of the Ambassador, let that4)e left 
to his own will : it is not proper to molest him, by hurrying 
and pushing him on ; thus shall the Tsung-tuh, as my repre** 
sentative, convince him of my kind affection." Yung-ching 

* Alexander Metello de Souzae Meneyes haying found means to forward, 
byan express, a letter to the Emperor, it was received the 26th November, 
1726, and translated by father Parennin. The Prime Minister— the thir- 
teenth brother of Tung-ching — ^reading the address, and remarking, that 
the ambassador objected to the two characters, Tsin-konjr, asked the inter- 
preter, what meaning the Europeans attach to those siji^ns. 

'*On leur donne, repondit Parennin, un tr^s-mauyais sens: ils signiil- 
CDt tribut, redeyance, sujestion, depeudance. II est vrai, reponcut le 
Regulo, ces caracteresne s^employent qu' k regard de ceux qui dependent 
de nous, et qui doivent le tribut. Mais s'aviscra-t-on de croire, que les 
Europeans, qui sont au bout du monde nous soient sourois, et que noui ap 
yons rien k exiger d'eux."— Lett. Edif. Tarn, XXI. Paris, 1781. 

Kong ou Kune ne signifie que present ; les Mandarins ne faisoient au- 
eune difficult^ de les remplacer par un autre mot ** Ly," sur la tdto des 
piesens de rembassade angloise. (1793) Kong plus imposant est ordinain- 
ment employ^ pour les presens qu' on ofire k 1 empereur. Voy. en Chine 
par J. C. Hittner, p. 206. 



Digitized by 



Google 



99 

ordered '^ Tong," a president of the inner tribunal of crimes, 
and the Jesuit, Anthony Magalhaens, to job the Ambassador, 
whom they met in the province Keang-se. Metello pre- 
ferred to continue hisjourney by way of the canals, as more 
convenient than to travel by land ; be arrived at ^' Chan-kea* 
wang," with fdrty attendants. The Kong*ha had fixed the 
number to twenty-six, but his Excellency declared, that he 
would himself, rather bear the expenses for the supernumera- 
ries, than that his retinue should not correspond to the dignity 
of his mission. On the 18tb May, 1727, the Ambassador on 
horseback, made his entrance at Peking : on his way he had 
a great quantity of cruzados flung out, a splendid prodigality 
and munificence, which was repeated on the Ambassador's 
return from his first audience. 

The ceremonial of an audience, not being inyariably the 
same at the Court of Peking, we shall record the *^ sol- 
emn" ceremony, L^ff Vasilievich IsmailofF, an Ambassador 
from Tsar, Peter I. of Russia, was subject to in 1720. 
The manuscript narrative is from an eye witness. The 
Envoy being conducted to the Hall of Audience, carrying in 
his hand a letter addressed to the Emperor, deposited it on a 
table placed opposite to the Emperor: he then withdrew, and 
made at the other side of the open door, the three genuflec- 
tions and the nine obeisances : they were not correlative to the 
person of the Sovereign, his master, for if so, the Ambassador 
should have made the genuflections with the letter in his 
hand. Having performed the ceremony, Ismailoflf entered 
the Hall again, took, kneeling, the Tsar's letter, and being in- 
vited to the throne, placed the credentials before the Emperor. 
This account agrees in the main with that of John Bell of 
Antermoney, who in the ninth chapter of his Travels, says : 
The master of the ceremonies conducted the Ambassador by 
one band, while he held his credentials in the other. Having 
ascended the steps, the letter was laid on the table, placed 
for that purpose, as tad beea previously agreed ; but the 
Emperor beckoned to the Ambassador, and desired him to , 
approach, which he no sooner perceived, than he took up the 
credentials, and attended by the master of the ceremonies, 
walked up to the throne, and kneeling, laid them before the 
Emperor." These two authorities prove, that the previous 
agreement referred to, by Fr. Juan de Concepcion, in his 
" Historia general de Philipines Tom." X, p, 102, never ex- 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 

isted. ^^ Quiero yo el Emperador que ponga la earta, (del 
Tsar) el Eltnbaxador sobre una mesa, y en mi nombre ira un 
principal mandarin a reverenciar-Ia, tocando con ]a frente la 
tierra * * * asi se execut6," — ^I the Emperor, will that the 
Ambassador shall place the letter from the Tsar on a table, and 
that in my name one of the principal Mandarins shall go and 
reverence it by knocking his forehead on the ground * * * and 
it was done. A precedence of this nature, would suit admi- 
rably any Ambassador, for, unless by transubstantiation, the 
Sovereign who sent him, be identified with the packet, the 
worshipping a piece of paper, is assuredly more absurd, than 
to worship an enthroned monarch. Had the two great men 
been in presence of the other, the ceremony, I venture to say, 
would have consisted in mutually embracing as equals ; but 
when a Sovereign sends to a foreign court, '< a confidential 
servant," such person, if anxious to deliver his message, 
ought to conform to the established rules of etiquette, for he 
and his master, must not forget the old adage : <^ Quis vult 
finem, velit et media." The assertion in Bell's Travels, 
chapter Xlth, that Leoff Vasilievich received an autographic 
answer to Tsar Peter, is to be understood, that Ismailoff, be- 
ing called, accompanied by his Muscovite interpreter, to a 
private audience, heard Kang-he verbally dictate his compli- 
ments to the Tsar, in the presence of two superior Mandarins 
of that tribunal, to which the afiairs of Russia belonged, and 
order them to <;onsign these Imperial expressions in an authen- 
tic document. In China the Elmperor never writes, we are 
informed, letters to any body, but those containing orders to 
his subjects. 

We proceed to the description of the ceremony Alexander 
Metella de Souza e Meneyes went through on the day (28th 
May, 1727) of his audience. Two Mandarins in actual 
waiting at court, preceded, then followed the Assessor of the 
Council of State, Lepoo, also translated tribunal of civil of- 
fice, and Parennin, a French Jesuit, the Interpreter ; next 
came the Ambassador, carrying with both hands his master^s 
letter ; after him the Secretary and a third gentleman, bear- 
ing the title of Mordomo,* conducted by a Mandarin. Ac- 

* At the Court of Lisbon, Mordomo-mdr is an office of high trast. 



Digitized by 



Google 



101 

Gompanied by the Assessor, his Excellency entered the west- 
ern gates, ascended the steps of the throne, and kneeling, 
presented the credentials : he rose, went out by the same way, 
and in front of the middle door, which was open, the Am- 
bassador with his retinue, performed the usual act of obei- 
sance. This ceremony being over, the Ambassador was 
brought to the foot of the throne, and seated at the head of 
the grandees. He shortly after had permission to make his 
speech, which he delivered, placing himself on his knees upon 
a carpet. On the 7th June, the presents contained in the thirty 
cases and boxes, were offered. The Emperor said : " It 
gave him much pleasure to perceive in so many precious 
things, the affection of the King of Portugal." From this 
day, the An^bassador resided a whole month at Peking. He 
and his family were, by an Imperial proclamation, allowed to 
stray without impediment over the place, in any direction 
they pleased. On the 7th July, his Excellency had his au- 
dience of leaye at Yuen-min-yuen, a country seat at a short 
.distance from the capital. That day, the Emperor presented 
with his own hands to the Ambassador, a cup with wine, and 
sent him from his own table several dishes. Leaving the 
place, presents were distributed to the retinue of the Ambas- 
sador, and to his Excellency, among other things, which 
Yung-chihg gave, were seven trifles, valuable solely because 
they were the gift of a monarch. MeteJio received also, 
thirty cases and boxes, to be delivered to his most faithful 
Majesty,' the King of Portugal. 

The Ambassador had declared to the Mandarins of the 
Council of State, that he could not admit the answer of Yung- 
ching, unless it were in terms of equal rank. " Tong," com-' 
missioned to bring the Ambassador back, took charge of the 
Emperor's reply, and put the scruples of Metello at rest. 
They left Peking 16th July, went on board vessels, laying 
at the distance of five or six leagues from the capital, and 
were on the 18th December, at Macao. No advantage that 
I am aware of, resulted from this embassy, though the city 
bore the heavy contribution of thirty thousand taels. The 
Ambassador brought to the Senate a letter, in which John V. 
gave the inhabitants of Macao to understand, that he would 
graciously condescend to accept a donative proportioned to 
the great expenses the royal chest had borne for the mission of 



Digitized by 



Google 



102 

an Ambassador and the presents to the Emperor. In con* 
sequence, the Jesuits of the province of Japan contributed, 

Taels, 1,000 
Those of the vice-province of China, 600 

The Chapter of Macao, 200 

Twelve citizens together, 3,000 

The city revenue bore, 25,300 



30,000 

Strangers, being permitted to settle at Macao, first by tacit 
consent of inferior Mandarins, and later by the verbal one of 
the Tsung-luh of Kwang-lung, and Kwang-se, on condition 
that they should submit to the laws of China, aimed at inde<- 
pendence. Fancying that they were masters of the spot 
they resided on, its inhabitants had early claimed the protec- 
tion of Portugal, because the greater part of them were really 
vassals of that kingdom. The submission was accepted and 
rules fixed for the government of Macao. So situated, i( 
became policy in the Portuguese to extend their influence 
over the Chinese, living m the place, and draw to themselves 
the territorial jurisdiction. These attempts had always been 
resisted, but repeated endeavors to encroach on Mandarin 
authority, 'convinced at length the Viceroy of the two provin- 
ces and his council, that it was high time to fix invariable 
rules, by which the Portuguese should, in all future transac- 
tions, be bound. Twelve articles were drawn up, and the 
Portuguese requested to agree to them, or leave the country. 
After many long, tedious, and troublesome conferences, the 
most eligible condition was chosen ; a Conventional Pact of 
which we shall extensively treat hereafter, was signed in 
1749. Any friend to good order aqd fixed laws would have 
welcomed the regulations and maintained them inviolate, 
but the 12th article forbade the teaching of Christianity, which 
so shocked the fiuthful, that it was deemed proper to omit it 
in the Portuguese translation. The whole reibrni bemg con- 
sidered an intrusion on their rights, the Senate, Prelates, and 
the Governor, resolved to complain to the King of Portug^ ; 
and at a general meeting, it was decided, that Dm. Fr. Hi- 
lario de^Sta. Rosa, Bishop of Macao, should be requested to 
lake upon him the commission and proceed to Europe. On 



,^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



103 

his arrival at Lisbon, (1750) the Bishop presented from the 
Senate of Macao, to King Joseph I. a memorial, the contents 
of which were pondered in a royal sitting in Council, the 
determination of sending an Ambassador was taken. 

The King chose for his Ambassador Francis Xavier 
Paohsco Lampato, who came to Macao 1752. On the 
14th November, the Mandarin of Heang-shan, put forth a 
chop — a proclamation-— translated by the Jesuit, J. S. de 
Neuvialle, from which the following is an extract. " I pub-» 
lish this chop to let you know, that the Kingdom of Portugal 
has never been in the habit of paying tribute. At present 
the new Sovereign of that realch, sends an Ambassadqr * * ^ 
who is at Macao, to offer some objects of curiosity from that 
country, and knocking head, to inquire after the health of the 
Emperor. We are informed, that a Mandarin is sent to re- 
ceive the Ambassador. Take care to sweep an|d clean the 
streets ; do not be noisy ; do not pronpunce the Ambassador 
tributary, that he may not be displeased and disgusted." 
. Pacheco left Macao and came to Canton on the 25th Decem- 
ber, where the Supercargoes of the trading companies waited 
on him. Accompanied by <' Shu," a Tartar Mandarin, and 
Father Augustine Hallerstein, (not AUerston,) the interpre- 
ter, the Ambassador reached << Chi-hoa," (20th April, 1753.) 
On the day his Excellency entered Peking, many of the 
Roman Catholic priests on horseback attended ; they opened 
the march. Then came the Mandarin conductor and Hal- 
lerstein. Next followed three grenadiers with drawn swords 
for the protection of twenty-nine cases covered with yellow 
silk, containing the King's presents. After them ' followed 
trumpets and cymbals, the attendants and manual servants, 
all on horseback ; also the pages with J;wo black boys at the 
stirrups, and the Secretary with two stewards on each side. 
The Ambassador was carried in a rich, magnificent sedan-chair^ 
by eight Chinese bearers, elegantly arrayed. Next the chair 
walked the adjuncts of the Senate, surrounded by many 
black boys, dressed like running footmen. At last came 
twelve chests, covered with blue velvet, laced with gold, and 
the arms of Pacheco m relief, embroidered in gold and silver. 
Grenadiers on horseback, closed the train. Alighted at his 
dwelling, the Governor-general of Peking, to whom the 
Emperor had entrusted the care of the present embassy, paid 
his Excellency a visit. 



Digitized b,y 



Google 



104 

In the same order the Ambassador proceeded on the 1st 
May, to the place Keen-lung had fixed upon for the reception 
of the first homage. The Emperor being seated on hiff 
throne, the Secretary and the Mordomo, Hallerstein and the 
director of the ceremonies, with the Ambassador were ad- 
mitted into the Hallf His Excellency ascended the steps of 
the throne, and kneeling, presented to the Emperor the 
King's letter. Keen-lung took it himself and handed it to 
one of the grandees, who kept il exalted at the height of his 
forehead all the time his Excellency — ^the hat on his head — 
delivered his speech. The speech being finished, the Am- 
bassador, the Secretary, and the third gentleman, performed 
the usual ceremony of obeisance. At the lapse of ten days 
the presents in twenty-nine cases and boxes, were sent, un- 
packed and accepted. Pacheco had besides, fifteen boxes 
with presents to be distributed among the principal Manda* 
rins. Keen-lung reciprocated the royal memorials by sending 
from time to time, his Imperial gifts, in^fifty cases and boxes, 
to the King of Portugal, and presents to the Ambassador and 
his retinue. Attiret, a French artist, was commanded to 
draw the likeness of his Excellency, which by the order of 
the Emperor, was placed over the Imperial throne in a Hall 
of the European buddings at Yuen*min-yuen. If reliance can 
be had on the assertion of an Italian Missionary, who for 
twenty-seven years attended the Court of Peking, in the 
qualification of a mechanician, there must be at that country 
seat, six Palaces, built in the European architectural style. 
At Yuen-min-yuen, the Emperor^s address to the King of 
Portugal was handed to the Ambassador, who left Peking 
on 3d June, and landed at Macao 6th October, 1753, in 
company with " Hay," a Tartar Mandarin, and Hallerstein. 
With this embassy, Macao spent 22,000 taels, and his Ex- 
cellency used to say, it cost him 16,000 dollars. 

Conventional Pact. It were to be wished, that those citi- 
zens, who flatter themselves with the expectation of becoming 
by election, sooner or later, members of the municipality, should 
take pains to study the early, and actual relations of Macao 
with China. An accurate knowledge of them ought to be 
an essential requisite in the gentlemen to whom the durection 
of the military force is to be entrusted. To boast as a young 
Governor did twenty odd years ago, that he should make the 



Digitized by 



Google 



105 

whole province tremble before his '^ Quatro gatos," (fourcats) 
meaning the gentle cohofrt of four hundred men, denominated 
the Prince's Regent battalion, betrays an idle, puerile, pre- 
sumption, or gross ignorance. Sixty years before, actuated by 
the then uncontradicted tradition, that Portugal was to be re-^ 
puted the liege Lord of Macao, Anthony Joseph Telles de 
Meneyes, Governor of Macao, exceeded his power, and drew 
humiliation, perplexity and expenses on the city. He began 
by an order, to pull up, cut down and destroy a railing the 
Chief of the Hoppo on Praya pequena was making in front of 
his ofSce, for registering and examining, within its precinct, 
with ease and quietness, goods coming from Canton, and other 
parts of China, by the inner passage, or being despatched for 
their respective ports. This violent and illegal act, had nearly 
suspended the trade, for the Chinese custom*house officer 
threatened to shut up his tribunal and carry his complaints to 
Canton. To make him desis^ from the journey, and adopt 
peaceful sentiments, the Senate could not help recurring to 
the old, tried, and successful means, namely, to offer excuses, 
valuable gifts, and the cost of a new solid enclosure round the 
Hoppo's office. Telles also was the cause of an alarming and 
very serious contention with the civil magistrates. Private 
manuscripts inform us, that in 1748, a military guard going 
their rounds, laid hold of two vagabond Chinese and brought 
them up to the fort Monte, where the (Jovemors used at that 
time to reside. Telles de Meneyes, said : bring them to the 
Procurator. In the way to his house a quarrel arose, in which 
the prisoners were used so cruelly, that one of them had ex«- 
pired, and the other was dying, when the soldiers reached the 
door of the Procurator. In this state he declined receiving 
them; they were therefore brought back to the Monte. 
What hereafter became of them could never be fully ascer- 
tained. Several conjectures were t^irculated, and are on rec- 
ord : among them we have selected such, which in our opinion 
are marked with the seal of common sense and probability. 

Next morning the Procurator waited on ithe Governor, who 
assured him, that he had not seen the Chinese ; a reply he 
obstinately adhered to, whenever an inquiry was made what 
had become of the murdered men. ' The surrender of the 
dead bodies and of the culprits being denied, neither an in- 
spection of the deceased, nor examination of the perpetrators 
14 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 

of the crime, was granted. To bring about this essential ob- 
ject, the Mandarin gave orders to the Chinese retailers not to 
sell victuals to the Portuguese, and, leavmg a few soldiers in 
the place, he proceeded to lay the case before his superior, 
the Af andarin of Heang-shan. The scarcity growing every 
day more distressing, and at last frightful, relief was to be 
sought by any means within the reach of man. The Gover- 
nor obstinately refused to give up the soldiers. In this emer- 
gency, the Senate resolved to tempt the venality of the Man- 
darins ; the trial was successful. In a secret meeting, managed 
with one of them, the Procurator slided into his hand, thirty 
pieces of gold* — ^Paos de oura" — assuring him, that the cul- 
prits had been degraded and were gone to Timor. The gold 
had its wonted effect. After the sale of provisions had been 
suspended for nearly twenty days, the prohibition was removed. 
By refusing to give up the dead bodies, a Coroner's inquest 
was prevented, an incident, which would help the Mandarins 
out of a dilemma, were a surmise of their being bribed ever 
stirred. To allege, that they were endeavoring by in- 
contestible evidence to unravel this intricate business, would 
be admitted a sufficient excuse for having delayed to sub- 
mit this criminal case to the decision of the Viceroy. 
MeanwhUe a new shape was given to the case. Truth was 
— ^which too often happens — turned and twisted into false- 
hood. It had been at length proved to the satisfaction of the 
judges, that the soldiers had been under the influence of oc- 
casional fits of insanity, and that in a paroxysm of mental 
derangement, the two Chinese were slain. In consideration 
of this deplorable state of their brains, it is hoped, that the 
merciful heart of his Imperial Majesty will mitigate the rigor 
of the laws, in commuting the sentence of death, into per- 
petual banishment at the place, to which the Portuguese of 
Macao are wont to send their convicts, and in commanding 
that each of the delinquents shall have, according to law, to 
bestow twenty taels on the respective parents of the deceased, 
for celebrating their superstitious ceremonies. This opinion, 
suggested in a memorial of the high Mandarins of Canton, to 
the Emperor, had the desired effect ; it procured pardon to 

* In January 1834, the price of Gold 98 touch, was twenty-four dollara 
pertael. 



Digitized by 



Google 



107 

the soldiers. Of this royal favor, the Senate was, by a Chop 
from the territorial judge of the province, informed. 

To these precedents, we shall add a sliort detail of an oc- 
currence, wliicb made the provincial government comprehend, 
that the Portuguese of Macao still continued wilfully to slight 
their orders, and to set at naught the laws of the empire^ 
The Mandarins had more than once admonished the Senate 
to allow no subject of China to embrace the Christian relig- 
ion, proscribed 1723 ; nevertheless a man, charged with 
heinous crimes — the nature of which I do not know-^-had for 
a length of time, escaped the pursuit of his prosecutors, for he 
had found a retreat at the Jesuits. Protesting that he would 
become a christian, they sent him as a Catechumen to an In- 
stitution they had near St. Paul, called our Lady of defence, — 
" Nossa Senhora do Amparo." Spies discovered at length, 
his hiding place, and Chinese justice reclaimed him as a sub- 
ject of China. The missionaries boldly denied, having any 
knowledge of such a person, but it was soon ascertained, that 
"luany more lay hid at the same place. Exasperated at the 
impudence of foreign religionists, the Mandarins persevered 
in demanding all those, who by their inhabiting the Amparo, 
betrayed an inclination to desert the worship of their fore- 
fathers ; they insisted that the culprits should be given up, 
and the Amparo razed ; commands which the Portuguese with 
all their might opposed. The provincial government having 
decided, that the inhabitants of Macao, should either quit the 
country or submit in a certain degree to the supremacy of 
the empire, the Mandarins put a stop to long and tedious dis- 
cussions and obstinate resistance, by issuing a mandate not to 
furnish them with the necessaries of life, but to be ready for 
evacuating the place in a few days. Aware that the people 
of Macao depend on a contmued influx of provisions from the 
interior, and that the daily supply comes from native retailers, to 
avert the impending calamity, a Council or general meeting 
was held on the 9th of November, 1749. The members 
protested against violence, and declared, that necessity com- 
pelled the Senate to suffer the Amparo to be demolished, 
and to agree to a Conventional pact,* dated Keen-lung's 
XlVth year. It consists of twelve articles. A copy, left 

*SeeAppeBdixNo. VIIL 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 

with the Senate, was by the advice and co-operation of An« 
thony Pereira e Sylva, a delegate magistrate, " Syordicante,^ 
from Goa, altered. In the Portuguese translation, the twelfth 
article, is omitted, because it prohibits teaching the Christ^ 
ian religion to the subjects of China. The Portuguese arti- 
cles, engraved on a stone tablet, fixed in a wall of one of the 
corridors in the Senate-house, exhibit a jarring discrepancy 
when compared with the original, by which the Mandarins 
are guided. 

Mandarin interference. Macao being the seat of a mixed 
population, whose political existence is at variance with the 
principals of undivided submission of natural subjects, collis- 
ions must now and then occur. When public business re- 
quired the presence of any of the Mandarins fix>m the district, 
the Senate hired for him a temporary habitation, till the 
resolution was (1779) taken to buy a house and prepare it 
for the reception of inferior officers of the province ; it goes 
by the name of the Mandarin's house — <^ Casa do Mandarin." 
These dwellings being wanting in that space and conven- 
ience, which must attend on a Magnate or a Tsung-tuh, 
when either condescends to honor Macao with a visit, the 
Procurator selects a commodious house for his residence ; fits 
it up, and adorns it in the style and taste of Chinese elegance. 
The collective body of the Senate, waits on such an eminent 
personage. The oldest inhabitants of Macao averred fl713) 
that the Senators were then for the first time permitlea to be 
seated in the presence of a Viceroy in chairs ; heretofore they 
had their places on stools. Mandarins of high rank visiting 
Macao, were welcomed with presents of more or less value : 
those bestowed in 1810, by the city on the Tsung-tuh of 
Kwang-tung and Kwang-se, who then called, were worth, I 
am told, about fifty taels. 

The natural subjects of the empire being very numerous 
at Macao, vagabonds, gamblers, thieves, &;c. entertain the 
expectation of hiding themselves easily in a place where the 
jurisdiction is divided, and the tenor of laws variously applied; 
the influx of these pernicious dregs of nations, is therefore 
constant and great. To keep them in awe. Keen-lung peiv 
mitted, about a century ago the Mandarin of Heang-shan, to 
settle in the neighborhood of Macao a co-adjutor, with power 
to examine criminals and inflict on the convicted, a certain 



Digitized by 



Google 



109 

degree of due punishment. This civil petty officer, denomi- 
nated by the Chinese, Tso-tang, established himself (1800) at 
jMacao ; he ke€f]p9 a watchful eye on the inhabitants of the pe- 
ninsula, and is the organ of communication with the higher 
Mandarins. . 

Correlative Intercourse. We endeavored in Chapter fifth, 
briefly to sketch the features of a municipality absolute, and 
those of the actual mixed government, so far as both can be 
considered independent of Chinese influence on their domes- 
tic concerns : to what extent and in what manner the laws of 
Portugal suffer infiraction by Imperial civil officers, a rather 
full exposition is given, we think, in the sixth Chapter. At 
present we intend to relate a case or two, in which Macao 
could freely discuss and ponder propositions, which the liege 
Lord chose to make to his local vassals. 

Succor against the Eastern Tartars. The Man-chaw, or 
oriental Tartars, threatening the independence of China, be^ 
cause the dynasty of Ming had forfeited the affections of the 
people, suggestions came from the Envoy, Gon§allo Teixeira, 
bearer of a tribute from Macao, to seek auxiliary aid at Ma- 
cao, as on record : it was adopted by Teen-ky, the successor 
of Wan-leih ; and a negociation set on foot by a Jesuit, John 
Rodrigues (1620) from Peking. A force of 400 regular 
soldiers — Europeans, Macao-bom, and Chinese, good marks- 
men, bred by the Portuguese — ^under the command of two 
Captains, Lieutenants and Adjutants, was raised. This co- 
hort passed Canton and proceeded to Nan-chang-foo, the 
capitol of Keang-se. At that place, news being received, 
that the invasion of the Tartars had been repelled, this little 
armed body had orders (1622) to retrace their steps and re- 
turn to their home. Every soldier was accompanied by a 
slave boy, who had been bought with the Emperor's money. 
For defiraying the necessary expenses, 34,000 taels were 
taken up at Canton, a sum, which (1632) was reclaimed un- 
der the pretext that the succor had not reached its destination. 
To settle this vexatious demand on the best terms attainable, 
agents were sent to Canton. 

Auxiliaries against Pirates. Application for assistance 
against pirates, who from time immemorial, have been more 
or less troublesome to the coasts of China, were made at dif- 
ferent epochs, to Macao. In 1719, the city consented to arm 



Digitized by 



Google 



no 



two brigantines — ^^ embarcagoes de vigia," — ^for the protec- 
tion of the sea against rovers, on condition that it should in 
future be free from the ground rent, and the measurement of 
ships. In 1792, the Mandarin of Heang-shan requested << for 
the sake of public good and general safety, that two ships 
should be armed, manned, and provisioned." The following 
privileges, on that occasion, claimed by the Portuguese, and 
explained by the Mandarin, put an end to all further nego- 
ciation. 



PRIVILEGES 

claimed by the Portuguese. 

1st. The Portuguese lord- 
ed anciently not only over the 
Island from the Barrier to the 
Typa, but also over " Lapa, 
Ribeira grandeand Pequena, 
Oitem, and Bugios" — ^mon- 
key island. 

2d. They had the right to 
grant permission to Chinese 
to reside at Macao, or to turn 
them out, whenever they be- 
haved improperly. 

3d. They had the right to 
confiscate property and mer- 
chandise, in order to pay the 
debts of Chinese, who had 
failed in fulfilling their con- 
tracts with the merchants, or 
kept back money belonging 
to Christians at Macao. 

4th. They had the right to 
punish a Chinese, when he 
was found guilty. 



EXPLAINED 

by the Mandarin of Heang- 
shan. 

1st. It does not belong to 
you to govern those parts ; 
your duty is to drive away 
foreign ships from among the 
islands, and see them off. 



2d. The Chinese who have 
ancient fixed abodes, you have 
no right to expel, others, who 
wish to reside at Macao, if 
they are bad, you may drive 
them away. 

dd. If a Chinese does not 
iulfil his contract, let the 
claimant make, according to 
custom, his petition to the 
nearest Mandarin. 



4th. We have our laws and 
by them we judge, the natu- 
ral orders nmst not be invert- 
ed ; as you govern your peo- 
ple, we watch over ours. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ill 



5tb. They had the right to 
have a Chinese, who had kill- 
ed a Christian, executed at 
Macao. 



6th. They had a right to 
go to and from Canton, with 
a chop of the Procurator and 
the Senate; also to convey 
goods to Canton and back, 
paying the duty fixed by the 
Emperor. 

7th. They had the right 
by means of the Procurator, 
to lay complaints before the 
Viceroy, against any Manda- 
rin, who had given offence, 
that the wrong might be re- 
dressed and justice done. 



5th. You know, tliat both 
Christians and Chinese must 
suffer death at Canton, by 
the sentence of many Manda- 
rins, and that it was conced- 
ed to you to have the delin- 
quent executed at Macao, 
because you feared that he 
might escape. 

6th. We never forbade 
you to go and come, but pass- 
ing through different places 
our officers must examine our 
own chop^ and determine the 
duties to be paid ; these are 
the positive laws and cannot 
be dispensed with. 

7th. You have never been 
oppressed by any injustice, 
which the Mandarins have 
not diligently sought to mend 
and make good» 



That unholy race pf men, who follow the criminal pursuit 
of attacking, plundering, and murdering peaceful fellow- 
creatures, whom they meet with at sea, or to whose habitations 
they venture to march on landing, had been greatly increased 
by those felons, who escaped fjrom the rebellion of Formosa, 
and by those miscreants, who had taken an active part in the 
domestic broils of Cochin-china. Audacity grew out of ac- 
cumulated means. In order that among four or fiVe indepen- 
dent chieftains, neither might act in opposition to their general 
interest, the wretches bound themselves by a kind of confed- 
eracy, to lend one another mutual assistance, when re- 
quested. This union gave to their daring spirit, a strength 
and skill, that kept the Qoasts of seas and rivers in constant 
alarm, and fear of invasion. In 1801 or 1802, Macao was 
under the necessity of arming a brig for the protection of its 
environs ; two years later a hired ship was added. Such 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 

was the situation of affairs, when in 1809, a Convention was 
proposed by the Senate of Macao, and concluded with the 
provincial government of Canton. 

Having read in the " Chinese Repository, Vol. III. June, 
1834, No. 2," a summary of " Chinese Pirates," and a nar- 
rative of the exploits performed by the Portuguese auxiliaries 
in 1810, in the attack on the pirates, we determined on re- 
fraining from strictures on the veracity of the Portuguese 
l^istorian, by whose assertions the compiler of the article 
has been greatly misled ; we shall limit ourselves to a candid 
relation of facts, which we have witnessed, and which are on 
/ authentic records. No Viceroy of Kwang-tung and Kwang- 
se, ever resided at Macao three months, hardly three days ; 
and at the time alluded to, not a single hour ; he therefore 
could not propose to the Governor a convention. The be- 
ginning of it originated with the powerful influence of Miguel 
de Arriaga Brum da Silveira, Chief-justice or Minister, with 
the Senate of Macao. Having a suspicion, or rather a moral 
certainty, that the Honorable E. I. Company at Canton had 
given the Chinese to understand, that an aid for exterminating 
the pirate-hordes, might be had at Bombay, and apprehend- 
ing, that a naval force might arrive early in the season of 
1810, ready to act if requested, the Portuguese conceived 
that it would be indecorous further to delay their offering an 
assistance in the destruction of an enemy, who had already 
harassed Macao, and actually menaced it with ruin and des- 
olation. A memorial was directed to the Viceroy of the two 
ph)vinces, which, by the agency of a gentleman «till living, 
was forwarded by means of a trustworthy Coolee, to the office 
of the Tsung-tuh. It was delivered, and the reward of fifty 
dollars bestowed on the bearer, so soon as it was publicly 
known, that three Mandarins were ordered by the Viceroy to 
proceed to Macao, and empowered to conclude with that 
government an auxiliary treaty. The matter having been 
duly discussed, pondered and matured, a Convention contain- 
ing seven articles, was signed the 23d November, 1809, by 
Miguel de Arriaga Brum da Silveira, and the Procurator 
Jose Joaquim Barros, and by Ken-kei-che, Chu, Pom, Man- 
darins. 

Macao was to furnish six ships — ^they were to be from erne 
to four hundred tons burden — manned, armed, and provided 



j 



Digitized by 



Google 



113 

with ammunition and provisions for six montbs, the city to 
receive eighty thousand taels, and reintegration of ancient 
privileges. Possessing but one brig, five ships were hired, 
furnished with artillery, and manned with one hundred Euro- 
peans and Macao-bom Portuguese, and six hundred and 
thirty Asiatics. In five days these six ships, by the zeal, ac- 
tivity, and assiduous attention of Arriaga, to whom the Senate 
had entrusted the management of this auxiliary concern, were 
ready for sea, and to act in conjunction with sixty Imperial 
war-boats. It must not be forgotten, that the Convention 
was signed on the 23d November, and that, five days were 
taken up for getting the hired ships manned and prepared for 
action, and reconcile, if you can, Mr. Glasspoole's averment, 
" Repository, page 78," — ^that " on the 29th November, ter- 
minated the boasted blockade,'^— of the Pirates in the bay 
under Lantao — "which had lasted nine days." To us it 
appears, that Mr. Glasspoole made it just as much a point of 
depreciating, on this occasion, the valor and military talents 
of the Portuguese, as their countryman Jos6 Ignacio Andrade 
did of extolling their gallantry and prowess.* We presume, 
that nobody will hesitate to admit, that the victory of the 
rebels must be ascribed principally to the Portuguese auxil- 
iaries, who supported the Imperial squadron. 

The allied fleet hanging incessantly at the heels of the en- 
emy, the Pirates dared not enfeeble themselves by detaching 
divisions on plundering expeditions, or for collecting contribu- 
tion and food to appease the craving hunger of their crews, 
who every day bore misery with less resignation. At this 
conjuncture, Alcanforado the Commander-in-chief of the 
Portuguese squadron, availed himself, by exhorting Chang- 
Paou to accept thje Emperor's gracious pardon and an hon- 
orable situation in the navy of China. To this proposal, he 
replied under date the 18th of December, 1809, that " he 
would nev§r submit to the Emperor." A former friend of 
his, was of a difiPerent opinion ; his companion in arms, Kivo- 
Potae, chief of a distinct squadron, determined to obtain his 
pardon by delivering up, in the month of January, 1810, his 
fleet and himself, to the Viceroy. This defection, the con- 
tinued desertion of his people, the cruel want of provisions, 

*Memortft sobre & destrui^aff dos Piratof da China^LiBbon, 1824. 
15 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 

and still more perhaps, the loss of his oracle, — a Pagod-— which 
^e Chiefs were in the habit of consulting, through the organ 
of its priests, and to act as^ directed in all their operations, 
were omens, which influenced a vulgar mind. The navigat- 
iBg tabernacle of the idol — ^for this godhead and his servants 
were in a separate sacred Junk — ^fell in with a Portuguese 
vessel, by which it was attacked and sunk,, with all the Bon-r 
zes and their God,** — Andrade assures' us— in the bay under 
Liantao. This misfortune and an increasing scarcity of vict- 
uals, that threatened the pirate-fleet, which lay at anchor is 
the bay of Heang-shan, the mouth of which was blockaded 
by the combined allied forces, were pressing causes of treating 
for a capitulation. Authorized by the Viceroy " Pae," par- 
leys had been flying between Chang, and Mr. Arriaga, in 
the presence of Chu and Pom, and had so far advanced, that 
a conference with the Tsung-tuh was fixed, and took place 
near the Bogue, in the latter end of February. It was inter- 
rupted by a rumor, that the Gov^nor of Macao had given 
order to Alcanforado not to let the pirates get out of the 
bay of Heang-shan, contrary to what bad been resolved in the 
congress : this unexpected event so alarmed the rebel-chie&, 
who were apprehensive of treachery, that they fled from the 
conferences, and betook themselves to their respective squad- 
rons. The Tsung-tiih having empowered Arriaga to settle 
the terms of submission, proceeded to Canton, and Arriaga to 
Macao. Having removed all suspicion from the mind of 
the Governor, he resumed the negociation, and managed it 
80 dexterously, that Chang-Paou at last agreed to bring, 
by order of Tsung-tiih, the squadrons to a place, designated 
by the name of " Pu-yum-xa," (Portuguese spelling.) The 
Viceroy came down to Heang-shan, and having received on the 
12th April, 1810, the submission of the pirates, at which Mr. 
Arriaga was present, he delivered to them a Decree of the 
Emperor, in which it was announced, that " all their crimes 
were pardoned, and that they were henceforth to be reputed 
good people, and numbered among the loyal subjects of the 
Empire." By this act of clemency, the Emperor got rid of 
22,000 enemies, possession of 360 vessels, 1,200 guns, and 

* When will credalous mankind cease to be the dnpea of impoetora, who 
impiooil J pretend to be the organs of Divinity ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 

more than 7,000 fire locks and swords, as spect$ed in the 
official roll, taken at the surrender of the four squadrons. 
In this account were not comprehended the pirates to the, 
eastward, who also gave themselves up, nor those stragglers 
who fled from their employers. Mr. Glasspoole estimates 
the enemy's force at 70,000 men, and the vessels small and 
large, at 1800. 

From the general pardon published at Heang-shan, 126 
were excluded and beheaded, 158 banished forever, and 60 
for two years. 

Had the present generation, inhabiting Macao, been better 
acquainted with the annals of the place, where they are set- 
tled or born, they would have insisted on obtaining solid priv- 
ileges, which might in future be valuable, instead of exhibit- 
ing chimerical pretensions, inherited from the ignorance of 
their ancestors. By documents, no foundation can be traced 
of the immunities which had been, it was surmised, bestowed 
by diflferent Sovereigns of China, on the Portuguese nation for 
eminent services rendered to the Empire, a restitution could 
therefore not be claimed ^ nobody expressed, to my knowl- 
edge, the thought of securing the convenience, or furthering 
the extension of the sole privilege which Macao can boast o^ 
that of a reduced measurement of their ships. Thus the 
sixth article, the restoration of privileges, being disposed of, 
the tenor of the third was curtailed, for instead of 80,000 
taels, no more than 66,645.340 were disbursed. The Macao 
auxiliaries had not been backward in pressing the enemy : to 
their presence and activity must be ascribed the extinction of 
the rebels. The fifth conventional article fixes, that all 
prizes m^de from the pirates " are to be divided in equal parts 
between the ships and the Imperial squadron." By what 
specious argument could the Senate authorise their Proxy 
then— Mr. Arriaga— to depart from the plain sense of this stip- 
ulation ? Considering that Macao had been forced from 
1801, to keep armed vessels against the pirates, and that the 
expenses had firom year to year grown heavier, and heaviest 
in 1810, one half of the booty, being 180 vessels, 600 guns, 
and at least 3,500 fire-locks and swords, would surely afibrd 
but a very inadequate return for the expenses which the city 
had, from 1804, to 1810, both inclusive, borne, for it exceed- 
ed 370,000 dollars, yet the dividend, in which Macao had a 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 

right to share, might have been converted into means of dis* 
charging some part of the debt, which circumstances had 
rendered it necessary to contract. The fifty bronze and iron 
cannons, Mr. Anriaga forwarded as a present to the Prince 
Regent of Portugal, were not prize guns, though J. d An- 
drade tells us so ; they were the very same, general opmion 
maintains, that had been bought for arming the hired ships, 
fitted out to act with the Imperial squadron against the rebels; 
nor were the guns put on board the Ulysses, as Andrade pre- 
tends, but on board the ship Mary I. We are told, that they 
were hardly esteemed worth the freight which was paid at 
Rio de Janeiro. 

With Japan.^ Nearly two centuries have elapsed since 
the Portuguese lost the trade of Japan. Let us trace the 
cause. Two sets of adventurers were in 1542, cast on differ- 
ent blands of Japan, Charlevoio,! and Portuguese authors 
assert. . Coming from Siam and bound for China, a 
storm drove Anthony da Mota, Francis Zeimoto, and Anthony 
Peixolo, into the harbor of Congoxima, in the kingdom of 
Saxuma. Fernao Mendes Pinto, Christovad Barralho, and 
Diogo Zeimoto, passengers on board a Chinese pirate, who 
cruized, the historian says, for Japan, were shipwrecked on 
the island Tanixuma, or Tacuxima, from whence Pinto pen- 
etrated to the kingdom of Bungo. At that time this archipel- 
ago was distracted by the emulation of ambitious subjects, who 
fought for supremacy. 

Roman Catholic Mission. During the internal convul- 
sions, Francis Xavier with his Japanese convert, Paul da 
Santa Fe, from Malacca, arrived 1649. They and the fol- 
lowing Jesuits, had in Japan an uncontrolled liberty to preach 
their doctrine : they imparted to the Japanese a new creed, 
and a knowledge of foreign luxuries ; both made rapid prog- 
ress among all classes. Three sovereign Princes thought 
themselves so enamored with Christianity, that they des- 
patched (15^) envoys, who were to wait on the King of 
Portugal and Spain, and to proceed to Rome, in order, it is 
said^ to acknowledge the supremacy of the Pope. At the 
conclusion of the civil war, Tayco-sama, a man of low buth, 

*Iii this article, works pttblithed by Misnonarief, who had resided 
in Japan, are preferred to the history or KoBmpfer. 

tHistoire de Japan. 



Digitized by 



Google 



117 

but high spirited and of eminent talents was recognized 
(1584 or 1585) by the principal feudatories, Cobo or tempor- 
al Sovereign of the island, a dignity the Dairo or spiritual 
Emperor conferred, though reluctantly, on him. To prevent 
defection, like that one of which the three Princes had been 
guilty, Tayco-sama, published 15816 a command that the 
missionaries should quit the country in twenty days ; a few 
Jesuits departed : the greatest part was hid among the neo- 
phites. Another set of mental disturbers, friars of St. Francis, 
came (1593) from Manilla under the titld of Ambassadors : 
the fraud being detected, twenty-six, some say twenty-three 
of the pseudo-ambassadors were on the 5th February, 1597, 
crucified. Tayco-sama expired 16th September, 1598. 

Dayfa-sama, who usurped the throne, belonging to the son 
of the deceased sovereign, was not impartial to the Christians. 
He bore in mind the disclosure, which the Spaniards had made 
to Tayco-sama, " that the Portuguese, contrary to the Empe- 
ror*s order, maintained Jesuits," and likewise the recrimination 
of the Portuguese, " accusing the Spaniards of sending first 
Priests to foreign countries to propagate their faith, and then of 
conquering them." This assertion gained some weight by the 
ambition of lolate, a powerful sovereign of "Oxu," or " Voxu" 
in the north-eastern parts of Japan, who .under the guidance 
of Luis Sotello, a friar, sent an embassy to Spain. This 
caused such a suspicion and distrust, that the temporal Em- 
peror menaced with banishing the priests, who perverted the 
minds of the people, and alsp threatened to exterminate those 
of his subjects, who adhered to the European errors. This 
' threat did not intimidate the enthusiastic zeal of apostolic ad- 
venturers, who said, they would deserve the crown of a mar- 
tyr, by preaching the proscribed gospel in Japan. A decree 
of 1624, ordered the Portuguese and Spaniards, many of 
whom were settled in the country and married to Japanese 
women, to leave the islands ; another forbade the letting of 
houses to strangers and Chinese, or to have any communica- 
tion with either ; at last, Toxongun-sama, banished in 1637, 
both Christianity and the Portuguese from Japan, notwith- 
standing the exiled found means to remain under the strictest 
surveillance, two years longer, penned up on the artificial isl- 
and Decima, till they were, as averred by G. F. Mey- 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 

land,** sent awaj in 1630. The Spaniards had been ex- 
pelled in 1625. 

Commercial intercourse. Before the archipelago of Japan 
was discovered by the Portuguese, Chinese, invited by the 
proximity, carried on clandestinely, an exchange of goods, 
s They were supplanted by the. Portuguese, who were in the 
beginning, welcomed in any port they chose to enter, because 
the local authorities and the petty Sovereigns reaped con- 
siderable advantage botn liberal presents, and the merchants 
great profit from the articles of trade, becoming every day 
more fashionable. Whether duties on importations and ex- 
portations, or anchorage money were exacted, I am not able, 
fully to decide. Tayco-sama being absolute monarch, open- 
ed to aM tradmg people, the ports of his Empire, and com- 
manded, that no impost on importations, nor measurement 
should be collected, either from the Japanese or foreigners; 
these regulations were still in 1638, respected., When the 
Portuguese trade was exclusively confined to Bongo, Firando, 
and at last to Nangasaki, are periods which I am not prepar- 
ed, in a chronological order to determine. In 1594, a treaty 
of friendship between Tayco-sama, and the Governor of Ma- 
nila, was concltided. Spanish ships were admitted to the 
port of Nangasaki, and participated in the trade with Japan, 
till 1625. Tayco-sama having departed (1598) this life, 
the Dutch traded, (1611) and the English, (1613) at Fu^n- 
do. Inthe'^Nao," a large ship, the merchants of Macao 
sent usually in the beginning from 1 5 to 1600 peculs of raw 
silk, besides silk stufis ; from Europe and India, all sorts of 
woolens, cotton cloth, drug9, aromatics, medicines, spices, 
wines, and a great variety of curiosities from all parts ojf the 
earth. They did not realize a profit of 2 to 300 per cent., 
as those of Liampo did ; but one hundred per cent, at least 
Koempfer asserts, and a great profit on the goods they took 
back, consisting principally of gold, silver and copper. In 
1636, the Portuguese exported in four vessels, Koempfer re- 
lates, 2,350 boxes with silver, or 2,350,000 taels,t and if it 

*Oven\ght yan den Handel der Earopexen op Japan, Batayia, 1833. 
" Survey of the trade of the Europeans with Japan/' a valuable work for 
those y who intend to maJce themselves acquainted with the old and modem 
history of that trade. 

t The weight of one tael of fine silver in Japan, is worth thirty-three 



Digitized by 



Google 



119 

be true that their trade was then reduced to one half of what 
it had once been, the Portuguese must in the zenith of their 
prosperity, have yearly taken out of Japan, about 4 1-2 mil- 
lions of taels in gold and silver."*^ 

The Dutch trading at Japan aspired like merchants at jui 
exclusive commerce, and were jealous of the Pcnrtugtiese. 
Rumors*— on what solid ground I cannot see — are in circula- 
tion^ that the Dutch, having captured a ship bound for Portu- 
gal, found a document drawn up by ^^ Moro," a Catholic 
neopbite, captain, diplomatist, or consul of the Portuguese 
trade at Nangasaki, addressed to the King of Portugal and 
Spain. It pretended that by the assistance of Ekiropean 
troops and a naval force, Japan might be delivered from the 
yoke of idolatry, acknowledge the supremacy pf the Pope, 
and allegiance to the Sovereign of Spain. New Christians, 
who were very numerous, would, the writer though^, render 
the execution of the project, an easy matter, because they 
would rise under the direction of their spiritual leaders — ^the 
missionaries, — not only for the sake of protecting their faith, 
but for extending the sway of the gospel over (he whole pop* 
ulation. The author of the plan had forgotten to take into 
consideration, that the Christian community, thinly spread 
over many islands, and parts of the empire, could never be 
brought to act in concert, effectually on any part, since the 
then existing government of Japan was aware of a partial 
disaffection among its subjects. Besides, Moro ought to 
have known, that some important parts of the Spanish mon- 
archy were in arms against their Sovereign, and that Spain, 
annoyed by the Dutch, not only in Europe, but in all her ul- 
tvamariDe possessions, was so weakened by an obstinately 
protracted warfare, that no adequate force for revolutionizing 
Japan, could be spared from Europe. Some one or other of 
the Spanish authors, I have had an opportunity to consuh 
upon the afiairs of Japan, would assuredly have given a de- 
tailed account of so vast a political Qonception, particularly 

■tnivon, Nederlaodacb^Jlfey^an. The Dutch factory in Canton, eetimateiK 
the weight of one tael of fine silver in China, worth seventj-two stuiverSi 
Nederlandech. 

* Th^ computation made by Montanus, brings it near to that amount 
G^zantschap aande Kejzeren van Japan. Anno 1669. " An £mbaM|F 
to the Emperors of Japan." 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 

if it originated with a person/ who vaunted himself as being 
a Portuguese : but they are all silent on that subject. Frey 
Juan de Conception j"*^ mentions a cunning renegado, Diogo 
de Acosta, who worked hard in expelling religion and for- 
eigners ; of Moro he does not say a word. It is thought, 
that Spanish haughtiness and Portuguese covetousness, and 
the contempt, public officers bore for the dealers of a new 
exotic doctrine, and for merchants, operated conjointly in 
denying to strangers, all intercourse with the empire. 

Diplomatic Missions. Whatever might have been the 
motives for secluding this people from the rest of the world, 
several fruitless endeavors to recover this valuable trade have 
been made. In 1640, four citizens of distinction and expe-> 
rience, Luis Paes Pacheco, Rodrigo Sanches de Paredes, 
Siam5 Vas de Payva, and Gonsalo Monteiro de Carvalho, 
undertook an embassy to Japan. They embarked on board 
Calares, and arrived at Nangasaki: These envoys, together 
with fifty, some say, sixty persons, were at the same time 
beheaded. The Japanese spared Manoel Cordozo Lii^ao, 
the purser, and some black boys. Montanus says they were 
twelve, who with a Portuguese pilot, were sent back to Ma- 
cao, that they might give an account of the scene they had 
been witnesses to. The hatches of the Calares were not 
opened, and the 400,000 taels, due by Macao to the mer- 
chants of Japan, rejected. King John IV. communicated 
in 1644, (not 1647) to the Emperor of Japan, his accession 
to the throne of Portugal, through his ambassador, Gon9alo 
de Siqueira. The court of Meyaco directed that no harm 
should be done to, the envoy, but that he should depart in 
peace. The last attempt, refers to 1685. Twelve Japanese 
trading from one island to another, were, by a furious storm 
driven out of their course, and lost on an island near Macao. 
These unfortunate wretches were saved. Informed' by the 
mejans of an old woman, born in Japan, that the people were 
her countrymen, the Senate taking this chance, for a hint of 
Providence, that the religion and trade should be once more 
restored in Japan, determined to fit out the ship' St. Paul, in 
ballast, for the sake of sending the poor Japanese home: 

* Ayadado a todo su astuio renegado Diogo de Acosta, presumo (por las 
trazas) que era Portuguez. — Historia de PhUlipiiias, Tom. V.p, 21. 



Digitized by' 



Google 



121 

This vessel sailed with pennission of the Mandarins of Can- 
ton to- Nangasaki. She came back unhurt, but brought a 
reinforced mandate, that no Portuguese ship should ever ven- 
ture again to appear on the coasts of Jiipan, under any pre- 
text soever. 

With Manila. By the eight articles of peace between 
Spain and Portugal, and subnaission to Philip I. in 1583, ex- 
clusive trade with India, and all other parts of the incorporated 
Portuguese dominions, was reserved to the Pbrtuguese, and 
free intercourse with Spain, Peru and Manila secured. The 
ifnerchants of Macao aimed at a monopoly of the trade at 
Canton, and obtained it, because they did not scruple to do 
violence to any Spanish vessel steering for Canton ; Macao ^ 
had consequently for a length of time, to supply Manila with 
Indian and Chinese produce. This profitable traffic was brok- 
en off by the restoration (1640) of the family of Bragan^a, 
to the throne of Portugal. The slumbering hatred against 
Spaniards, made the government of Macao overstep the boun- 
daries of prudence, by allowing an envoy, Dm. Juan Claudio, 
and his retinue, to be insulted, by arbitrajily cancelling debts- 
which were due to Spaniards, and by suffering friars and' lay- 
men to be driven (1644) from Macao, proceedings which 
widened the breach. The port of Manila remained shut 
against the Pbrtuguese, more than twenty years. The treaty 
of peace (1668) between Spain and Portugal, produced but 
a short respite to the animosity. The commerce of Macao 
was a third time precluded from Manila. In 1720, the Sen- 
ate observed in a letter to the King of Portugal, that « though 
the trade exists between us and Manila, the great profit which 
our ships formerly made by going to that place, is lost ;" yet 
the gain must have been very considerable, for the Senate 
forbade (1720) vessels, belonging to a certain class of mer- 
chants to trade to Manila, because it was one of the ports 
where profit might be expected. Actually, the commercial 
intercourse is of no great consequence, perhaps less to Macao 
than to Manilai. 

In my " Contribution," (1832) it was asserted erroneously, 
that, "the Chinese admit the Spanish flag from Manila, on 
the same condition as that of Portugal." The case is this. 
By order of John V. (1746) a few numbers out of the twenty 
five ships granted by the Chinese to Macao, are allotted to 
. 16 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 

ships from Manila. On the arrival of any in the roads of 
Macao, the Commander solicits the Senate to bestow on his 
ship a number* Assenting to this petition, a number and a 
name of any registered ship not in port, b assigned ; then 
and not before, may the Manila vessel enter the harbor under 
Spanish colors and begin business. She now enjoys the 
benefit of a reduced measurement, and has also the advantage 
of paymg at the Portuguese Custom House, the duties which 
Macao ships are bound to pay. Loaded wholly with rice 
the Manila ship is exempt from certain charges, which an 
edict of Taou-kwang's IVth year, 1825, has sanctioned. 

With Timor, A few deserters and vagabonds from Banda, 
the Moluccas and other dominions of Portugal in the East, 
panting for independence possessed themselves of an island, 
called Timor. There they built and fortified a place, denom- 
inated Koupan, from which they were (1613) driven by the 
Dutch. Dhelle is the actual residence of a Governor, whose 
authority extends over that part of Timor, to which the crown 
of Portugal lays a claim. Its principal produce is wax and 
Sandal-wood. This last article was for many years imported, 
and an income from it collected by the government of Macao, 
so considerable, that " almost all the expenses of the settle- 
ment were defrayed by this import alone." In the progress 
of time, the profit had fallen off greatly ; still in 1720, it 
yielded so sure a gain, that by a resolve of the Senate, the 
poorer merchants were not permitted to trade with Timor, an 
arbitrary resolution the court of Goa censured and abolished. 
By an edict of Yung-ching in 1723, the prohibition of Kang- 
he in 1717, was removed, and the Chinese allowed to become 
competitors in foreign trade. Bringing then from Timor and 
Batavia, a great quantity. Sandal-wood sold in Canton, and 
sells so cheap, that a voyage from Macao to Timor, is almost 
reputed a losing one. Nevertheless, a vessel must yearly be 
despatched for the purpose of delivering documents from Goa, 
and of conveying Sepoys, officers, exiles, ammunitions, &c., 
to Timor, and of bringing back government paper, treasure, 
fee, which is remitted by way of Macao to Goa. 

With Batavia, Chinese merchants, in the habit of trad- 
ing at Batam in Java, opened 1686, at Batavia a new mar- 
ket for tea and Chinese produce and industry. A decree, 
published 1717, in which the Government of Batavia de- 



Digitized by 



Google 



123 

clared, Valentyn affirms, ^^ that no Chinese Junk shall unload, 
unless on condition, that the Dutch company shall have all 
the teas at their own price," interrupted the connexion. To 
avoid a total ruin, the Chinese yielded reluctantly, but they 
took among themselves an oath, never to return. This con- 
vention, and the prohibition of Kang-he, the very same year, 
for Junks to navigate southward of China, afforded a tempo- 
rary relief, because Kang-he excepted (1718) graciously, the 
inhabitants of Macao from the general restriction. The du- 
ties levied that very year, amounted to twenty thousand taels. 
In 1720, Chinese trade with Batavia, required seven ships 
and two sloops. This good fortune lasted but too short a 
time, for Yung-ching repealed the prohibition of his father, 
permitting (1723) his subjects to renew the foreign trade ; 
the Dutch company also began to transmit the produce of 
their island to China in their own ships. From this time, 
mercantile communication has languished, and is now kept 
up by the Macao ship, which must every year go on to 
Timor. 

With Goa, — Commercially. Afonso Dalboquerque usurp- 
ed the sovereignty of Ismael Adel-chan, by corrupting Hid- 
alean, because " his father had taken Malabar vessels in ports 
and places belonging to the King of Portugal." The Gen- 
eral spoke of free navigation, but gave orders to scour the 
coasts and force any merchant-ship, with which the com- 
mander may fall in, to Goa. This violence caused the ruin 
of Calicut on the coast of Malabar, and became the source of 
future wealth and prosperity to Goa. Goa shared with 
Macao in the trade with Japan and Canton. The market of 
Nangasaki being interdicted, repeated disasters befel Goa. 
To alleviate its distress, various, though unsuccessful projects 
have been devised; commercial associations with Macao were 
proposed and declined. At present the trade is unimportant. 
Hardly would a ship touch at Goa, were the Senate not bound 
to forward every year, authentic documents, stating all occur- 
rences at Macao, and give passage to soldiers, prisoners and 
travellers. 

With Malacca. It is on record, that, at the period Afonso 
Dalboquerque assaulted and took (1511) Malacca, the inhab- 
itants had increased to one hundred thousand, collected by 
the liberty, which distinguished this most famous emporium 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 

of trade. The exertions of Sultan Mahomet to recover his 
dominions, and the constant vexations, which merchants ex- 
perienced from the Portuguese armed vessels, induced Ara* 
bians, Guzerats, Persians, &^c., to open at Patane in Siam 
a communication with the Chinese, Lew-kews, Javanese, fee. 
This infant mart was ruined by Manoel Falcao, who com* 
manded a galley, and had orders to chase (1516) the ships 
coming from Guzerat, Coromandel, Bengala, fee, to Malacca, 
to which the merchants of Pegu had already resorted. A 
toll of ten per cent, was levied on ships passing the strait. 
To give a salutary check to a growing tyranny, and the covet- 
ousness of the principal officers at Malacca, Alfonso de Souza, 
Governor general of Portuguese India, (1542) prescribed reg- 
ulations to be observed in levying the King's duties on impor- 
tations and exportatioas. The expected effect took place ; 
merchants from China, Japan, the Malaccas, fee, came to 
exchange the produce of their respective countries, for the 
merchandise of Persia, Hindostan, and Kingdoms on this or 
the other side of the Ganges. This friendly reception dwind- 
led gradually away. The inhabitants were worn out by ever- 
lasting annoyances of the public authorities, and the strangers 
were not benefitted by the protecting laws. Depopulation 
was a natural consequence. In 1639, the peninsula, depend- 
ent on Portugal, contained no more than twelve thousand 
inhabitants. Of them, three thousand were settled in the 
city, and three hundred Portuguese among them : the rest 
Mongrels and Malays. Such was the state, when Malacca, 
according to the assertion of Dutch contemporary annalists 
surrendered (1641) to the Nederland Company. 

With Siam. — Commercially, After the seizure of Malacca 
just described, merchants from India^ afraid of falling in with 
Portuguese cruieers, stood towards Patane in the kingdom of 
Siam, hoping that they might escape being plundered. The 
result we have related. Ships from Bengal, Guzerat, Coro- 
mandel, fee, were driven into Malacca, the government of 
which made proposals for establishing a factory in Siam ; to 
that, the King thought proper to assent. The Director of 
it and his dependents, behaved so much to the satisfaction of 
the Court, that, by their influence, the Dutch were for some 
time forbidden to settle among the Siamese. Mutual affec- 
tion grew up to full confidence, for the King did not hesitate 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 

to send (1660) to Macao, a sum of six hundred and five cat- 
tees of silver, besides goods, the growth of his country. The 
loan was reimbursed by degrees. An account being cast, 
(1717) the balance due by the city, proved to be 71 cattees, 
8 taels, and a few fractions, a sum the Siamese Minister for 
foreign aflidrs, in^ted the Senate to pay to the captain and to 
the factor of the ships that were sent from Siam to Macao : the 
Senate could at that time pay nothing. In 1720, a remit- 
tance of somewhat more than 12 peculs of white silk of the 
first quality, — ^**de primeiio bicho," — at 179 taels per pecul, 
and a few pieces of yell9w damask, were delivered by captain 
Francis Correa Leger.: the remaining debt being 21 cattees, 
8 taels, was di^harged in 1722, by the factor of Father Man- 
oel Queiros Pereira, capitular treasurer of the Cathedral, 
who had that year despatched one of his ships to Siam. The 
King's cash-keeper passed a formal declaration, that the 
whole debt was cancelled, besides, by an order of his master, 
he gave notice to the Senate, that the ship of the present 
season, had been favored in the same manner, as the three 
of the preceding year had been. 

Diplomatically. This affectionate intercourse was inter* 
rupted by the invasions, with which the enemies of the coun- 
try, principally the Burmese, harrassed Siam. Bearing in 
mind, ancient commercial and political relations, the govern- 
ment of Portugal offered, through the medium of Goa, to re- 
lieve a friend from recurring vexations, and to assist the 
Siamese. We may fairly draw this conclusion, from the 
following extracts of a letter, dated Siam, 28th December, 
1786. '< The King expresses himself grateful to Queen 
Mary I. for her generous tender.; a signal of good will which 
shall never be forgotten till the end of the world. Having 
already, in a variety of encounters worsted the enemy, the 
King entertains no doubt that he shall compel the Burmese to 
sue for peace ; the King therefore, Will not put Her Majesty 
to the inconvenience and expense of sending troops and am- 
munition to him, but he begs, that orders might be given to 
the government of Goa to forward in the course of 1787, 
three thousand muskets. Should the subjects of Her Majesty 
wish to establish a factory, the King is ready to grant for that 
purpose a piece of ground ; they may build within it^ precinct 
a church, diat the Christians, who have been many years 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 

without spiritual guides, may be comforted by the priest Her 
Majesty may think proper to send to Siam." 

At the time when Macao was swayed by a political dicta- 
tor, — a Civilian, — whose capacious imagination made him 
conceive, that he might raise that place to an eminent rank, 
among commercial settlements in Asia, Siam was selected 
to be the point on which the future prosperity of Macao 
should turn. A Christian, a Portuguese born in Siam, be- 
came the bearer of presents, and the proposals for a renewal 
of intercourse. A correspondence was opened, the contents 
of which, being submitted to the government of Goa, appear-* 
ed in the light of a promising undertaking ; to forward and 
mature it, the Count de Rio Pardo, viceroy, was prevailed 
on to appoint in 1 820, a Consul general. Besides numerous 
liberal gifts to the King, Queen, Princes, and the first minis- 
ter, credentials to the Court of Bankock, the capital, were 
handed to him, public and private instructions also. They 
were to be consulted panicularly at the period, when the 
preliminaries, drawn up at Goa, consisting of twenty articles, 
should be discussed : they were the basis of a treaty of mu- 
tual alliance, amity and commerce, which was to be conclud- 
ed between the King of Siam, and the Count de Rio Pardo, 
in the name of his master the King of Portugal. Twelve 
years this Consul resided in Siam, successful in nothing worth 
mentioning, except in obtaining permission to build houses 
for his own convenience, and accommodations for his assist- 
ants, servants, and future artificers. A guard, composed of 
a Quarter-master and four Sepoys, assigned for the protection 
of the consulate and factory, were allowed to parade at Bank- 
ock. Had this honorable commission been entrusted to a 
gentleman of respectability, honor, property, good credit, 
diplomatic and mercantile knowledge, the Convention would 
have become a matter of course. Such a factor, director or 
consul general, would have proved himself a friend to Siam ; 
he would have built ships on his own account, and loaded 
them with the produce of the country. These speculations 
would have met, both in Asia and Europe with success, and 
encouraged many of his countrymen to embark in the same 
sphere of activity. The Portuguese would have formed a 
body of respectable merchants, who might have secured to 
themselves a trade, actually divided among competitors of 



Digitized by 



Google 



127 

different nations. This disqualified man was dismissed in 
1833, his successor went from Macao to continue a useless^ 
expensive and discreditable representation. 

With Cochin-china. — Commercially. Roman Catholic 
missionaries have set the Protestant Catholic reforming apos- 
tles an example of spreading themselves all over the world, 
settling ^^ nolens volens," among people, whom they were 
pleased to nick-name heathen. The intruders propagated a 
doctrine, tending, they assured, to purify the soul, and render 
it proper for the enjoyment of heavenly bliss ; their boast of 
European pre-eminence in civilization, arts and sciences, was 
the next tlieme, then followed an expatiating on the immense 
advantages to be expected from mutual intercourse of free 
trade. These apparently impartial suggestions of reverend 
Priests, operated on the minds of native merchants, and on 
those who lived in the neighborhood of Cochin-china.—- 
Those of Macao, explored the resources of the country, and 
found them so rich and important, that at a general meeting 
(1685) it was resolved, that the ship Nossa Senhora de Mon- 
sarrat, should bring Frutuoso Gomez Leite, an envoy to Co- 
chin-china, to please the Sovereign of Portugal, and *' for the 
conservation of the city." Notwithstanding so vital an inter- 
est, the trade was interrupted, for what reason, and for' what 
length of time I have not been able to trace. In 1712, the 
King of Cochin-china, proposed through a Jesuit, John An- 
thony Arnedo, that the commercial intercourse should be 
renewed between his subjects and the inhabitants of Macao. 
Amedo's credentials were drawn up by the first minister ; 
the presents for the Senate were from the King. In the 
reply, dated 13th April, 1713, the Senators inform the King, 
that his royal gifts had been gratefully received, and with be- 
coming high respect accepted ; that Father Arnedo had the 
commission to solicit firom his Majesty an authentic document 
of such concessions, which may induce adventurous merchants 
to listen to his Majesty's proposal. In return for those which 
the Senate had received, the city sent to the King of Cochin- 
china by Arnedo, presents estimated at sixty taels. Further 
offerings and letters were exchanged in 1715, and 1719. 
In the Senate's reply to the last letter, it is declared, that 
ships cannot be licensed for Cochin-china, till the difiiculties 
which still oppose the conclusion of a treaty, shall have been 
removed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



128 

Diplomatic Mission. Be it for not having had, as a for- 
eigner, liberty freely to use the public records ; or be it from 
total suspension of intercourse, I have not traced any feat- 
ures of a continued amicable disposition of parties till the 
year 1786. The goverment of Cochin-china had, like many 
others, permitted itself to lay heavy and increased burdens 
on its subjects, whose groans were either unknown to the 
reigning dynasty, or cruelly disregarded. Ambitious men 
blew the flame of an incipient disaffection, and formed a plot 
by which the whole royal family was nearly extinguish- 
ed. Tunking conquered the usurper, took the title of 
King of Tunking and Cochin-china. The lawful heir, Kaou- 
chang, fled to Siam, left it, and screened himself on the small 
island Palavay in the gulf of Siam. In his company was 
Adran, a French missionary, the tutor of his son. This priest 
having by a careful inquiry, ascertained that on the southern 
coast of Cochin-china, many of the subjects were still attached 
to their' ancient lord, proposed to proceed with his pupil to 
Paris and to solicit the protection of Louis XVI. The 
Prince assented, and the travellers set out for France in 1787, 
they were back in 1790. That the dethroned monarch 
might be willing to grant considerable advantages to any 
State which had the power to reinstate him on the throne of 
his ancestors, must have been familiar to those who composed 
the Senate of Macao. In consequence, one of the principal 
citizens, Anthony Vicente Rosa, was empowered to treat 
with Kaou-chang. By his letter, dated 18th December, 
1786, the King entreats the Grovernor general of Goa, to 
send him thirty armed vessels, — '^ embarca9oes de gnerra," — 
ten thousand men, not including the crews, and provisions 
for a year ; likewise ten thousand muskets, and ten thousand 
targets for his people. In return, the King bound himself to 
treat the Portuguese as the most favored nation, or rather as 
his own vassals. They were to possess a tract of land, with 
liberty to build a fortress and to have their hational colors 
flying. Accompanied by one of the King's ministers, and by 
a General and sixty soldiers, A. V. Rosa, arrived (1787) at 
Goa. The preliminary articles were submitted to the con- 
sideration of the Governor General, Francis da Cunha e 
Meneyes. The succour, Kaou-chang's delegate was author- 
ized to negociate, could at that time neither be raised nor col- 



Digitized by 



Google 



129 

lected by the government of Portuguese India ; materials for 
a treaty, by which the reciprocal rights of the contracting 
parties should be fixed, could not be found. The oegociators 
took leave of Goa and joined their master, Kaou-chang, who 
was pleased to reward Rosa, by bestowing on him the hon- 
orary dignity of a Mandarin. The ci-devant envoy wore this 
distinctive robe, with embroidered emblems belonging to his 
class, at Macao on Court days, i. e. on the birth-day of a 
King or a Queen of Portugal, an occasion, at which the prin- 
cipal natural subjects and respectable foreigners, residing in 
the place, were in the habit of calling at the Governor's 
house, to congratulate, as it were, in his presence, his royal 
master or mistress. 



Actual state of Trade at Macao. 



We have in a circuitous tour, visited the principal places 
in Asia and the East Indies, at which the settlers of Macao 
were wont to trade, and to draw an immense profit fix)m, by 
mutual exchange of goods. Let us now throw a glance at 
what remains, not of the ancient splendor, for that is nearly 
gone, but at the cheering hope, that the settlement may 
once more rise into notice. In 1831, the whole shipping 
consisted of sixteen ships, measuring 5331 English tons; in 
1834, of fifteen ships, making 4185 tons. The greater part 
of the ship owners are destitute of sufficient means to lay in 
a suitable cargo, and to bear the charges and expenses of long 
voyages. Many vessels are therefore loaded in part by Chi- 
nese adventurers to Singapore, Batavia, Malacca, Pulope- 
nang, Calcutta, Bombay, Damaun, Mauritius, &c. This ac- 
commodation is mutual, for though the freight is rather high, 
the property on board a Portuguese ship, is considered safer 
than in a Junk. Chinese and Macao merchants send also to 
the above mentioned places, China^produce on board British 
ships, because the fireight is cheaper, and the duty in British 
ports ten per cent, less, than if the goods were unloaded firom 
17 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 

a Portuguese vessel. So material a difference, opertites 
against the shipping business of Macao, particularly on the 
exportations. To secure the imports, a strong inducement is 
now held out. The tariff of 1784, regulating the imports on 
all sorts of merchandise, has suffered a judicious amendment.* 
Were it possible for ship-owners to manage their expenses so 
as to be rewarded by a freight equal to that of English, Chi- 
i^ese, settled abroad, would be induced to make the greater 
part of their remittance, by way of Macao, from whence an 
easy conveyance for goods to Canton and other places is open 
by what is called the inner passage. All sorts of merchan- 
dise may be imported, except opium, sulphur, brass and salt; 
saltpetre must be bought by a merchant commissioned for 
that trade : neither is it allowed to export gold, silver, yellow 
and white copper, iron and nails. 

It would be odious to recite any of the instances zealous 
merchants of Macao, have inscribed on records, whenever a 
proposal was made to treat foreigners as fellow subjects, but 
it gives us pleasure to transcribe a few observations made to 
Count de Sandomil, on his commanding the Senate not to 
accept Yung-ching's offer to make Macao the centre of all 
foreign tr^de, with permission to levy duties on imports. 
They are contained in a letter, dated 20th December, 173^, 
and run thus : " Though some may presume that the resi- 
dence of foreigners might be the cause of mischief and dan- 
ger to the city, those, who have more experience, are of 
opinion, that their establishment in the town can never be 
prejudicial, on the contrary, greatly advantageous, for it is 
certain, that no place can be rich and opulent, but by means 
of commerce." Notwithstanding, regulations never to admit 
strangers, have been solicited, obtained and renewed. Igno- 
rance drew up the petitions, and ministers unacquainted thea 
with the rudiments of sound political economy, were misled 
by sophistical and captious arguments. Ccmimon sense is 
now progressing all over the earth ; and no longer ought weB 
informed men to feel reluctance at foreigners partaking in the 
commercial privileges which the natural subjects of Portugal 
are favored with. This equality will create respectable coo- 

* ComiQll J. R. MorriMm'» Chinese Commtreial Guide. Caatoli, 1634, 

page 25. " Arrangements of trade at Macao/' — and page 42. '< Datiefl on 
gpodi at Macao." 



Digitized. 



I by Google 



131 

nejuons) &nds, and credit ; it will extend shipping and trade^ 
give employment to good and active people, and be a check 
on mendicity and misery. 

Should ever cosmopolite sentiments like these be patron* 
ized, Macao may perhaps become the emporium of a trad«, 
less honorable to be sure, but equally astonishing with that of 
Japan ; we allude to opium. Of this narcotic drug, which 
enfeebles the faculties, both of mind and body, a few chests 
were imported (1720) from the coast of Coromandel. The 
demand for it growing yearly, the government of Goa strove 
to secure to Macao the exclusive. market; but instead of 
affording conveniencies, prohibitions were issued, against 
taking opium on freight, or buying it from the English and 
French, who, roving in their ships among the islands, were 
forced tp sell to the Chinese at such a rate, that the- pfia^ 
of opium at Macao, became quite dull, l^guid, and unprofit* 
able. The quality was for some time very unequal ; in 1735, 
one $ort fetched only 70 taels, another 225 taels, per p^QuL 
Thi& disadvantage ceased, when the British company resolv- 
ed tp take it under their own control. A further ^Qcour- 
a^ement to speculation was in train, for the company limited 
about fifty years ago the manufaetore of Patn^ and Benares 
to 9. httle more than four thousand chests. The greatest part 
of it came to Macao : the ships earned a good freight, and 
the city, import-duties to no mean extent. 

Had liberal measures been pursued at the time when the 
Upglish company could no longer check the manufacture of 
opium in India, my quantity might now be landed at Macapi 
b^t about twenty years ago, the abuse of individual influence 
strained every nerve to compel foreign dealers in that drug, to 
submit to restrictions, to which they neither could nor would 
submit* The scheme failed. A convenient harbor wals found 
at Lintio, an i3laDd where ships riding at anchor frpm l^t 
April, 1830, to 1st April, 1831, served as deposits far no 
h^ss than 92,591 chests of Patna, Benares and lifalacaa. 
From Ut April, 1833, to 1st April, 1834, there were deliv^ 
nfA from the ships at Lintin, 19,781 chests, paid with l^r 
0569^40 dollars- To this great stock of 1830, j«3t,mentioia* 
ed, we have to add an importation to Macao, of 1,883 1-4 
cbi^sts of th» same kind. The duty raised op th^m at 16 



Digitized by 



Google 



132 

taels per chest, besides a few fractional charges, amounted 

to 30,132 taels. 

On other items of trade were levied, 39,051 taels. 



So that the income from Custom House was 69,183 taels. 
In 1834, the receipts on 3,283 " chests of opium at 8 taels 
per chest, with a few fractional charges, produced, 

Taels, 26,536,160 
Other items, 48,747,453 



Taels, 75,283,613 



When Macao merchants were in the habit of buying at 
Canton, their investments, they had learnt that the settlement 
of Imperial duties at that place subjected them to tedious 
discussions, intolerable impositions, and dilatory despatch at 
Ihe season in which the owners were anxious to get their 
ships to sea : for that reason the merchants bethought them- 
selves of reverting to a practice, which their ancestors had 
with safety pursued. In a preceding page we have showed 
that the Chinese brought to Macao and delivered to the early 
settlers, cargoes, which had been contracted for. This way 
of doing business, was, about the year 1800, recurred to, be- 
cause several Chinese adventurers, men of property and 
credit, or associated with one or another of the Hong mer- 
chants at Canton, had fixed their residence at Macao. De- 
serving confidence, the Portuguese were induced to deal with 
men, fi*om whom it was reasonable to expect, that cargoes 
might be furnished at the difference of duties, which are im- 
posed on goods sent to Macao, from those heavier ones ex- 
acted by the Mandarins on shipments to Whampoa. 

On Portuguese ships from Europe, though they may be 
numbered, the Hoppo charges, for the first class, 250 taels, 
for the second 240, and for the third 170 taels. . Such ves- 
seils have, besides, to pay a Hong merchant at Canton a 
fee, termed by the Portuguese HanUtagem^ varying by a 
specific agreement, from about 200 dollars on a vessel of 200 
tons, to 3,500 dollars and upwards, of 500 tons or larger 
size. 

We shall, for the sake of information, record a case, de- 
monstrating with what cautiousness the civil government of 



Digitized by 



Google 



133 

Macao must proceed in respect to Chinese property. In 
1718, a Chinese merchant bought atBatavia a vessel, loaded 
it, hoisted the Portuguese colors, and arrived at Macao. 
The Senate had intention to charge the cargo with duties, to 
which the owner refused to consent ; he offered his own 
terms, which were for the following reason acceded to. 
Having a pass of the Viceroy, the Chinese may, it was argued, 
strike the Portuguese and hoist the Chinese flag under which 
the vessel may enter the port — "an act that neither the 
Senate nor the Captain general, can oppose, for we (the Por- 
tuguese,) are living in the limd of the Emperor ; nor can 
the Senate, from the intimation in 1717, of the will of Kang- 
he, lay any duties on other ships than their own." 



Digitized by 



Google 



III. SuBtJWAN Sptti^ements. 
Preliminary. 



We shall now endeavor to trace, as far as our collected 
scanty means will assist us, the history of the habitations, 
settlements and pleasure grounds, which the Portuguese of 
Macao, are still claiming as their lawful right on the adjacent 
islands. To introduce some order and clearness into this 
obscure and bewildered subject, the author has determined to 
insert in the Appendix,* a Plan of Macao, apparently the 
most ancient in existence. That the engineer who undertook 
to produce the outlines of the place, and its environs never 
put his foot on shore is evident from his having drawn the 
streets at right angles, whereas by the configuration of the 
soil itself, they must necessarily run in crooked and distorted 
directions, and from hemming in a part of the city by a 
Wall, which, crossing hillocks and a dale, connects the con- 
vent of St. Francis with the fort Monte. This draught is 
copied from a work, the title of which, is transcribed at the 
bottom of the page.f We have preferred it to the more 
elaborate delineations, already mentioned, of Mr. Agote, a 
Spanish, and Mr. De Gui^nes, a French gentleman, and to 
that of 1808, of J. B. Fonceica, because it comprehends a 
ranse of hills and mounts, at the slope of which individuals 
of Macao formerly displayed their feats of rural activity. 
Not to clog the lithographic copy with names at full length, 

• No. IX. 

t Hiftor. Beschr. der Reizea VIII. Deel, €. Grayenhage, 1749. " His- 
torical deieription of the Trarelfl." 



Digitized by 



Google 



1S5 

a numerical series is substituted and adapted to the places of 
Which the denominations are removed to the bottom of the 
sheet. In the harbor^ is the once famous Green Isle, (No» 11) 
at a dhort distance from the town ; passing to the opposite 
bank of the rirer, a ridge of hills presents itself. The Por- 
tuguese of Macao call it Lapa ; Horsburgh in his chart, 
Tweerlien^shan, and Patera island, the etymology of wbkh 
we safely deduce from llha dos Padres, which means Priests* 
Island, as designated in the old map, owing to a piece of 
land at the south-eastern extremity of Lapa cultivated by 
Jesuits, and some other parts of the island by Dominican and 
Augustine friars. By orders of an Emperor, the south-east- 
en) part was assigned for a burying ground to a Portugue^ 
Jesuit, who had rendered service to the Chinese government. 
His spiritual brethren took possession of it 1645, and began 
to knprove the waste land. The progress was^ such that in 
less than ten years the place went by the name of Priests* 
Island, an epithet it bore at the time the plan of Macao was 
drawn, probably in 1655, during the short residence of the 
Dutch ambassadors frotn Batavia, at Cantcm in their way to 
Peking : a surmke confirmed by the circumstance, that it 
belongs ta the historical description of their voyage in China. 

Comparing this map with that which a young friend M|. 
W. Brampton delineated in 1834, the reader will perceive a 
striking difference of extent aaad execution in the tworela^- - 
tive designs.* 

The Senate maintains that the Pc^uguese anciently lorded 
it over Lapa, Ribeira grande e pequena, Oitem and Bugios ; 
a right which the Portuguese never were entitled to exercise, 
the Mandarins pretend ; to llha verde the city does not lay 
ackdm. 



Gaeen Island. 



The aspect of the Island could not be inviting. It was a 
rock with heaps of stone, a dreary wilderness where vaga- 
bondsy thieves, deserters, &c. bad coUected together. The 

* Appendix, No. X. 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 

ground could be cleared and rendered thriving only by the 
perseverance of men, who would willingly and ceaselessly 
attend to its advancement, and who were opulent enough to 
provide means for its ulterior improvement. A spirited body 
of missionaries, the Jesuits, undertook to civilize this sav^age 
spot of nature. They had instituted at Macao a Seminary 
and a College for the purpose of propagating the gospel prin- 
cipally in Japan and China. At this celebrated seat of learn- 
ing, the number of Professors, Students, &c. was on a con- 
stant increase, «and the means of accommodating them all 
very limited, when Alexander Valignano, Visitor and Valen- 
tino Carvalho, Rector of the College at St. Paul, began in 
1603 and 1604, to introduce themselves in this barren island. 
A few earthen huts were erected, and a chapel built. This 
edifice some Chinese mistook for a fort, which was to serve 
in the execution of a scheme the Jesuits had, it was rumored,, 
conceived, of making themselves masters of China. Two 
orders of mendicant friars, inveterate champions, had fallen 
out in a violent strife about the mysterious doctrine of the 
immaculate virgin, a nice subject, settled by the faith of or- 
thodox christians. Of the combatants, one party was coun- 
tenanced by the Vicar of the Bishopric, and the other by the 
Rector of the Jesuits. The citizens having espoused this 
obsolete scholastic cant, the weakest or the most wicked 
hinted to ignorant and credulous Chinese, that their country 
was on the eve of being invaded and revolutionized by the 
Jesuits, who, possessed many religious institutions and great 
influence : to facilitate this project, foreign aid from Goa and 
Japan was expected. This stale fable, though in every res- 
pect contemptible, unsettled the untutored mind, and caused 
the thoughtless, headed by a Saracen,* a military officer, then 
quartered with his cohort at Macao, to rush (1606) over to 
the island, lay it waste and demolish the place of Christian 
worship. This profanation, naturally enough, incensed the 
Christians with enthusiastic zeal ; they hurried over to assist, 
avenged the insult, and slew the commander. His fate did 

* Some authors maintain, that the Saracens or Mahometans came in the 
VlJIth, others in the Xllth century as auxiliaries to China : their loyalty 
was so satisfactory, that permission was granted for them to remain. At 
the end of four venerations they were indiscriminately admitted with the 
Chinese to all public offices. 



Digitized by 



Google 



137 

not assuage their exalted fury ; it abated at the approach of 
the Mandarin of Heang-shan, who fortunately calmed their 
agitated passions. He granted to the Jesuits permission to 
remain on the island, but raised a stone tablet, declaring in 
the vernacular language, that it constituted an integral part 
of the Empire. 

The Tsung-tuh of the provinces, hearing of this foul rumor, 
suspended by heavy penalties, all intercourse with Macao, and 
communicated the news to Wan-leih ; meanwhile he ordered 
V the captain general of the province, to lay siege to Macao 
by sea and land, invade and destroy it. The commander 
was, happily, a man who would not commit himself by an 
Undertaking of such importance, before he had fully ascer- 
tained the truth or falsehood of the accusation. His spies 
informed him, that Macao had no thought of hostility, but that 
the inhabitants were at daggers^drawing on account of some 
private dispute. A Mandarin who had been living on inti- 
mate terms with the Jesuits at Peking, and a deputation of 
seven respectable citizens from Macao, to Shaou-king-foo, 
obliterated at last from the mind of the Viceroy all malicious 
suspicion; permission was granted to the Chinese to live 
among and trade with the Portuguese of Macao. 

The Jesuits had the probity to acknowledge in an official 
document, (1617) that the use of it " depends on the good 
will and high pleasure of the King of China, and his minis- 
ters." This island offered to the inmates and pupils of the 
college, room for decent recreations ; to the sick, persecuted 
or exhausted laborers in the vineyard of Christ, a retreat, a 
place of safety and devotion, and of rural occupation. In, 
the above mentioned manuscript, drawn up by the order 9( 
Francis Vieira, Visitor, the author announces, that a pie^e of 
the cultivated soil produced already ananas, figs, peaches, 
&c., and promised an increasing harvest, from a variety of 
trees, that had been planted, or were about to be introduced. 
No pains it seems, were taken to naturalize exotic trees : this 
warrants surely, the supposition that many of the indigenous 
trees, which bring forth a variety of excellent and whole- 
some firuits had been carefully transplanted, and domesticated. 
The rising, poorer tracts were left to be stored by nature 
herself with a species of pine and shrubs proper for fuel. 
Luxuriant vegetables grow in China ; they were of course 
18 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 

not neglected, however epicures would have been at a loss 
to gratify their appetite, either with potatoes, green peas, 
cauliflower, or other herbacious dainties, luxuries which be* 
gan sixty or seventy years ago, to adorn the tables of foreign- 
ers : by an horticular taste, and the industry of a few gentle- 
men in the Dutch East India Company's service, this culture 
was first introduced in China. This island was, De Guignes 
assures us, a most convenient place for smuggling priests 
into the country. Might they not have done more good by 
remaining where they were bom ? If it be true, that in 1832 
" millions of English subjects were living in total alienation 
from the sanctions and comforts of religion," surely occupa- 
tions for priests could not be wanting in Europe two or three 
centuries ago.* 

The Jesuits had been more than one hundred and fifty 
years in possession of this estate, when a thunder-bolt hurled 
from the Court of Lisbon, aiming at their total destmctron, 
came in the shape of a law, dated dd September, 1759. By 
this law, Joseph I. King of Portugal, " declared the members 
of the society of Jesus, to be notorious rebels, traitors, ag- 
gressors, and commanded that they shall be had, held, and 
reputed as such, * * * that they shall totally be extinguish- 
ed in all the realms and dominions of Portugal * * * that 
neither verbal or written communication shall be kept up 
with them." In obedience to this law, and by order of Man- 
oel de Saldanha de Albuquerque, Count d'Ega, Viceroy of 
India, the Jesuits were in 1762, transported from Macao to 
Goa. Like the Templars, the Jesuits were stripped of every 
thing they owned. Even a proclamation intimated, that 
every body shall in the course of twenty days, under penalty 
of forfeiting all he owns, give in the presence of the Gover- 
nor and the municipal Judges, an account of the ready money, 
gold, silver, moveables, effects, he may have borrowed firom 

* While so man^ thotumndfl are annually raised by vohintary subscription 
to send forth misBionariesinto the remotest comers of the world, we should 
dole out the revenue of the national church in so unequal a manner, 
that more than 4000 of hs districts are unable to support a minister in the 
decent habits and respectability of a gentleman. And that while we have 
millions at home, who are living in total alienation from the sanctions and 
comforts of religion, we should " sow besides all waters,*' except those, 
whose borders have the first claim fer our culture. — Edinhargk R&mnOf 
Ab. CXL 207.— Lord Henley on Church Reform. 



Digitized by 



Google 



139 

the Jesuits on good faith, on bonds or mortgage. The com'* 
maod was enforced, but no part of the confiscated property 
used, it appears, to pay debts, which the Jesuits had con- 
tracted at Macao. One of the principal citizens, to whom 
the Colleges of St. Paul and St. Joseph were owing more 
' than 6,000 taels, submitted, for the sake of having a kind of 
security to become the tenant of Green island. Its care and 
conservation he entrusted by a legal agreement, drawn up on 
the 15th December, 1763, and signed by the concerned to a 
man, whom the junto of royal revenue at Macao had ap- 
pointed. By this deed we are informed, that a chapel, a 
vestry, a gallery leading to the choir, an habitation next to 
the refectory with their appurtenances most minutely detailed, 
were in existence ; no mention is made either of a college, 
observatory, or botanic garden. This inventory was to serve 
for a rule, by v/hich the gentleman who might become the 
owner of the island, should at any time restore the premises 
to the King of Portugal, were a reversion ever called for. 
In 1785, the creditor being at Goa, consented, as on authen- 
tic records, to remain with the island for 6,147 taels, 346 
cash, a sum the Jesuits were owing him, and as nobody, at a 
posterior public auction at Macao, offered any thing for the 
property, orders dated Goa, 14th April, 1766, directed the 
Senate and its adjunct, to give up the Island to Siamo Vi- 
cente Rosa, whose claim on the two colleges was thus can- 
celled. 

He, S. V. Rosa, and the next heir to the proprietary kept 
it for some time m repair, neatness and order; twice a 
week any person of respectability, might with permission, 
spend a day in amusement on the island. At length, how- 
ever, in Ueu of laying out some money for the stopping of an 
unavoidable decay, the buildings were broken down, and the 
materials sold : nature set at liberty, changed the epithet of 
the Green, to that of Desert Island. For want of protection, 
Chinese aided in delapidating the estate, and accelerated the 
devastation. At last, men of sensibility pitied the degraded 
state to which the island was reduced : the Professors and 
Priests at the Royal College of St. Joseph, became in 1828, 
the owners, at the cost of 2,000 dollars, I am told. They 
undertook to rescue this famous rock, once more from its 
waste solitude ; they adorned the island with a chapel, they 



Digitized by 



Google 



140 

baih a house, containing a hall for the reception of strangers, 
and chambers for the accommodation of the Professors, who 
may wish to spend in the country a part of the vacation, 
which begins in the middle of August, and finishes on the 1st 
of October. A room was constructed for the overseer, and 
cabins for the people, who are employed in watching and 
improving the estate. In the premises are shelters for do- 
mestic quadrupeds, poultry, pigeons, &c.; a spacious open 
area is left in the middle ; on the high ground many pine 
trees are planted ; in more conspicuous spots fruit trees ; 
of the better soil one part is turned to advantage by cultivat- 
ing vegetables ; another affords to young animals a grazing 
plot. To protect the existing and future plantations from the 
destructive influence of sea-water, the island must, as it an- 
ciently was, be encircled by a wall high enough to hinder the 
flood from dashing over it. About two-thirds of that work 
was,(1834) already done: the remaining will be finished soon ; 
then the rock will have to contend only against the tyfoons 
and hurricanes. Over against the principal house, is a key, 
by which you land ; to the southward of it, a basin, forming 
a shelter for boats : it has a gate and can be locked. On 
the area between the landing place and the dwelling house, 
many pagoda-trees are arranged. Their speedy and lofty 
growth, their wide and bushy branches, will in the course of- 
a few years, create a cool, refreshing and delightful grove or 
bower, to the great comfort of visitors. The maintenance 
of Ml Inspector and five slave-boys at least, entrusted with the 
guardianship, cleanness and culture of the island, cost St. 
Joseph twice as much, as the produce obtained from the 
land is worth : expenses which the royal college submit to 
because it wants a place for innocent amusements and re- 
creation. 



, OlTEM OR OlTENG. 



In a preceding page, we mentioned that an Emperor of 
China honored the memory of a missionary for his having 
successfully employed himself in the discharge of public 9er- 
vice, by assigning for the reception of his relics a distinct 



Digitized by 



Google 



141 

place. To that end, despatches, (we quote from an- official 
manuscript,) were directed from the supreme government of 
Canton, to a subaltern civil officer, that he might propose, 

il 644) for the interment of the meritorious Portuguese Jesuit 
ohn Rodrigues, a place on the Lapa, nearly opposite to the 
Green Island. The Jesuits, desiring to acquire a spot of a 
more promising nature, obtained an escheated waste land, the 
compass of which is estimated to have been more than four 
times that of Green Island, commencing at the foot of a moun- 
tain in the south-eastern part of the range of Lapa, denomi- 
nated Oitem, and expanding itself to the very verge of the 
sea. It is at a short distance from the Bar-fort, at the en- 
trance of the harbor, and almost faces Monkey island. A 
stream of fresh water rushing from the top of an adjacent hill, 
crosses the region and empties itself into the river. If Oitem 
did not extend to Ribeira grande, the distance between them 
was inconsiderable. Of this grant, Gaspar d'Amaral, Rector 
of the college at St. Paul, took possession by planting four 
poles, bearing for inscription, ''this place has been given by 
the King of China to the Priests at St. Paul for their burying 
ground." These poles having been maliciously torn up, a 
cross on a mount, laying to the eastward of the sea-shore, 
was raised, but no other work undertaken till Sambiagi, or 
Sambiasi in 1645, arrived from Nanking with the Emperor's 
signature to his royal grant. Will it be amiss to suppose, 
that Jesuits employed in proportion, as much perseverance, 
industiy and property in the amelioration of this new acquisi- 
tion, as they had for nearly fifty years, bestowed upon a des- 
ert rock, the epithet of which had been deservedly changed 
into that of Green Isle ? The heaps of stone ranged along 
the sea-coast, and some remains of walls, though dead wit- 
nesses, bear testimony of their having formerly contributed to 
the comfort of men and animals. On the mount where the 
cross had been raised, a chapel no doubt, offered a conven- 
ient place for worshipping God : the ruins still to' be seen at 
the south-eastern extremity of Lapa, may be those of the 
edifice. In 1726, a lay-brother lived on the settlement, 
'' though at the peril of his life," Caelanobopes, a Jesuit, ex- 
presses it in his reply to a letter directed to the college of St. 
Paul, by the Senate's entreating the Jesuits not to give up 
Oitem ; they were recommended to despise the clamor of 



Digitized by 



GooQle 



142 

the populace, aad to oppose steadily the intrigues of petty 
Mandarins. Constant vexations, the unproductiveoess of the 
soil, and expenses, inclined the Jesuits to transfer Oitem to 
any body* The support of a Lay-brother and twelve slave 
boys, the charges for a boat, and the repair of the wall, which 
surrounded the habitations of the Jesuits on Oitem, demanded 
a yearly out-lay of 215 taels, the value of what the place 
could in a year produce, did not amount to thirty taels. Be- 
sides, it was often visited by thieves, the slaves occasionally 
revolted, and by the distance from the college, the reputation 
of the lay-brother might be in danger. These and other ar- 
guments the Jesuits laid before the Vice-provincial, request- 
ing him to decide, whether Oitem was to be entrusted to a 
lay-man, paid as factor and guard of the sepulchre. In their 
representation, they allege that the Augustines and others, 
who own6d settlements on the island, had abandoned them 
for less powerful reasons. The rest of the communication 
and the date is wanting, but it may, by comparing this with 
other manuscripts of the Jesuits, be conjectured from the au- 
tography that it was written in the years between 1737 and 
1746. The Jesuits at last abandoned Oitem, but at what 
time, I have not been able to trace. The scene of their per- 
severing, but ill requited activity, presents actually to the 
eyes of a stranger, nothing more than a few miserable huts, 
and a rice field iu'the valley of Oitem. 



Sundry Lodges. 



A few cursory hints, collected in turning over old manu- 
scripts, announcing that the Dominicans and Augustines had 
once settlements on neighboring islands, made us entertain the 
hope, that the archives of their respective convents might 
furnish the name of the place, the title to it, the use made of 
it, the reasons why surrendered, the time when it was given 
up, but alas ! these topics could not be solved by the con- 
vents. The actual regents, declared, and positively assured 
the friends who applied in favor of the author, for leave to 
have a glance at their papers, that such records were not in 
existence. Where hist(»rical facts are wanting, tradition may 



Digitized by 



Google 



143 

be allowed to step in. Having turned the south-eastern 
point of Lapa, we enter in a broad river, running between it and 
Macao. A beach, a shore, or rather a valley to the left, 
nearly bordering on Oitem, and opposite to the Bar-fort bears 
the name ofRibeira grande. It was occupied some time or 
another by inhabitants of Macao. Old people assert, having 
heard it said, that from a printed work a rumor went about, 
that a Portuguese lady, had by her last will bequeathed her 
estate on Ribeira grande, to the convent of St. Domingo. — 
The ulterior prolongation of this valley, goes by the name of 
Ribeira pequena : il terminates, we may say, at the foot of 
the mountain, which faces the Chinese old Pagod, when we 
proceed in our way to the Bar-fort. Report asserts, that a 
chapel once stood on the Lapa : if this be true, the land 
about it might have been occupied by the Augustines. 
Monkey Island^ — " ilhados bugios" — ^was granted to a Jesuit, 
Manoel Pereira, who entered China, (1672.) Anthony 
Mesquita Pimentel, Captain general of Macao, (1685) had a 
piece of ground in the neighborhood of the town. At what 
time and in what manner Maria Nunes came to the spot that 
bears her name, and Jorge Ribeira to his, I have not the least 
idea. Some of the settlements proving altogether unprofita- 
ble were left ; others for want of means to cultivate 'and 
protect them. In 1711, the Senate in a letter to Joseph 
Pereira complains, saying, "the Mandarin of Heang-shan 
never leaves off teazing us with orders to evacuate our settle- 
ments, and pays no attention to the chops, which the holders 
present to him ; his emissaries refuse likewise, to take any 
notice of them." The Senate entreats his Paternity to inform 
the Tsung-tuh of the intolerable vexations the public officers are 
constantly haunted with. At last from a letter of 1764, to the 
supreme government at Goa, we learn, " that the gardens and 
country houses, which the inhabitants formerly owned on the 
other side of the river, had in consequence of misfortune and 
- ruin of the occupants been abandoned and entirely left in the 
hands of the Chinese." 

Ribeira grande is still a favorite shore, to which the Por- 
tuguese resort for the sake of the refreshing stream that crosses 
it ; of the ascending and descending hills for bodily exercise ; 
of taking in company of a few select friends, a frugal meal in 
a shade spread by nature, or under a tent more or less elegant. 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 

Forty years ago foreigners sought recreation at this and other 
parts of Lapa ; they usually spent a day in walking, talking, 
eating, drinking and rational amusements. A body of super- 
cargoes, — commercial representatives — of six different nations 
or privileged companies, endeavored to keep up mutual har- 
mony and social affection, by making up parties to this or that 
place, in the environs of their residence ; the monopolies, be- 
ing by degrees extinguished, their respective servants dispers- 
ed of course. At present travellers now and then, for gratify- 
ing their curio!aty visit Lapa ; the Portuguese are permitted, 
it appears, to loiter in all directions of the island from the riv* 
er to the sea : and even northerly so far as Passang, a place 
in front of Casa Branca on the opposite side of the river. 



Digitized by 



Google 



ROMAN CATHOUC CHURCH AND MISSIONS 
IN CHINA. 



19 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



PRELIMINARY. 



The Cross, and greedy merchants came from India, by way 
of Malacca to China, where misssionary bsinuations proved 
less efficient, than soothing mercantile language and liberal 
offerings on the bottomless altar of self interest. They open- 
ed to the Portuguese a mart on a desert island, Macao, and 
an asylum for Roman apostles. The very &st were two 
Jesuits, in company with the envoy, Gil Goys, Francis Pe- 
res, and Manoel Teixeira ; the former had (1565) on the 
.skirt'of a hill now called Monte, an habitation. Their num- 
ber increased gradually ; some of them went in Portuguese 
ships to Canton, as chaplains. One of them succeeded in 
so ensnaring a youth, that he consented to desert his school, 
and clandestinely to proceed with his seducer to Macao* 
This mischief having been detected, the tutor of the boy, and 
his relations demanded protection of the Mandarins, and 
claimed the restitution of the youth who was kidnapped. 
Menaces of using compulsory means had effect. The mat- 
ter was settled, but a stamp of villany adhered to a set of 
men, who would sanction deeds of acknowledged iniquity.* 
The provoked feelings had not subsided when a Jesuit, Miguel 

* Nuper enim, cum alins e nostro ordine eo (Canton) se, ad sacra ex 
more naricatoribiui per mmdiniamm dies procnranda, contnlinet, ad 
Chriflti fi£m adolescentulnm profani Simnlacroruni saoerdotie diacipulamy 
ita pellezerat nt rolentam in Amacaenae opjudum, sed clam abouxerit. 
Id aubodoratos magiater apud magUi.trata8 graviter queatua eat, effecitque, 
adnitentibna etiam adoleacentuli propin^uia, nt magiatratua enm Ti eztor- 
qneient, non aine magna infamia, qoaai mails artibus pneros seducerent 
patribosque subdueerent De Ckri, Etp, ajpnA Sums Jhitii* I<io TrU 
gmlio. 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 

Ruggiero bent his mind upon procuring for religion, if possi- 
ble, the protection of a powerful Mandarin. During his stay 
at Canton (1581) as chaplain, he insinuated himself into the 
affections of a sea-prefect. In 1582, Ruggiero proceeded in 
the capacity of mterpreter with the Portuguese judge, Penella 
to Shaou-king-foo, where the Tsung-tuh resided. To him, 
a few months later Ruggiero and Paccio, (not Passio) of 
them we shall further speak hereafter — ^presented an elegant 
pendulum, and a triangular prism ; they then obtained leave 
to inhabit a Chinese temple in the very provincial cs^pital. 
From thence spread gradually a missionary society, which 
niight probably have baptized the whole of China, and intro^ 
duced a species of Christianity,* had the Popes been wise 
enough not to bring in competition with the Jesuits, the men- 
dicant Monks, and other ambitious collaborators. 



RoBUN Catholic Chubch at Macao. 



That the subsequent exposition of the Church system may 
be rendered more intelligible, we shall begin with a short des- 
cription of the patronage. 

The Klng^s patronage. The Kings of Portugal pretend, 
in virtue of bulls of Gregory XIII, and Clement VIII, that 
no ecclesiastic shall pass from Europe to Asia, but by way 
of Lisbon, and with the permission of the Court, a favor it 
had in its power to grant or refuse. This is the first point of 
a privilege, denominated the King's patronage, — " e Real 
padreado ;" — ^the next, that the Sovereigns of Portugal have 
a right to build churches, and govern those which exist with- 
in the limits of their dominions, by missionaries and Bishops, 
not only, but also to assign laborers and pastors to such 
churches as may be erected any where in the heathen-world 

*To convince onnelves that the moral principles of Christianity, hsdhy 
the metaphysical suhtilities of the Jesuits, been vastly relaxed, letters writ- 
ten in 1656, by Blaise Pascal— 10 d vn Provmetof— and 6 aux R. R. P. P. 
JeauiteM-—mBLj he read in Oeuyres de Blaise Pascal T. 1. Or in the XII. 
Satire de Boileau Despr6anz. 



Digitized by 



Google 



149 

of Asia, independent of Portugal. From the time of Gregory 
XIII. to that of Innocent XII. these pretensions had not been 
brought to a test : but no sooner had Innocent decided to 
send Apostolic vicars to Asia, than Peter II. King of Portu- 
gal, protested against their mission, pretending that they could 
without his consent, exercise no such a function in India. 
This question was of a delicate nature : its resolution implied 
restrictions on the patronage of the Kings of Portugal, or on 
the Pope's fullness of prerogative to send '< motu proprio,'' 
to any parts of the world, apostles of the Gospeb To decide 
this serious doubt, Peter II. was invited by the Pontiff to 
send an Ambassador, prepared to produce such documents ai» 
His Majesty may think conducive to substantiate his preten- 
sion to the patronage. The Envoy adduced five arguments, 
which were, (1680) examined by a congregation of Cardinals, 
appointed by Innocent XII. The Cardinals after a full scru- 
tiny, perceived, 1st, that the Papal Bulls quoted by the Por- 
tuguese Ambassador, recorded no trace that the spiritual gov- 
ernment of all Asia ever was conceded to any Sovereign of 
Portugal ; they proved merely, that the King had the right 
to exercise his patronage in sJl those churches which he had 
endowed, still supported and protected. 2d, To hinder 
Priests from passing by way of the Phillippine Islands to 
Asia, Pontiffs had commanded that none should proceed thither 
without a previous license firom the Court of Lisbon, but 
since the Spaniards, Dutch, English, French, and Danes had 
settlements in India, Urban VIII. revoked, as superfluous, 
the Bulls of Gregory XIII. and others, allowing missionaries 
to proceed to Asia by any way most convenient to them. 
3d, It was inadmissible the King should govern christian 
churches in pagan countries, where he could give them no 
protection. 4th, The jurisdiction of the Primate of Portu- 
guese India, was not in the least infringed by the Pope send- 
ing missionaries to any part of Asia. 5th, The Arch-bish- 
ops and Bishops, in virtue of a decree of the congregation of 
propaganda fide, issued 7th March, 1633, may nominate 
Bishops — " in partibus infidelium" — ^to be confirmed by his 
Holiness. Upon this summary, the Cardinals decided the 
3d and 23d September, 1680, ^^per delegc^umem Vtcarior- 
um apostolicorum non constare de dliqao prg'udicio juriJms 
Regum Portugalia illaiaj'^ words of the same import as those 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 

of a later deobion : ^^pratenium and privativum Regi$ PoT' 
t^aiio mu$ianario$ et titvlareM episcopoB in India design 
nmdi nuUa ratume nitiJ^ Jealous for the preservation of 
the Royal prerogative, an order (1688) was enacted at Lis- 
bon, that missionaries, to prevent being expelled from Asia, 
must pass through the Kingdom of Portugal, and take the' 
oath to the Universal patronage ; a decree the councellors 
of the Vatican opposed, by comipanding the very same year, 
that no Superior of the re^lar clergy shall suffer any of his 
subjects to take the oath ; an inhibition renewed in January, 
1733. Nevertheless, any Procurator of the missions, or 
missionary, whose residence shall be at Macao for any length 
of time, must for his own safety, disobey his Superiors and 
submit to the decree of Lisbon. 

Hierarchy. Hardly had a few Portuguese adventurers 

?)t a kind of footing at Macao, when Sebastian L King of 
6rtugal, a young, devout enthusiast, bethought himself of 
5 lacing by the nomination of Pius V. Melchior Cameiro, a 
esuit, at the head of the Church establishment. He arrived 
in 1568, and by permission of Gregory XIII. governed the 
church till 1581 : he died at Macao and was buried in the 
collegiate chdrch St. Paul. Sebastian solicited that Macao 
should be made a Bishop's see ; Gregory agreed (1575) to 
it, on condition that the King should provide the Cathedral 
with ornaments, vestments, plate, books, and other utensik, 
required by the Catholics for the splendor of that divine ser- 
vice, and that he should keep the buildings in repair ; in 
return, — ^private records assert, — ^the King should have the 
power to propose subjects, duly qualified for the government , 
of the new diocese, extending to the wall that crosses the 
isthmus of the peninsula. It actually comprehends, by the 
division of Innocent XII. the provinces of Kwang-tung, and 
Kwang*se, and the island Hae-nan. For more than one hun- 
dred and twenty years, the diocese was presided over by 
" Governor of the Bishoprick ;" they had neither the power 
of conferring holy orders, confirming, consecrating the oil used 
by the Catholics in baptism, confirmation, and extreme unction, 
or anointing Bishops ; nor the right to use the crosier, the 
ring and the pectoral cross, which are external signs of an 
episcopal dignity. 



Digitized by 



Google 



161 

A temporary vacanby in the Episcbpal see, is observable 
for more than a century, either, because the Kings of Portu- 
gal had omitted to propose subjects, or the Pontiffi refused 
their confirmation. At last, in 1691, a Church«man, John 
de Cazal,* succeeded to the Goyemors, with the authority of 
Bishop. ' This situation he filled forty-three years in a period 
of great temporal and spiritual tribulations. His salaiy was 
limited to six hundred taels, which the Senate obstinately 
refused to discharge,: till at length, (1732) they got an order 
fiK)m King John V. to bring it to account of the dbburse* 
ments made by the royal chest. The Bishop has actually 
two thousand taels, and a spacious palace, containing a chapel* 
Cazal expired 1734 : his body was interred with great pomp 
in the Cathedral. A Bishop has the power of appointing \as 
Vicar-general, and of filling vacant places in the secular 
hierarchy with such clergymen as he may deem worthy to be 
trusted with the duties of sacerdotal functions, but his prefix- 
ment must be submitted to the Court, and confirmed by his 
Majesty. After a lapse of nine years residence at Macao, 
Dm. John de Cazal instituted ^^ a Chapter," composed of 
five dignitaries, viz. a Dean, who bebg the highest dignity, 
presides over the Chapter, a Chanter, a Chief-treasurer, an 
Arch-deacon, and a School-master, " Mestre escola." These 
dignitaries must, in the course of eight days, reckoned from 
the demise of the Bishop, choose a Capitular-vicar, who re- 
mains the head of ecclesiastical aifiairs till the successor of thd 
departed has taken charge of the Bishoprick. The actual 
(1833) Capitular-vicar, it was decided at Goa, shall have 
500 taels ; as Vicar-general he has besides 200 taels. The 
salary of the Dean is 280 taelsr, the four subsequent dignita* 
ries enjoy each 240 taels. per annum. Next to these mem- 
bers, rank six Canons, two sub-canons, ^< meio conegos," six 
Chaplains, and two Masters of the ceremonies. Each Canoti 
has 200 taels, a sub-canon 100. The Chaplains and the 
Masters of the ceremonies are paid by the revenue of funds 
which the Chapter has at command. The three Curates, 
viz. the Canon of the Cathedral, the Vicar of St. Lawrence, 

*By a law of 3d January, 16U, the mOuop ttikeu the titls Duna; by 
another of 23d January, 1789, he takes that of £8ce2Ieii«y, aa honorary 
member of Hia Majesty's Council. PrivU, <2a JVofrreja, p. 38. 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 

and the Vicar of St. Anthony, have mdividually 120 taels, 
per annum. Adding for certain duties they attend to, per- 
quisites which they regularly cover, the situation of a Curate 
is sufficiently easy and comfortable. These items are en- 
larged by the salary of 1,000 taels, granted to the Bishop 
of Nanking; 600 taels to the church of St. Joseph, and re- 
pair of the buildings belonging to the royal college ; 240 taels 
to the Superior, and to each of the Professors, (the number 
of six, is not invariable ;) 150 taels for every Chinese semina- 
rist in the college, who may in all be twelve : further contri- 
bution to the Qollegiate church of St. Paul ; to the Convent of 
St. Augustine ; to parish churches, and to festivals and pro- 
cessions. In 1832, the whole hierarchical establishment cost 
the royal chest 8,273 taels. 

Expectant individuals of the secular clergy, '^ clerigos ex- 
travajgantes," are those, who as yet, have not been provided 
with an employment, office, or living in the diocese ; they 
amounted in 1833, to five Priests. These candidates deposit 
previously to their receiving holy orders, the sum of four 
hundred taels, designated by the word " Patrimony," in the 
hands of the TVeasurer of the Chapter, or give a security for 
the same, to the end that firom the revenue of the said capi- 
tal at 7 per cent, they may be able to appear decent in the 
eyes of the public. 

The congregational members of the royal college at St. 
Joseph, have their Superior at Lisbon ; these regular orders of 
St. Dominic, St. Augustine, St. Francis, de Assie, and the 
Nuns of St. Clare, are accountable to their respective Pro- 
vincials, residing in Goa; nevertheless the Bishop of Macao, 
exercises in certain cases, a sort of syndic magistracy over 
them all. The Episcopal see was vacated in 1828, by the 
demise of Dm. Fr. Francis de Na. Sra. da Luz Cochim. 
Some of his predecessors grasped at the exercise of tempo- 
ral power ; an ambition the Prince Regent of Portugal at 
last reproved, and gave in 1800, to the then rulmg Bishop, 
the fatherly admonition that " the Divine Master had author- 
ized his disciples only to preach and baptize." 

External rites. All those who believe in Christ, devoutly 
celebrate, in commemoration of the resurrection of Jesus, 
the Sunday, and yearly Christmas, Easterday, and Whit- 
suntide, each sect in its own way. Sullied, pious men thought, 



Digitized by 



Google 



159 

with original sin ; they easily apprehended that their thanks- 
givings and solicitations wanted to be commended to the 
Trinity in unity by some beloved inmate of heaven. Human 
individuals who by inspiration taught mankind revelation, and 
had bled as martyrs for the Christian religion, presented 
themselves as proper objects of veneration ; they were there- 
fore, by the primitive church, " elected by the votes of the 
whole people," and by consent of their congregational inspec- 
tors, presbyters or bishops, " raised to the rank of Saints."* 
In process of time, Pontiffi " motu proprio," increased con- 
siderably the number, declaring zealous evangelists endowed 
with the power of performing miracles, to be saints ; their 
names are inscribed on an Album ;t a catalogue of the can- 
onized. At the head of the celestial hierarchy presides the 
Holy Virgin, Queen of Heaven, invoked at Macao under 
twenty-eight different denominations* Beside eighteen fes- 
tivals distinctly consecrated to the devotion of the Holy Vir- 
gin, there are thirteen dedicated to Saints, male or female. 
These solemnities last nine, ten or thirteen days, and generally 
end by public religious processions. A flag, adorned with a 
conspicuous emblem, relative to the subject of veneration, is 
hoisted near the church : similar signals are occasionally per- 
ceived at several parishes and convents. Devout people re- 
sort to them every day and pray at the shrine of the Saint. 
Thirty holy days, " dias santos da guarda," are by command 
of the Roman See, annually and solemnly celebrated. To 
them, and the ceremonies above adverted to, we have still to 
add twenty-seven days, on which the faithful may hear mass, 
and now and then a sermon, in remembrance of the blessed 
partner in the heavenly glory. 

A free association of individuals, ruled by fixed regulations, 
tending to bind their members to the discharge of mutual 
aid, and acts of benevolence and charity, <^nstitutes a 
^< Brotherhood." At Macao the most ancient is that of our 
Lady of Mercy, '^ Na. Sra. da Misericordia." In imitation 
of it, several corporations have been organized, approved by 
the Bishop, and sanctioned by Popes. Actually, Macao can 
boast of eleven Brotherhoods, besides a few in embryo, 

* Luc. Ferr. BibL canonica verbum Sanetuf . 

t See BiU. can. verb. Sanetos. 
20 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 

wanting animation from the Pope, exclusively of the proto- 
type, " Misericordia." Eight of them are said to have pe- 
cuniary means more or less adequate, (arising from the inter- 
est of their respective funds,) to bear the annual expenses of 
the festive celebration of a peculiar saint. Each Brother- 
hood wears a distinctive vestment at public " Processions," 
of which we shall notice but a few. The Senate pays out of 
the royal chest the charges required for the festival and pro- 
cession of "our Lady of Conception," the patroness of the 
Kingdom — of those "of the Guardian Angel of the Kmg- 
dom" — ^ of St. John the Baptist," the patron of Macao, — 
and " of Corpus Christi day." This ceremony ought to be 
graced by the professed Knights of any of the military orders 
of Portugal, all of them clothed in the fall attire of their re- 
spective rank. The Brotherhood of our Lady of the Rosa- 
ry — " Na. Sra. do Rosario," — and that of our Lady of the 
Remedies—" Na. Sra. dos Remedios," — are remarkable for 
the elegance, splendor, and riches displayed on the Image 
carried in procession. This outward pomp of religion is 
cheered by an accompanying numerous clergy, who are 
chanting the ])raise of the Saint, during the airing it takes in 
a litter, laid on men's shoulders. A detachment of the bat- 
talion with military music joins the processions, some of which 
are saluted by a firing of twenty-one guns from the fort 
Monte.— (1833) 

Whether the first settlers at Macao, entrusted to St. An- 
thony at Lisbon, during the celebration of his feast, which 
lasts thirteen days, the government of the town, depends, it 
seems, on the uncertainty of traditional rumors ; that he was 
in 1725, enlisted as a soldier, and got in 1783, the rank of 
captain, is proved by existing documents. His procession 
is of a military cast. The Image, accompanied as late as 
1833, by the clergy, the governor, nobility, the battalion, 
and common people, was carried in a litter by four officers, 
and every morning fot thirteen days, a body of soldiers waited 
at his church to fire a salute. On the eve of the procession, 
the Senate sends 240 taels, — the annual pay of a captain, — 
which sum the curate uses for the support of neatness, de- 
cency and grace in the divine service. St. Anthony is a 
favorite Saint, principally with the sailor-population. At 
times the devotee falls on his knees, worships, and solicits 



Digitized 



j'by Google 



166 

the potent intercession of his Saint ; but no sooner does the 
claimant fancy, that the request has been either slighted, or 
the favour provokingly postponed, than the image is taken 
from the shelf, upbraided, beaten, ill-used: — likewise, no soon- 
er does the supplicant presume that the Saint has granted his 
protection, than the darling of the petitioner's heart is caress- 
ed and adored, tapers and incense burned before the image. 

We shall proceed from the amusing to the most seriously 
melancholic procession. The Sunday of the Cross, — " Do- 
mingo da Cruz," — ^to judge from the emblems exhibited in 
this procession, represents a transition from heathenism to 
Christianity. The Redeemer, an image of the size of a man, 
clad in a purple garment, wearing on his head a crown of 
thorns, and on his shoulder a heavy cross, bends one of his 
knees on the bottom of a bier, supported by eight of the most 
distinguished citizens. The bishop with the secular and 
regular clergy, the governor, ministers, nobility, the military, 
and the whole Roman Catholic population, it may be said, 
assist, deeply affected by a scene which prognosticates a di- 
vine sacrifice to be made for reconciling man with his Creator. 
Young children, — of both clear and dark shades — arrayed 
in fancy dresses of angels, with beautiful muslin wings at 
the shoulders, carry in a miniature shape, the instruments 
which were required at the crucifixion. This procession takes 
a range over almost the whole city ; when finished, the image 
of Christ is deposited in its shrine at the convent of St. 
Augustineu 

In 1593, the Senate reported to Philip I. King of Portu- 
gal, that Macao had '^ a Cathedral with two parishes, a Mis- 
ericordia with two hospitals and four religious bodies, viz : 
Augustines, Dominicans, Jesuits and Capuchms." Though 
for three centuries Christians would suffer no dead body to 
be interred near the habitations, yet a few hundred years 
later, a " burying ground," was assigned in the church-yard : 
next, at the entrance to the church ; and long before the 
epoch above mentioned, in the church itself. The nearer the 
corpse is laid to the high-altar, the shorter will be the deten- 
tion of the soul, credulous people beheve, in the purgatory ; 
but the grave becomes more expensive. How long shall the 
faithful living, be forced to inhale the miasma of putrifying 
bodies, at the very moment the august ceremonies of divine 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 

service are celebnted ? In imitation of the heathen, whose 
sacred places were a shelter to deserters and unrulj sabjectSi 
Honorius and Theodosius engrafted on the Christian churches 
a similar '^ Immunity," and Boniface IV. or according to 
Mosheim, Boni£su;e V. who died 625, ordered that nobody 
should be apprehended in any church. It is but a few years, 
since assassins, deserters, and other culprits found shelter in 
churches and convents at Macao. 

No individual of Jewish race, was ever recognized at Ma- 
cao ; no '^ Auto da fi&," therefore, ever soiled the place. Nine 
or ten years ago, monastic gentry and the Nuns of St. Clare, 
amused themselves by burning in effigy a man and a woman 
made of paper, personifying, no doubt, Herod and his daugh- 
ter, by whose entreaties St. John the Baptist lost his life : 
the '< bonfire" went off in the evening of St. John's day* 
Philanthropists cannot comprehend why the Jews should be 
hated. Could that nation act otherwise than it did? Had 
the prophecies not been fulfilled, what would have become of 
the work of redemption ? 



Objections to Chinese Recreations at Macao. 



Because the Albigenses had the hardihood to read and un- 
derstand the contents of the Scripture in a manner different 
from that of the vicar of Christ, they were by Crusaders ex- 
terminated-— and by the suggestion of a Canon, the patri- 
at-ch of the preaching firiars, St. Dominic, proposed to Inno- 
cent III. tlie erection of a tribunal, the duty of which should 
be to stop the progress of an heresy which might spread and 
at last shake the Papal supremacy. The plan was ma- 
tured and confirmed, and accordiog to Mosheim, Gregory 
IX. (1^3) decided that the Dominicans should be at Jhe 
head of the Inquisition or Holy office. We do not pretend 
to follow the Inquisitors in the exercise of their power, nor to 
trouble ourselves about the period this establishment first fixed 
itself at Goa : we shall merely note down that the hierarchy 



Digitized by 



Google 



167 

of Macao had oommission 8crupulou3iy to watch over, the 
purity of the faith, and in case of delinquency, to forward the 
dissentient to the Inquisition at Goa. This excruciating body 
was in 1812, extingubhed by a provision of the pious Prince 
Regent of Portugal. 

Previous to this memorable epoch, the Christians had con- 
trived various means to free the town from offensive spectacles, 
which the Chinese population at Macao exhibited on their 
theatre, and in their processions. By the order of a Vicar- 
general, Francis da Rosa, a stage on which the Chinese were 
acting was broken down, '^ a provocation much to be depre- 
cated," says the Viceroy of Goa in his letter to the Senate, 
(1736) in which he also "orders the Chapter to reprehend 
the Vicar«general, and recommend him to abstain in future 
from similar behavior, contenting his zeal with informing the 
Senate and the Governor of what to him seemed to be prop-^ 
er." This salutary admonition was set aside by a letter of 
18th March, 1758, in which the tribunal of the Inquisition 
prohibits any kind of theatricals or procesnons to be sufifered. 
Nevertheless, several of the Governors recollecting that the 
Portuguese can exercise no jurisdiction over the Chinese, had 
been prudent enough to connive at the fleeting recreations of 
the Chinese, but m 1780, at the instigatioa of a delegate 
from the Holy office then residing at Macao, the Senate gave 
an order to the Procurator to demolish scaffolds, which had 
been erected on the occasion of a solemn festival, which was 
to wander through the place. His zeal was frustrated. Hav- 
ing permission from their Mandarins to raise temporary stands, 
the insult of throwing them down would be resented ; the 
Chinese advised the Portuguese not to provoke tunmlt by Btk 
act of intemperate zeal. Convinced that no effort of civil 
police would hinder a pagan festival, duly prepared, from 
shewing itself in the town, a Bishop resolved to try spiritual 
influence on his flock. His Excellency Dm. Fr. Francis de 
Na. Sra. da Luz Cachim, issued a pastoral admonition, Which 
the Curates published in their respective parishes. It was 
dated 15th April, 1816, and breathes a fatherly exhortation, 
that all Christians should, for the sake of the salvation of their 
souls, abstain from having a peep, either through the window 
from behind the Venetian blinds, or m the street, at the pa- 
geants which the Chinese Were going to carry through the 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 

city. Disobedience was threatened with the penalty of the 
great excommunication ; a punishment that could • not be 
applied, because out of the whole population there were 
perhaps, not fifty adult Christians, who had resisted the im- 
pulse of curiosity : the others gratified it by looking at the 
gorgeous ceremonies, repeated by the Chmese during three 
days, and by gazing at night in the bazar, at ingenious illu- 
minations, theatrical jests and amusements. 

The actiial state of the Raman Catholic Mission in the 
Bishoprick of Macao. " Religion descended firee finom 
Heaven, let her remain free on earth ;" this is an ejaculation 
of tolerance, peace, harmony, and the philanthropy, which 
few, if any religious had a right to boast of. The Jews ex- 
terminated their neighbors, because they did not believe in 
Jehovah : the Mahometans, where they are masters, impress 
the tenets of the Koran, sword in hand. Christianity, by the 
command contained in St. Mark, chapter XVIth. 15,* is an- 
nounced to afl the world with the zeal required in St. Luke, 
chapter XlVth. a6.f Had the marvellous personage, called 
Budha or Fub, (bom, it b said, above one thousand years 
before Christ,) or any of his disciples, in the name of their 
master, enforced the precepts of Christianity alluded to, Bud- 
hism might have been the universal church, because a doc- 
trine of impostures, three thousand years ago, was not then, 
as now-a-days, cast into the philosophical crucible of sense 
and reasoning. Two national superstitions, those of Laou- 
keuQ, otherwise caHed Laou-toze, and of Budha or Fuh, are 
recognized in China by government. With the Bonzes, 
spiritual servants of the last mentioned hypothetical deity, 
Roman Catholic Priests at their entrance in Chma, came 
first in contact. They began to quarrel about their faith. 
It is to be lamented, that human ingenuity should have bor- 
rowed firom the Bible the ground-work of more than four 
hundred sects, each of them Siithfully believing themselves to 
be in the straight road to heaven, with the exclusion of all 
such as are not within the pale of theur confi*aternity : an un- 

* Go ye into all 4he world, and preaeh the goapel to every country. 

t If uiy man come to me, and hate not hit father, and mother, and wife, 
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his on n life, he can- 
not be my disciple. 



Digitized by 



Google 



169 

charitableness, which a miracle alone, the greatest of any 
ever wrought, may erase from the minds of prejudiced Christ- 
ians.* Until this unexpected event shall have eradicated 
the animosity which still rages among theologo-polemic com- 
batants, may it not be reasonable to conclude with the King 
of Siam, that " the Tbue God takes pleasure in being glorified 
by myriads of living creatures, who praise him, each in his 
own way."f Enemies of this simple theme, refer to a doc- 
trine, the professors of which were justly censured by Kang- 
he, saying, <^ I am astonished, that the Pontiff can believe 
men, who pretend to teach the same religion, though some 
of them affirm what others deny." Would it not be proper 
that concord, union, and mutual affection should constitute 
the character of every missionary ; a consistency that might 
engage the attention of enlightened men, and fix in the mind 
of the ruder class an uncontrolled dependence on foreign 
judgment ? This harmony seemingly presided over the de- 
meanor of the Jesuits : it awakened curiosity, many who lent 
an ear to the ingenious arguments of these strangers, became 
their disciples and converts. This progress, however, slack- 
ened so soon as members of several congregations began to 
dispute about the meaning of the sacred volume. Divine 
truth, men of commonnsense conjecture, can be but one, 
clear, precise, uniform, proof against the pruning knife of 
human metaphysics. A deviation from this essential charac- 
ter, turned the favorable tide of conversion against the exotic 
doctrine, and no effectual advancement can be looked for till 
firom four to five hundred sectarian passions shall have had 

*The sense, I, in my second contribntion expressed on the subject of the 
variety of Christian sects and missionaij societies, has been in the 
valuaqle Canton Journal, ** the Chinese Repository," for November, 1834, 
in a sober and unofiending manner, animadverted on. Before my senti- 
ments were announced, I had resolved to give intentionally, no ofience ; 
my humble aim was to submit them and my timid conviction to the ordeal 
of future, more enlightened and discreet ^neratv>ns. The time must come 
when the ** fulcrum of missionary infaUibility shall ftil,^ and the heavenlv 
gift, " common-sense," the earliest revelation, the unerring, shall triumph 
over inveterate anti-rational credulity. 

t Journal of an embassy to Siam and Cochin-china, bj^ John Crawford, 
£sq. London 1828, Chapter Xlllth. It is a recapitulation of what hap- 
pened 1685, in Siam, a» related in Let. Edif. by Mosheim. 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 

time to cool and coalesce, and Cbristianity be freed firom the 
trappings of human device.** 

Among all christian sects, there are no ceremonies so al- 
luring, I presume, as those of the schismatic Greek, and Ro- 
man Catholic churches. A tinsel, say some, unworthy the 
dignity of pure religion ! It may be so. Nevertheless, a 
temple seated on an elevated ground, of a chaste architecture, 
without and within, spacious, lofty; clean, and neatly adorned, 
strikes the external senses of spectators, and leaves on their 
minds something like an impression of sublimity : the sacred 
abode, being on any of the great festivals set, as it were, in a 
blaze by hundreds of lighted tapers skilfiiUy arranged, filled 
with the harmony of vocal and mstrumental notes, enlivened 
with the majesty of divine adoration ; venerable and rever- 
end Priests, arrayed in costly and splendid garments, cele- 
brating the service— this enchants the soul, and presses her 
to join in the worship of an unknown Bemg. The internal 
sense is roused, enquiries are made, dogmas examined, mys- 
teries weighed, a scrutiny that has led men of acknowledged 
intellectutd strength, to abandon the faith of their forefathers. 
The Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg, has published fifty 
reasons or motivesf for his quitting Lutheranism and embrac- 
ing Catholicism. A spiritual food, without admixture of soma 
external harmless cover, does not suit every palate. Protes- 
tantism, be. &c. is too homely, too ascetic and abstruse for 
mankind in general. 

It is now (1834) exactly two hundred and fifty years, since 
the first Roman Catholic missionaries were allowed to remain 
at Shaou-king-foo, in the province of Kwang-tung. Two 
Jesuits were in 1601, permitted to enter Peking, where they 
began clandestinely^ to teach a doctrine, the success of which 

* To Of it U grmtifying to quota firom an American Itinerant Presbyterian 
mitsionary, the following paeeage : << As it respects the variety of religious 
opinion * * * of one thing I have long been deeply convincea— that reUg- 
ion is love, love to Qod and to men * * * the religion of the heart." TL 
Flints Rtci^lecUana^ p. 117. Boston, 1826. 

f Fifty reasons or motives which induced his most Serene Highness 
Anthony Ulrick, Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg to abjure Lutheranism 
and embrace the Roman Catholic religion. London, 1804. 

t Mathew Ricci obtained both for himself and his assistants the liberty of 
explaining to the people the doctrine of the gospel." Moeheim asserts 
from the Description de la Chinis par Duhalde,(Dutch edition,) Tom. III. 84 



Digitized by 



Google 



161 

has been various. It depended for upwards of a century on 
the connivance of local officers, till (1692) Kang-he enfran- 
chised the new sect, and placed it on the same footing with 
those of Laou-keun and Budha. This favor Yung-cbing 
thought proper to repeal ; he prohibited (1723) in his vast 
dominions, the exercise of Christianity. This prohibition 
was further enforced in respect to Macao, by the twelfth par- 
agraph of a convention, concluded (1749) between the gov- 
ernment of Macao, and the provincial magistrates of Kwang- 
tung. These public impediments and the scanty means that 
could be placed at the disposal of missionaries for ingratiating 
themselves with the inferior Mandarins, that they might wink 
at the violation of the laws, have greatly retarded the labor of 
foreign priests. At present, no European is residing among 
the Christian population, which in 1830, amounted, by ap- 
proximation, in the Bishoprick of Macao, to 6090 Chinese. 
The spiritual care is entrusted to the devotion and zeal of 
seven Chinese Catholic Priests, who in obedience to the di- 
rection of their Prelate, the Bishop of Macao, or his substi- 
tute, the Capitular-vicar, visit by turn the six still existing 
missions, viz : 

Portuguese Orthog. English Orthog. Christian Chinese, 



1. Chunte, 


Shun-tih, 


1250 


2. Hainan, 


Hae-nan, 


855 


3. Chaucheu, 


Shaou-chow, 


750 


4. Chao-king, 


Shaou-king, 


730 


5. Namhai, 


Nan-hae. 


1850 


6. Namcheu, 




655 



6,090 
In 1833, from high clerical authority 
there were at Macao, Patane, Mong-ha, 
Lapa, 7,000 



13,090 



Dulbalde must have been minnfonned, for Nic. Trigauld, who wrote 
before 1615, his << Christiana Ezpeditio apud Sinas," principally from the 
manuscript records bv Ricci, in the Italian luiffoage, of the most remarka- 
ble events, which had happened to the mission from his entrance in China, 
(1582) till his death at Peking, (1610) expressly mentions, page 700,« at in 
21 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 

The salary of each individual is eighty-two dollars, yearly. 
Travelling expenses, estimated at from 40 to 50 dollars, ac- 
cording to the remoteness of the place the Priest is sent to, 
and the pay of the catechists, and various other charges are 
carried to separate accounts. To meet these pecuniary exi- 
gencies, the revenue of a certain capital is applied : its man- 
agement is left by appointment of the Bishop to three Canons 
who are bound at the expiration of a year, to lay before the 
Prelate an accurate statement of the receipts and disburse- 
ments, referring to the iiind just mentioned.^ 

loloeo, (the field where Ricci wu interred^ and hi* eompuiioiiB got per- 
muwion to build a house,) ritua legia noatrs (of China) observantei, Deom 
pro regis ejusque parentis vita et salute atqne incoiumitate rogaremos.^*^ 
Had Wan-leih given the missionaries leave piiblicly to teach their tenets, 
he could not well order his Council of Rites to take notice of a philij^^c 
which a Mandarin of Nanking presented (1615) against the doctrine and 
proceedings of the foreign priests. 

* The Reforming apostles, who by an intemperate zeal* of modern mis- 
sionary societies, are in the XlXth centurv obtruded on the worM, have 
such a striking similarity of behavior with those of Rome, who in the 
Vllth century propagated in the northern parts of Germany, by any 
means, the pnnciples of their doctrine, that to transcribe the following from 
Mosheim, is a sufficient apology. 

*^ These voyages tmdertaken in the cause of Christ, carry, no doubt, a 
specious appearance of piety and zeal ; but the impartial and attentive 
inquirer after truth, will find it impossible to form the same favorable 
jud^^ent of them all, or to applaud, without distinction, the motives that 
anima;ted these laborious missionaries. That the designs of some of them 
were truly pious, and their character without reproach, is unquestionably 
certain. But it is equally certain, that this was neither the case of them 
all, nor even of the ^eatest part of them. ' Many of them discovered, in 
the course of their ministry, the most turbulent passions, and, dishonoring 
the glorious cause in which they were engaged, by their arrogance and 
ambition, their avarice and cruelty, the^ abused the power wnich they 
had received from the Roman Pontimi, of'^formin^ religious establishments 
' among the superstitious nations ; and instead of gaining souls to Christ, they 
usurped a despotic dominion over their obsequious proselj^tes, and exercis- 
ed princely authority over the countries where their ministry had been 
successful." &c. Moskeim's Ece. History, Vol. IL 155. London, 1806. 

* Christ gave, St. Mark saya, this charitable command : Go ye. &c.; not that imeharitable 
«me : force younelvea on the nations, steal yoonelves on tne people, and preach ths 
CkMpel. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Roman Catholic Mission in China. 



Preliminary, 



It must be left to men better qualified than I am, to invests 
gate, whether Christianity was taught in China, in the Illd, 
IVth, Vlth, IXth or Xlth centuries ; whether the first doctors 
came firom Armenia, Persia, or from the western parts of the 
East Indian peninsula, and what was their theme, for sectarians 
no doubt they were, because the schism on the meaning of 
HolyiWrit, is almost co-equal with Christianity. . Whether 
the Christians in China, denominated by the heathen, " Wor- 
shippers of the Cross," were so numerous, that a reasonable 
suspicion might be excited against them of meditating a change 
in the form of government and church, and that the family 
of Chin»khis-khan, the dynasty of Yuen, elevated in the 
latter end of the thirteenth century, to the throne of China, 
was thereby led to persecute her Christian subjects from 
principles of policy or diversity of creeds : my object is to 
present, in a concise narrative, the most memorable events 
that have happened during two hundred and fifty years to the 
Roman Catholic mission in China. 

Missionaries to China, Vascp de Gama being successful 
in his attempt to weather the stormy cape, now called Cape 
of Good Hope ; to establish trade at Calicut, with the most 
powerful sovereign on the coast of Malabar: of carrying 
home to Lisbon, samples of rich produce from different parts 
of Asia — ^Paul Illd having by a Bull of 27th September, 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 

1540, confinned the society of Jesus^ foresaw the advanta- 
ges which the Holy See may derive from the exertions of 
Jesuits in those remote countries. Portugal offered them an 
easy conveyance : they embarked at Lisbon, and landed at 
Goa } from thence they spread themselves quickly over Asia 
in various directions. In our individual humble opinion^ a 
missionary ought to know the language of the people he 
means to instruct : he should also make himself acquainted 
with their creed, in which the instructive and primordial feeUngs 
of right and wrong, — ^the base of all civil and social existence, 
are undoubtedly interwoven. On this foundation he may ad- 
vance temporal happiness ; and teaching pagans by his own 
example, to do to others what we wish should be done to 
ourselves ; in one word, that men should be Just — ^he may 
win their affection and confidence. A missionary must not 
behave like quacks, who willingly accost people, exclaiming 
" you are sicki" It will suffice, that he be known as a man 
ready to administer spiritual comfort to those who may feel 
desirous of enjoying it. The time is, perhaps, then approach- 
ing, when the superstructure called " faith in mysteries," for 
the salvation of souls,* may be raised. With these prelimi- 
nary and prudential qualifications, few persons, if any, ever 
entered a mission. A little school-learning, a considerable 
stock of superstitious opinion, and an indiscreet zeal were all, 
the greater part of missionaries brought with them to China* 
Lamenting that its inhabitants had no knowledge of the re- 
vealed doctrine, did the European, for the sake of eliciting 
truth, encourage the heathen rationally to argue the subject ? 
No, he perplexed the rude understanding by beginning to 
speak of faith, and eternal torments.! These mystical enun- 
ciations, the missionary proposed to explain, on condition that 
the auditory should implicitly " believe" in what he, in the 
name of " his" God, was going to announce. This errand 
brought Francis Xavier, to the southern confines of China ; 
he landed at San-shan, where he died, (1652.) A Domini- 

* The individuality of hnman aoiils was decided during the pontificate of 
Leo X by the bull ** AportoUci," in which we read ; "Won est una anima 
in omnibas hominibus, sed in quolibet est propria.*' BiH. can. V. Anima. 

t Quod infernus proprie dictus sit in inferioribus terrsB partibus, nemo est 
qui dubitet. Bihl. canon V. Infemtu, How is this to be reconciled wi^ 
the revelation of St. Luke, Chap. XXL 23 ? 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 

can, Caspar da Cruz, began (] 556) to preach in China, fmt 
was expelled. The Spanish Augustines, whom Grosier in 
the preface of his Description of China, in English, speaks 
of, left the Phihppine islands in company with a Chmese 
admiral, whose squadron had been liberally provided for ut 
Manila, carrying from the Governor to the Viceroy of Fuh- 
keen a petition, and also one to the Emperor for leave to 
reside in the country ; this being denied> the friars came back 
the very saipe year, (1675.) Four Capuchins having resolv- 
ed to penetrate to Chma, embarked, were shipwrecked on 
unknown islands, saved and sent to Canton. The Tsung* 
tiih ordered them to return to Manila ; they however, chose 
to stop at Macao, and settle in the hospital of Lepers, (1579.) 
The year before, Alexander Valignano, visitor of India ana 
Japan, an Italian Jesuit, touched in his way to Japan, at Ma- 
cao, where he spent ten months. From thence he wrote 
to Vincent Rodrigues, the Provincial of India, recommending 
him to forward to Macao, at least, one intelligent and zeal- 
ous priest, to whom Valignano addressed, before his depart- 
ure for Japan, instructions. The first missionaries were all 
Jesuits. An Italian by the name of Miguel Ruggiero, came 
(1579) from India, and began, by the advice of Valignano, 
to study Chinese. He engaged, a painter, " quem minime 
inaptus magister patri visus est Sina pictor, qui, quod linguae 
deerat, arte suppleret, quippe non raro contingebat ;" the as- 
sertion of Moshei'm, that Ruggiero had learnt the Chinese 
language before he arrived in China, is therefore inaccurate. 
By an unrelenting arduous application, Ruggiero made such 
progress, that he went (1581) as chaplain with Macao ships 
to Canton, where in a temporary house, erected on the bor- 
der of the river, he said mass. The merchants were not per- 
mitted to pass the night on shore, but father Miguel, having 
procured the good will and gained the protection of the sea- 
prefect, was not only excused from returning at night, to the 
vessels, but room was assigned to him in the palace, where 
the bearers of the King of Siam's tribute to the Emperor 
usually lodged. At this place the missionary entered upon 
his vocation, and began converting people. Macao having 
resolved to send a deputy-gentleman in lieu qf those who 
were summoned, (1582) as previously noticed, to Shaou* 
king-foo, with rich and valuable presents, Rug^ero was ap» 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 

pointed to accoiApany him as interpreter. The Interpreter's 
discretion and urbanity, not only obtained from the Viceroy 
liberty for a few Spanish friars, who h$id been cast on the 
coast of Fuh-keen, and were then at the provincial residence 
to go to Macao, but he likewise drew fiom him a hint that 
he, Ruggiero, might be allowed to reside in the capital. 
This hint, the cunning Jesuit brought on the carpet, when he 
in company with Francis Paccio, an Italian, presented to the 
Viceroy(as before stated) an elegant Pendulum and atriangular 
Prism, which Mathew Ricci, an Italian, coming (1582) from 
India to Macao had brought with him — ^two things at that time 
great curiosities in China. To conceal their real intention, 
the missionaries recurred unblushingly to falsehood, assuring 
that their only wishes were to make themselves masters of the 
Chinese language, and become acquainted with the arts and 
sciences of the country. On this plea, the two priests were 
permitted to inhabit a Fane or Chinese temple ; but hardly 
had they taken possession of it, when the inmiediate succes- 
sor of their patron stuck up an edict, prohibiting entrance 
into China to all strangers, but principally to Priests, <^ who 
were troublesome and obnoxious." 

In less than eight days, however, this rigor was mitigated ; 
for the Che-foo, a Mandarin, magistrate of the department of 
the fooy or town of the first rank, invited with the tacit con- 
sent of the Tsung-tuh, Ruggiero and Ricci, the successor of 
Paccio, to return to Shaou-king-foo, (1583.) The Che-foo 
bad filled his situation so much to the satisfaction of all par- 
ties, that the Literati and the people, had determined to build 
him a temple, and adorn it with his figure or statue. The 
Emperor having consented, bestowed upon him an honorary 
title, corresponding to his desert. Highly delighted with the 
Imperial grace and public veneration, the Governor conceived 
that the glory might be more lasting, should Bonzes, fix)m 
a foreign land preside over the Fane. At that time the mis- 
sionaries dressed like Bonzes, and shaved the head and beard. 
The proposal having been made, the two Jesuits declined the 
oJ&r, alleging that they were priests of the Lord of heaven, 
and could not serve idols. This firank excuse did not alter 
the good disposition which the Che-foo had evinced towards 
the strangers, for he made them a present of a piece of land, 
and permitted them to stray about in the country ; at last he 



Digitized by 



Google 



167 

obtained from the Tsung-tuh, — ^who would never see any of 
them — ^that they might reside at Shaou-king-foo. Backed by 
the authority of a Che-foo, the missionaries came out trium- 
phant from various difficulties. However, the time drew 
nigh that their protector should appear at Court, to perform 
his solemn triennial devotion to his Sovereign. Of his ab- 
sence the enemies of the foreign worship availed themselves. 
The Priests were arraigned for using all sorts of imposture, 
false reasoning and impious books, to entice the rudest and 
most uncultivated class of the community. In consequence 
of this charge, the Tsung-tuh decided, that Mathew Ricci 
and Anthony Almeida, a Portuguese, should be transported 
(1589) to Macao ; a sentence so far moderated, that they 
could remain neither at Shaou-king-foo, nor at Kwang-tung ; 
they were at liberty to settle at Shaou-chow-foo, where in fact 
they arrived in April, 1589. 

Even at Shaou-chow-foo, their opponents attacked the 
Priests. The Literati praised the precepts, coinciding with 
those of Confucius. To worship the Lord of Heaven -^as 
right and just, but from want oJT faith, they could not help 
railing at the mysteries of an original sin, ratified at the coun- 
cil of Trent, in the fifth session, 1546: of eternal torm^its, 
of the incarnation of the Trinity, of not being allowed more 
than one wife. They accused the Europeans of teaching a 
spurious and pernicious doctrine ; of building churches at the 
expense of their dupes; of introducing young girls to monas- 
teries ; of forgetting their parents when dead ; of paying res- 
pect neither to the departed nor to Confucius, but merely to 
a stranger they called Jesus. That the Bonzes abused a set 
of foreigners, who aimed at nothing else than the subversion 
of the religious fabric of Fuh, is no wonder. Their invec- 
tives and clamor did less harm than burlesque comedies. 
Buffoons represented Christians going to church, the sword 
girt, praying with a string of beacb in their hand, adoring God 
bending one knee, disputing, wrangling ; and women wor- 
shipping at the same place with men, a practice the Chinese 
abhor and detest. 

The incredulity of many, the rancor of others, not even the 
queer theatrical jests were sufficient to dishearten Ricci, who 
by his. knowledge of mathematics, experimental philosophy, 
&c. had means to amuse, entertain and please visiters fix)m 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 

many parts of China ; some of them became his converts, oth- 
ers his protectors and friends. In 1594 he and his brother 
Jesuits threw o^ by the advice of Valignano, the garb of 
Bonzes, and put on the more respected dress of Literati. 
In such an attire, Ricci known in China by the epithet of 
^^ Si-thai," according to Trigauld, the Lettres edifiarUes, give 
him the name of Ly-ma-teou, the manuscript catalogue of 
missionaries, that of Le, became a proper companion for men 
of rank. A military officer going to Court, took Si-thai from 
Shaou-chow-foo, when Nicolas Longobardi was left to govern 
the Church. Ricci visited a beloved neophyte at Nan-yong- 
foo, proceeded with recommendatioQS to the celebrated an- 
cient capital Nanking, entertaining the hope of raising across 
at that place. Betrayed by the features of a foreigner, who 
might be a Japanese spy, for China had a war with Japan ; 
orders came that he should directly quit the capital. From 
thence,.Ricci directed his steps to Nan-chang-foo, the capital 
of Keang-se, where he was permitted by the Governor to lay 
^1595) the foundation of a religious institution, and to leave 
the care of it to John Sociro, a Portuguese. Such activity 
and zeal was further stimulated by the dignity of Superior of 
all missions in China, present and future, conferred on Ricci 
by Valignano, in 1597, if I am not mistaken. The Gover- 
nor of Nan-chang-foo, being called to fill the first place of the 
Council of State, Ricci in company with Lazar Cataneo, an 
Italian, availed himself of the opportunity to vbit a second 
time Nanking, and proceed, if possible, to Peking. The war 
with Japan continued still, and the suspicious fear of strangers 
likewise. Neither Ricci's intimacy with the President of the 
Council of State, nor the patronage of friends could quiet, even 
at Peking, the apprehension of government. Cataneo there- 
fore returned by water to Nanking : Ricci went by land to Soo- 
ehow-foo, in the province of Keang-nan. A neophyte, Ignatius 
Sinicc Kui-tai-z&, the son of a respectable Mandarin, and inti- 
mate with the principal families obtained leave for Ricci (1598) 
to establish Christianity at that place. 

At length peace being concluded with Japan, Ricci de^ 
termined to appear a thurd time at Nanking, where he now 
was welcomed with that amenity, firankness and good breed- 
ing, said to be characteristic of those who inhabit the old cap- 
ital of China. The reputation of a ^' Savant" bad preceded 



Digitized by 



Google 



169 

Ricci. His lectures on the exact sciences were listened 
to with rapture ; they excited in the auditory a sincere wish 
to become acquainted with the truth of mathematics. To 
gratify his hearers, father Mathew translated the Elements 
of Euclid, and a new christian by the name of Paul,sinice- 
Siu, gave them the fullness of the Chinese idiom. By this 
work, Ricci conciliated such an affection, that even those who 
were greater admirers of his philosophical than religious te- 
nets, acquiesced in his instituting (1599) at Nanking a church, 
in which Lazar Cattaneo remained. 

Being favored with many recommendations to men of high 
rank and reputation at court, and with letters patent from a 
great magistrate, granting him liberty to carry to the presence 
of the emperor, a few European curiosities,. Ricci, accompa- 
nied by a Spanish Jesuit, Diogo Pantoja, set out for Peking. 
At Lin-tsin-chow, an Imperial toll on the grand canal, a 
eunuch, Mathan, administrator of the customs, tendered his 
services to the strangers. This Mathan is by Alvaro Senedo 
in his ^^ Relatione della Cina," and by Duhalde described as 
their greatest enemy. Nicolas Trigauld, who composed 
" Christiana expeditio apud Sinas," from the manuscript 
records of Ricci, represents him of a friendly disposition to- 
wards the priests. Ricci declared to Mathan '< that he de- 
sired to have the honor and good fortune personally to present . 
to the emperor the insignificant trifles which he had brought, / 
and to spend the rest of Jiis days in the service of their com- 
mon lord and master." The eunuch took the priests in 
one of his boats to Teen-tsin and lodged them in the fort, 
that their persons might not be exposed to insult, nor their 
property to depredation. " Deinde reversus est (Mathan) 
sociis in arce (Teen-tsin) relictis et custodibus attributis, a 
quibus tamen quo vellent ire minime prohibebantur. " Of all 
this Mathan informed the emperor in a memorial, to which at 
the end of six months a rescript arrived, permitting the stran- 
gers to proceed to Peking, a place they entered not 
in 1581, as assented by De Guignes, in his voyage to Peking, 
but on the 4th January, 1601. Wan-leih accepted the pres- 
ents of the strangers, and commanded the council or tribunal 
of rites and ceremonies to lodge them, at first, at the pal- 
ace where foreign envoys usually alighted, and then the pre- 
fect of the imperial palace to let them take a house at dieir 
22 



Digitized by 



Google 



l^/cy^ 



S^-^ 



h 



170 

convenience ; at last the Emperor assigned to them a fixed 
stipend, some say every three, others every four months. 

So many signal favors gave lustre to the two Europeans, 
whose real intention they, their friends and abettors took pains 
carefully to keep the court ignorant of. Meanwhile men of 
the Jesuit school joined their associates, not only at Peking, 
but at any of the intermediate stations and their collateral 
branches, whicb Ricci'had established in his progress from 
Shaou-chow-foo to the capital. That the collaborator might 
work unanimously, without discrepancy to the advancement 
of the mission, Ricci being the superior of all the missiona- 
*^ ries in China, prescribed in a work " Of the Divine Law," 
published 1603, general rules to be observed by the propaga- 
tors of the tenets. So long as the Jesuits had, by the bull of 
Gregory XIII, ^8th January, 1585) the exclusive care of 
Christianity in China, the undertaking went on peacefully. 
At Peking the masters, servants and catechumens so increased 
that the society petitioned (1605) for leave to buy a large 
house, which was granted ; in after-times it was converted 
into a church, dedicated to St. Joseph. Thus settled the 
Roman Catholics at Peking, and though they had not asked 
permission, proud of what missionaries please to denominate 
^^' Divine command,^' they did not hesitate to propagate a new 
sect.* Some of their neophytes became men of influence ; 
the good will of many was bought and preserved by liberal 
offerings on the altar of self interest. At the death of Ricci 
(1610) these protectors obtained of Wan-leih, a field, or 
rather a garden, where Si-thai was interred, and likewise 
permission to build a house at the same place for the habita- 
tion of Panloja and his comrades. At the time of this con- 
cession, the strangers were again reminded of their duty '^ to 
obey the* laws of the empire, to pray for its preservation, and 
for the health and longevity of the emperor." 

Men free fix)m illusion and bribery were on the alert ; they 
traced the progress of the mischief in all its bearings, and felt 
the imperative necessity of checking its growth before it got 
strength to set at nought the commands of government. A 

* Imperator Hnmvius pnblica le^ has ires sectas (that of Literati, of 
Fiih and of Laou-keun,) stabilivit : ita tamen ut prima Eruditorum res Im- 
perii curaret et duobus reliquis dominaretur. Atque heec causa est cur 
una alteram aon studeat opprimere. iMg, JBot. hnj J. Miukqf. 



Digitized by 



Google 



171 

Mandarin of Nankiag developed (1615) in a memorial, the 
criminal eflbrts of the new sect, depicting with true and vivid 
colors, the ardor with which foreign tutors inspired their dis- 
ciples with contempt for the revered and sacred ^customs of 
their ancestors, substituting " Intolerance," by which the af- 
fections of the people were alienated from those, who ventur- 
ed to predict the consequences of so revolting a precept. 
The phillipic being submitted by order of Wan-leih, to the 
council of rites, and they having scrupulously investigated 
the matter, and weighed the points of accusation, uttered the 
opinion that the new doctrine aimed at a change, which 
might in future be fraught with disturbance and danger. A 
decree (14th February, 1617,) proscribed " the men who 
preach a law, which confuses people," and commanded the 
Mandarins to send them from the court and provinces to 
Canton, that they might return to theu: homes. This order 
was but partially obeyed, forjthe " Persecuted," so the chris- 
tians termed their priests, found shelter and protection in the 
families of their converts. The storm was soon spent, for 
Siu, known among the chrbtians by the name of Paul, had 
arrived at the dignity of a Ko-lao or minister of the first rank. 
He, his friends and the protectors of the proscribed, made the 
successor of Wan-leih acquiesce in the fallacious hope, that bis 
dynasty i^ight, by the powerful assistance of Macao, be pro- 
tected against the Manchew Tartars, should a negociation for 
auxiliaries be entered upon ; *' the Portuguese, the advisers 
maintained — ^are experienced gunners: their Priests, if ad- 
mitted, will serve your majesty with their talents, and the 
soldiers with their valor, so that no enemy shall ever succeed 
in making (kirable impression on the empire." The deluded 
monarch gave his assent. A missionary sent to Macao, col- 
lected there a body of four hundred men, headed by two 
captams, sub-lieutenants, and adjutants; they moved smd 
reached (1622) Nan-chang-fc)o : there this little corps had 
orders to retrace their steps. Missionaries less encumbered 
got the start of the military, and joined their panting hosts. 
New flocks of Jesuits streamed to China, among them the 
most noted for his missionary zeal, and knowledge in mathe- 
matics, was a German, John Adam Shal. 

Disaffected subjects do not fight heartily m. defence of their 
sovereign: of this truth the dynasty Ming, was fully aware, 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 

at the onset of the Tartars. Internal commotions increased 
the embarrassment and made it necessary to bring about peace 
with the foreign enemy : but the negociator basely betrayed 
his master, who being deserted and besieged in his palace^ 
ended voluntarily his life. The faithful remaining imperial 
force, unequal to contend with mighty victorious rebels, the 
commander-in-chief invited as auxiliaries, the Manchews to 
assist in subjugating the revolted. The proposition was ac- 
cepted, but the Tartars finished by making themselves mas- 
ters of the country ; they founded (1644) the actual dynasty 
" Ta-tsing." The first sovereign was Shun-che, who gave 
Shal the commission to reform the calender ; this the Jesuit 
did so much to the satisfaction of his master, that the Em- 
peror appointed him president of the tribunal of astronomy. 
This missionary so fascinated the head of the nation, that per- 
mission was granted not only to build in the capital two 
churches, but likewise to repair many, which in the provin- 
ces were decaying. Shan-che also admitted a considerable 
number of missionaries, and permitted them to spread all over 
China. Among the new comers, Ferdinand Verbiest, a Ger- 
man, became coadjutor to Shal in his astronomical pursuits. 
The imperial favor lasted unimpaired all the reign of Shan- 
che, who expired 1661, leaving Kang-he, a young lad of eight 
years old, under the guardianship of four Tartars, to succeed 
to the throne. 

These four gentlemen esteemed impartially the usefiil tal- 
ents of Shal, and his religious profession with no peculiar 
regard. The infallibility of the doctrine propagated by the 
Jesuits had been questioned. It had become a subject of 
acrimonious controversies firom the moment Clement VIII, 
Paul V, Urban VTII, and Clement X, opened by apostolic 
concessions to friars of all denominations a fi*ee ingress to 
China by any way they could find out. Mendicants, partic- 
ularly Dominicans, quarrelled with the Jesuits about the sig- 
nification of the word *« Teen" and '*' Chang-te ;" about the 
veneration the Chinese pay to Confiicius, and the deceased. 
This strife revealed the important secret, that the principles 
of their doctrine served also the purpose of contentious emu- 
lation for influence. It was remembered, that during the time 
missionaries existed on the islands of Japan, nothing but in- 
trigues, schism and civil war was heard of; calamities that 



Digitized by 



Google 



173 

might sooner or later befal China, where by the criminal 
eagerness of missionaries, actually spreading over the land 
for the sake of " enlisting" deluded people of all classes not 
checked. The members wore distinctive badges of medals, 
rosaries, crosses, &c. and were always ready to obey the call 
of the chiefs the moment a probability of success in subvert- 
ing the existing political order and ancient worship of China 
should offer. This remonstrance, presented by one of the 
literati, to the four regents, tutors of Kang-he, was grave, 
and merited to be examined with the nicest impartiality and 
fairness. The case was tried by several tribunals, the members 
of which expressed (1665) their conviction, that Shal and his 
associates " merited the punishment of seducers, who announce 
to people a false and pernicious doctrine." Shal died of 
grief ; Verbiest and others absconded ; many were expelled 
from the capital and provinces of China; 

Kang-he, having taken the reigns of government into his 
own hand, employed Verbiest and made him director of the 
tribunal of astronomy. This Jesuit resolved to put the favor 
of his sovereign to a test, addressing him a most respectful 
petition, that the missionaries banished to Canton might be 
authorized to join their respective churches ; this request was 
by the special favor of the emperor granted, (1671) but the 
decree contained an unmeaning and nonsensical clause, '^ No 
Chinese shall embrace Christianity." Had Kang-he really 
meant to guard his subjects against seduction, the ports of his 
dominions had surely not been thrown open in 1685, to all 
commercial nations. Free trade presents a ready convey- 
ance to missionaries, not exclusively to such individuals, as 
the celebrated Colberg had in view to supply China with. 
His mission was to be composed of men richly endowed with 
a variety of knowledge in the arts and sciences, that they 
might investigate and examine those of China, bring the 
useful to France, naturalize and improve them. Ever ready 
and able to explain and instruct the Chinese, when requested 
in the European manipulations and ^ientific discoveries : and 
even when "solicited " in the christian tenets, such gentle- 
men might have advanced the welfare, harmony and civiliza- 
tion of the world ; they would have been, as benefactors 
of mankind, welcomed every where. Missionaries of this 
description deserve, above all others, in niy humble opinion, 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 

public esteem, encouragement and liberal support. Marquis 
de Louvois dissented from this plan. He dispatched, though 
not the very first, four Jesuits toChina, two of them Gerbillon 
and Bouvet, were by previous recommendation of Verbiest, 
admitted on their arrival (1688) at court. Next year Ger- 
billon and Thomas Pereira, a Portuguese, accompanied as 
interpreters, prince So-san, to meet on the frontiers a Russian 
plenipotentiary, count Theodor Alexeivich Golovin, that they 
might, by conciliatory means, divert an impending war. Both 
characters, being of an unyielding temper, were on the eve, 
after many conferences, of departmg enemies, had not Ger- 
billon by his pliancy and convincing arguments persuaded 
them, that it was of mutual advantage to both nations to re- 
main on good terms : a treaty of peace and amity, signed 1689, 
at Nip-chew, near Nerchinok, was the consequence. 

This service So-san bore in mind, but did not in a dignified 
manner acknowledge. In the opinion of men of a cultivated 
and sound understanding, the fcHreign sect had never ceased 
to excite suspicion, that it might in time be the cause of dis- 
sensions, strife and schism : a reason why really good patriots 
always advised to drive the propagators from the country. 
In the beginning, interested men winked at the residence and 
occupation of missionaries, who, being strengthened by friends 
and neophytes, acquired influence, not only to elude the force 
of decrees, but even means to return into favor with govern- 
ment. The missionaries had already weathered two storms, 
denominated " general persecutions," each of six years dura- 
tion: a third was now in progress. A Foo-yuen of the prov- 
ince Cbe-keang, determined, notwithstanding the solicitations 
of his friends, to draw, by a memorial, the attenticm of Kang- 
he to the inevitable disorder China was threatened with, were 
fanatic foreigners any longer sujSered to spread a dootrkie 
equally adverse to the existing religion and to the indepen- 
dence of the state. It was examined by the tribunal of 
rites, the members of which iofiinuated that no foreign creed 
ought to be tolerated in the empire. Greatly alanned at this 
hint, the missibnaries were night and day, it may be said, on 
their knees, worshipping a sovereign on wiiose clemency and 
partiality their existence depended. The following message, 
^O'empereur est surpris de vous voir si entet^s de votre relig- 
ion : pourquoi vous occupe^ vous si fort d'un monde, ou vous 
n' etes pas encore. Jouissez du tems present. Votre Dieu 



Digitized by 



Google 



175 

1^ met bien eli peine du soin que vous prenez^ U est assess 
puissant pour se rendre justice sans que vous vous meliez de 
ses ioterets/' could not assuage their sorrow. At length the 
Emperor condescended to receive from the priests, a memo- 
rial^ which was transmitted to the tribunal of rites, with a 
command to revise the case. Finding no reason for an al- 
teration, the tribunal abided by their former opinion. The 
emperor was going tp conform himself to it, saying to So-san, 
I regret I cannot comply with the petition of the Europeans, 
when the prince, a cunning and subtle courtier, insinuated, 
that the emperor's supreme will might be intimated ; Kang- 
he allowed himself to be misled, and So-san brought the 
message to the tribunal, who drew up a decree, which Kang- 
he signed 22d March, 1692, authorizing the exercise of the 
Roman Catholic religion in China. 

It was hinted in a previous page, that friars who came to 
China about fifty years later than the Jesuits, began to doubt 
whether the signification of certain words and ceremonies 
among the Chinese could be reconciled with pure orthodoxy. 
Though Kang-he had given an explanation of the characters 
in question, and a Pope had sanctioned the decision of the 
holy office, that the ceremonies of China were of a civil na- 
ture : an apostolic vicar of Fuh-keen, Charles Maigrot, a 
Frenchman, had the boldness to supersede the decreet)? Alex- 
ander VII, (1656) and to publish 1693, a mandate, deciding 
that Teen and Cbang-te do signify nothing more than the 
material heaven, and that the customs of venerating Confii- 
cius, and the deceased, are superstitious, an innovation the 
holy office adopted and Clement XI confirmed. (1704) 
Kang-he being not the man who would transfer to a pope 
and priests the right of legislathng, issued (17th December, 
1706,) a declaration, " that be would countenance those mis- 
sionaries who preached the doctrine of Ricci, but persecute 
those who followed the opinion of Maigrot, bishop of Conon, 
and that the land might get clear of those inapt and turbulent 
men, the emperor commanded, that the missionaries should 
in July, 1707, submit to an examination." The memorial 
presented to the examiner was in latin, signed by the Eu- 
ropean in his own hand-writing, and sealed with his own seal ; 
to it was affixed in Chinese characters the appellation he went 
by in China. The whole ran thus : J. N. fi'om N. of such 
religion, such nation, such age, came to China years ago ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



176 

I have lived in such a place of such a province, I have stud- 
ied philosophy and theology, and have no wish to return to 
Europe : in the publication of the holy doctrine, I have fol- 
lowed the maxims of M. Ricci." The questions put to the 
missionaries were, " Have you followed the maxims of Ricci? 
Will you continue the labor of a missionary ?" If the reply 
was negative, the examined received an order to depart 
within five days for Canton and embark, for Europe ; did the 
missionary answer '^ yes," an imperial license in Chinese and 
Tartar language was handed to him ; any one, who could not 
produce this protection was to be expelled : the new comers 
were bound to prcJceed to Peking, that they might be exam- 
ined and get their letter-patent. Touman, a titular patriarch, 
Clement Xlth's legate, who landed (1705) at Macao, publish- 
ed 1st January, 1706, and 26th January, 1707, two man- 
dates, forbidding the missionaries under pain of excommuni- 
cation to enter with the examiner upon any discussion, con- 
cerning the controverted subject. These mandates being 
(1710) supported by a congregation of inquisitors, Clement 
aI commanded both Jesuits and friars of every community 
to obey and observe the bull, "Ex ilia die." In 1716, it was 
converted into a law. To enforce this apostolic constitution, 
Clement XI sent the patriarch Mezzabarba, a legate to China : 
he arrived at Macao 1720. Finding that Kang-he persisted 
in his determination never to grant to the papal court any 
kind of jurisdiction over his subjects, the legate thought 
proper, in accordance with his power, and for the sake of sav- 
ing religion from the disgrace of being banished, to concede, 
" Eight Permissions." They so little reconciled the con- 
tending parties, that Castorani, a Franciscan, and vicar of the 
bishop of Peking, proceeded to Rome, where after the in- 
trigues and perseverance of seven years, he at length obtained 
that the permissions were abrogated and condemned in 
1742, by a bull of Benedict XIV, conunencing " Ex quo 
singulare." Besides, missionaries going to China take an 
oath scrupulously to adhere to ^lement Xlth's bull, ex ilia 
die. 

Kang-he had the mortification to find that the mandates of 
Touman were reverently obeyed, whilst the emperor's edict 
of 17th December, 1706, was by the greatest number of mis- 
sionaries disregarded. Toumarr and Mezzabarba, papal* le- 



Digitized by 



Google 



177 

» . 

gates endeavored to transfer from Kang-he to the pontiff, the 
spiritual jurisdiction of those portions of China, which were 
" politically" in revolt against their sovereign, by admitting 
that a foreign priest might legislate in their native country. 
Their apostacy originated, Kang-he knew, in an error of 
judgment, though the obstinacy of refractory missionaries was 
grounded on a malicious design, which their zeal had as yet, 
found no, means to bring about. That the corn may be free 
from tares their roots must be carefully plucked out. At 
last Kang-he was aware, it seems, of this truth, and prepared 
to root out both the mission and its tenets, when nature called 
him (23d December, 1722) to an eternal repose. His son, 
Yung-ching, less partial to Christianity, told Parennin and 
Kagler, '^ vous voulez, que tons les Chinois se fussent Chre- 
tiens ; votre loi le demande, je le sais bien : mais en ce cas 
la, que deviepdrons nous ? Les sujets de vos rois ? Les 
Chretiens que vous faites ne reconnoissent que vous ; dans 
un terns de trouble ils n'^outeront point d'autre voix que la 
votre." Yung-ching knew that many missionaries had, with- 
out an imperial license, crept into the provinces, busily em- 
ployed in misleading, converting people and raising churches, 
thereby to increase as fast as possible, their party. A Bach- 
elor of Arts, who had himself been a christian, published 
that the Roman Catholics aimed at nothing less than to 
throw Chma into a mould of European customs, faith and 
government. A Tsung-tuh of the province of Fuh-keen ex- 
pressed convictions of a similar nature in a memorial, soliciting 
the emperor to relieve the provinces from Europeans and 
accommodate them either at court or banish them to Macao. 
The council of rites, having by the eonmiand of . the emper- 
or, examined the petition, supported it, and Yung-ching con- 
firmed it on the 23d January, 1723. A few missionaries 
were tolerated at Peking ; those driven to Canton were ex- 
horted to behave with docility and submission. Three hun- 
dred churches and 300,000 christians, it is said, were deprived 
of their rulers and priests, only a few Europeans and Chinese 
ecclesiastics were secretly left to have temporary care of the 
disheartened flocks. To approach them again many of the 
expelled missionaries at Canton, prevailed on their converts 
to trace a route, by which they might come back and contin- 
ue their ooeupaxions. Out of thirty exiles at Canton^ sixteen 
23 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 

absconded ; such a defalcation created suspicion. The great 
Mandarins despatched therefore, with the approbation of 
Yung-ching, (1732) the remaining priests to Macao with a 
positive injunction to quit the country by the first ship that 
went to sea ; and that the order might be duly obeyed, a gen- 
eral officer commanded his men to be present at their em- 
barking and see the foreigners ofT. The Jesuits acted with 
more prudence ; they did not run away. This mark of obe- 
dience and the influence of their protectors reconciled them 
with the court. Yung-ching appointed Ignatius Kagler,a 
German, president of the tribunal of astronomy, and gave him 
a title of honor — a degree of Mandarinship — ^that he might 
appear decent in the presence of his sovereign. 

Keen-lung ascended to the throne of his father, (1736.) 
Antipathy, or rather animosity against the priests, who still 
labored secretly to entrap his subjects to the belief in a pro- 
scribed doctrine, made him search with uncommon eagerness 
and perseverance, the propagators of the gospel. A zealous 
Tsung-tuh of Fuh-keen, having discovered christians in his 
province, imprisoned them, tried them, convicted them of 
disobedience ; and Keen-lung not satisfied by driving the 
priests from the country, — ^to which they commonly returned 
— ^ratified the sentence, by which a bishop, Peter Martyr Sanz 
was on the 26th of May,' 1747, beheaded, "quod hominum 
multitudinem perversa religione seduxerit ;" the libel was in 
Chinese characters : Sanz was not the only victim in Fuh- 
keen. That the emperor might trace with greater certainty 
the odious priests and his rebellious subjects, secret orders 
were sent to the governors. Many missionaries were appre- 
hended, ill-used, tortured ; many churches were plundered ; 
many families entirely ruined : the two provinces Shan-se and 
Shen-se suffered most. The loss of missionaries was easily 
retrieved, for new subjects flocked to China. Those who 
were not vassals of Portugal, or could not produce license 
from the court of Lisbon to remain in Asia, were refused 
admittance at Macao ; but they found protection at the pro- 
curator's of propaganda fide G. della Torre, who lived in 
Canton. From thence he was in the habit clandestinely, of 
forwarding preachers to diflerent parts of China. A zealous 
satellite, a Chinese, educated at Naples, in the college " della 
sacra familia de Gesu Christo," a priest by the name of Peter 



Digitized by 



Google 



179 

Zay, had coDStantly been successful in delivering unmolested 
at places of their respective destination, those missionaries the 
procurator had entrusted to his care and foresight. Another 
Chinese from the same college, whose name was Philip Lieu, 
engaged to bring at less expense, four Europeans to Se-gan- 
foo, the capital of Shen-se ; they had reached Seang-yang-foo 
io the northern parts of Hoo-kwang, and were invited to alight 
at the house of a new christian, to whom the conductor was 
addressed. The missionaries rejected the offer ; they were 
soon after assailed by a gang of Mandarin runners, headed by 
the perfidious christian, and stripped of every thing valuable 
they possessed. In the expectation that their crime might 
be hi^ and unnoticed, the gang denounced at the office of a 
military commander, four Europeans, who were proceeding 
to Shan-se, with an intention to tender their service to the 
Mahometans, who were in arms against government. On 
the revelation of the koran no less than about three hundred 
sects of Islamism, the learned affirm, have propped the pre- 
tended infallibility of their doctrine. Two of them were, for 
centuries, established in China, and distinguished by their 
head-dres3 ; one sect wore a red, the other a white cap, in 
the shape of a sugar-loaf; a circumstance from which the 
Chinese deduced a nick-name, by which those Mahometans 
were designated. Their diversity of belief gave rise among 
them, to dogmatic babble, of which the government took no 
notice till the disputants began plotting^ and influencing their 
Chinese neighbors ; then and not before, they were treated 
like disturbers of the public peace, and banished from the coun- 
try. The consequence of this sectarian hatred, and the ulti- 
mate ruin of the seditious are detailed in ^'Memoires concernant 
les Chinois, Tome XI, page 590, a subsequent." May a 
similar scene never be renewed should the reforming apostles 
meet Roman missionaries and be settled with them in China, 
at the same place ! The calumniated missionaries were im- 
prisoned, (1784) examined and sent to Peking in company 
with those who had undertaken to carry them to the place of 
their destinations 

Meanwhile the principal promoter of priest smuggling, 
Peter Zay, took himself off. He quitted Canton, came to 
Macao and embarked for Goa. Few of his criminal associates 
could boast of so narrow an escape ; some of them, when 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 

seized, lost their fortitude at the sight of the instruments of 
torture, and exchanged the crown of a martyr for a contume- 
lious, miserable life ; others allured by the hope of pardon, 
apostatised unhesitatingly, and reverted to the worship of their 
ancestors : the most sly made no difficulty in letting their 
judges into the secret of th^ missionary system. This dis- 
covery, and an edict, that there was no difference between 
christians and mahometans, but that both co-operated to the 
subversion of order and good government, made it necessary 
minutely to examine the accusation. Upon investigating this hy- 
pothetical connection, many missionaries in disguise were found 
in almost all the provinces : they were imprisoned and trans- 
mitted to the jail at Peking : their coadjutors, the Chinese 
priests absconded, hiding themselves in dens and caverns. 
To mitigate the severity of the persecution and of the prison, 
and likewise the degree of punishment that awaited the cul- 
prits, the prelates residing at Peking, spared neither supplica- 
tions, entreaties nor bribes. However, their solicitations ef- 
fected no relief. Every effort to save their friends had prov- 
ed inefficient, when all at once the most unexpected decree 
of 9th November, 1785, filled all christian hearts with con- 
solation and gladness. Fully convinced by inquiries and 
proofs, that the missionaries had no other object than to teach 
religion, Keen-lung released twelve Europeans,* still in jail, 
and granted them either to remain in their respective churches 
in Peking, or to proceed, accompanied by a Mandarin to 
Canton, that th6y might return to Europe. Nine of them 
accepted the last proposal ; three joined their friends at Pe- 
king. The above narrative differs in some particulars from 
that given by De Guignes in his voyage to Peking ; ours is 
borrowed from a manuscript notice, which the successor of 
Delia Torre, the reverend J. B. Marchini, procurator of 
propaganda fide, a gentleman and philanthropist, communi- 
cated to his superiors at Rome. To this friend, who long 
ago departed this life, I am obliged for many of the most cor- 
rect and valuable parts of the history of the missions in 
China. 

* Dix-huit mlanonaires Europeans moururent dans lea priaona de Pe- 
kin^r. « Choix dea Let. edif. Tome 111; 190." — M. Amiot n>n parle que 
de aix. '* Mem. cone, lea Chinoia. Tome XV ; 378." 



Digitized by 



Google 



181 

The steps taken by the pontiffs for the extension of their 
universal church, proved inefficient, the moment true philoso* 
phy, love of truth, began a century and more ago to scruti- 
nize the chaos** of absurdities ; \vhen she has further pene« 
trated into the intricate recesses of political and religious"^ 
superstitions, and it be demonstrated, that they are the cause 
of human moral miseries, then shall the << divine iSame/'— 
common sense — overrule her opponents, and convince the 
world, that, by respecting mutual rights, harmony, benevo- 
lence and brotherly afiection, may be naturalized, and man- 
kind taught to cherish one another as members of the most 
extensive and noble family on earth. The meaning of an 
universal church comprehends, of course, the whole world ; 
the least progress a few missionaries made any where, sub- 
jected the country to an ecclesiastical division, of which the 
sovereign was generally unaware. Gregory XIII entrusted 
the spiritual government of all China to the bishop of Macao, 
and the missionary care to Jesuits and natives of Portugal. 
That kingdom, the population of which was always small, 
could not supply an extending mission in Asia with indispen- 
sable laborers ; popes, therefore permitted gradually, Fran- 
ciscans, Dominicans, Augustines, secular priests of the sem- 
inary of foreign missions at Paris, and those of the propaganda 
fide to exert their devotional zeal in various parts of China. 
Any institution either of them had organized was considered 
property by birth-right, and governed with the consent of the 
prelate, by members of their own body. These concessions 
the king of Portugal deemed derogatory to his royal claim ; 
for were it necessary, he argued, to subduct from the bishop 
of Macao, any part of spiritual obedience of China, the sov- 
ereign, of Portugal alone had a right to divide it, and nominate 
ecclesiastics, proper for the discbarge of episcopal duties in 
any part of that vast empire. Upon this plea, Alexander 
YIII consented that Peter II, king of Portugal, should ap- 

* May we be allowed to quote in corroboration of onr asiertion, fromFi* 
langieri, the following : " La dialettica delle scole . . . introdusse cosl nella 
leli^one como nella politica . . . una puerile nomanclatura, e fece, che la 
Oivmitk non meno che la legislaadone paMame pe' fill gottiliflBimi delle 
logiche distinzione e delle metwsiehe aottigliezze con una destrezza pro- 
digioea, ma che non leryiya ad altro che a mostrare la sagacitk dello spi- 
rito umano anche nel momento nel qual abusa delle sue forze.'* Sden. 
ddlaLegid, 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 

point three bishops, and fix the limits of their respective ju- 
risdiction. The three dioceses which Peter proposed, com- 
prehended not only China, but also Tunkin and Cochin-china^ 
» pretension so extravagant that the Vatjoan refused to 
sanction it. The king's claim Innocent XII ani^ulled (1696) 
by the bull, <' E sublimi," assigning by his sble and supreme 
authority to the bishopric of Peking, the provinces Peh-chih- 
le, Shan-tung and the Eastern Tartary ; to that of Nanking 
the provinces Keang-nan and Ha-nan, and to that of Macao 
the provinces Kwang-tung, Kwang-se and the island Hae- 
nan ; he reserved to himself to govern the rest of China, 
by apostolic vicars, nominated by the congregation of propa- 
ganda fide and approved by the pope. Many of the old 
missions are comprised in this new division, but they are all 
with the consent of the bishop or apostolic vicar, in whose 
jurisdiction they are situated, ruled by members of that com- 
munity, which laid the foundation of them. 

Aware that their personal security and the advancement of 
an illicit undertaking, depended entirely upon the connivance 
of the constituted authorities in the places where missionaries 
ventured to proclaim their tenets, every precaution was used 
to prevent the most distant suspicions, that foreign priests 
might become indiscreet witnesses of the transactions of any 
civil or military officer. By scrupulously abstaining from the 
least interference in matters which were not of their province, 
this discretion produced in the Mandarins a willingness to 
shut their eyes to missionary proceedings. Experience had 
strengthened mutual confidence, which would most likely 
have continued to this day unshaken, had the sensibility of 
patriotism not been roused by the arrival (1802) of British 
auxiliaries to Macao. Their admission it was anticipated, 
would be ruinous to the interest of the Portuguese, and ap- 
prehending from the laxity and dilatory conduct of the Chi- 
nese, that the provincial Mandarins were debauched and 
corrupt, the senate communicated in a letter to Dm. Fr. 
Alexander de Gouveza, bishop of Peking, their fears. He 
and father Joseph Bernardo Almeida respectfully informed 
"the governor of Europeans,"* "that the Portuguese settled 

* The governor of Europeans was commonly a Ko-ldo entrusted with 
the concerns of the missionaries at Peking, till Uie year 1804, when they 
were compelled to appear before any tribunal that summoned them, and 
were treated in every respect like natural subjects of China. 



Digitized by 



Google 



183 

at Macao were in great peril * * * that they (our country- 
men) have requested us to present to the emperor their 
actual situation." An inquiry was instituted, and though the 
Tsung-tuh demonstrated that the apprehension was altogether 
unfounded, and merely the effect of pusillanimity, the whole 
body of Mandarins took the alarm, for another channel of 
communication with the emperor than theirs, would be in- 
auspicious and replete with danger ; it was time to prevent, 
or if possible, to annihilate priests meddling in the affairs of 
government. 

An experiment was tried in a criminal case of an Italian 
propagandist. Adiodato, sinice Te-teen, had a dispute with 
the Portuguese about a mission in the city Teng-chow-foo 
and its environs. Being dissatisfied with the sentence of the 
bishop of Peking, he resolved to appeal to the congregation 
of propaganda fide ; and that its members might at a glance, 
form a correct idea of the place in question, Adiodato had 
a map drawn which might even be laid under the eyes of the 
pontiff, and serve as a base to the decision of his holiness. 
The bearer of the map, letters and documents to be delivered 
at Macao, was detained (1804) in the province Keang-se, 
and transported to Hing-poo, the tribunal of crimes and pun- 
ishments. Informed that the author of the map was Adiodato, 
the distinction of a Mandarin of the sixth order was taken 
from him, and the culprit sent to be examined. He confessed 
that he had directed the map to " the lord of the law," an 
epithet the popes are known by in China, with a request that 
his holiness might be pleased by a decree, to put an end to 
the dissensions of missionaries, concerning the district of Teng- 
chow-foo. Upon further inquiries the judges heard that 
Adiodato was in the habit of leaving his church, to roam 
abroad teaching religion, that Chinese catechists were em- 
ployed in the four churches* at Peking, and in various prov- 
inces to train people up in the faith of the Europeans ; that 

*Two belonged to the Portuffiiese, one to the French, and the fourth to 
the Italians. The Chinese called St. Joseph, the eldest of the Portuguese 
churches ** Tsnng-tang," i. e. the eastern house. It was burnt by an 
accident in 1814, but permission to rebuild it could never be obtained. 
" Nang-tang," i. e. the southern house, the actual cathedral of the Portu- 
guese. "Pe-tang," i. e. the northern house, within the first precinct of 
the imperial palace, it belonged to the French. " Se-tang," i. e. the 
western house, or the Italian church of propaganda fide. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Mmm ^m^mmmm 



184 

among the catechists were soldiers and one woman, who cat- 
echised women ; that within a few years thirty treatises of a 
doctrine "that perverts the heart," have been published. 
In the present perplexity those who apostatised, were set at 
liberty ; " the Tartar soldiers declared unworthy of being 
ranked among men ;" the Chinese soldiers who did not re- 
cant were sentenced to wear a heavy canga,* sinice Kea, 
round the neck for three months, and go to Thibet as 
slaves ; the woman catechist was also banished to Thibet, 
and given to the soldiers, but not allowed to redeem herself 
by money, as had before been the case with women. Adio- 
dato the modern " hiruy emissarius," loaded with his own 
sins and those of his superiors, was sent to Je-ho or Zhe- 
faol to be imprisoned in the bridewell of the eleuths. 

Seven years being past, another occurrence gave further 
vent to the resentment of the Mandarins. A Chinese Catho- 
lic priest, Stephen Chang, bom in the province Shan-se, was 
(1811) arrested at Se-gan-foo, and transmitted to Peking. 
Interrogated, he boldly declared that the bishop of Peking, 
Dm. Fr. Alexander de Qouveza, who departed this life,(l 808) 
had made him submit to an examination, and then conferred 
on him the seventh order : that on his arrival ^t Shan-se, 
another European, the apostolic vicar gave him an office in a 
certain place of the province. From this confession the 
judges inferred that the christians designate by a numerical 
order, the men entrusted with their secret instructions, and 
like the Mandarins, always disposed to act in obedience 
to the summons of their superiors. To secure the apos- 
tolic vicar, known by the Chinese appellation Lu, Man- 
darins proceeded in search of him to the churches in Pe- 
king, where on inquiry, the priests protested that they 
knew nothing of such a man. By this evasion the culprit's 
life was safe ; the back-doors to the churches were by order 
of the emperor, walled, and the whole guard, consisting 
(1805) of four Mandarins and forty soldiers, centered at the 
principal entrance. To preserve to the Chinese chrisdans 
an unmolested communication with their priests, each church 
had to pay to the military, (we are assured) yearly the sum 

* A wooden olog or collar borne on the neck hj wy of puaiihment ftr 
clivers ofkncet,'^Rtt^9 Offdoptdu, 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 

of five hundred taels. The interrogatories of Adiodato and 
Ghang raised fresh motives for distrust. A censor, b a me- 
morial to the emperor, described the Europeans propagating 
under the mask of mathematicians, a doctrine which deserved 
to be proscribed, and the Mandarins conniving at the trans- 
gression of the prohibitive laws, merited, he said, severe pun- 
ishment. The Europeans employed in the service of the 
court, had room enough, he meant, in one house, and ought 
to live together ; the suggestions being weighed and approv- 
ed by the tribunal of rites, Kea-king confirmed them. 

The governors (they were at that time two,) of the Euro- 
peans, mtimated to the priests an order to concentrate them- 
selves at Nan-tang, and the resolution that the members 
of the tribunal of mathematics might remain at Peking, on 
condition of not preaching their law. Convinced they could 
be of no fiirther use to religion, the Italians, in all four, availed 
themselves of the permission and left Peking, (1811) accom- 
panied by a Mandarin, who provided them during their jour- 
ney with what they necessarily wanted, and delivered to them 
in Canton, one thousand taels to pay their passage to Europe. 
The Italian church and its premises were sold and the pro- 
duce handed over to those who had full power to receive it. 
In 1812, the buildings were razed, and the place on which 
they had been seated, converted into an open field. The 
Portuguese and French had also an intention to quit the court, 
but having succeeded by solicitations and gifts, (we under- 
stand) in continuing their residence in their respective 'church- 
es ; and entertaining the flattering hope, that this storm, like 
many others, which the religion had at difierent periods hap- 
pily weathered, might soon be over, they resolved not to 
abandon, at this conjuncture, their alarmed flocks. These 
were also at length deprived of their immediate spiritual aid, 
for the emperor confirmed the following propositions : *• the 
Europeans shall not be allowed fiirther to buy land * * * for 
such property is the den of christians, and the means of prop- 
agating their religion * * * a memorandum of the landed 
property belonging to the Europeans shall be deposited, but 
the papers of purchase remain in theit hands, that they may 
sell or let the land " ad libitum :" the rent shall not be col- 
lected by them, (to prevent Europeans fix)m having " Lai- 
24 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 

vang," [Portuguese orthography,] i. e. active and passive 
correspondence with the people,) but by a tribunal to b6 
appointed." Thus by a temperate, though efficient measure, 
the government of China was attaining its object. The 
French lazarists having excited a strong suspicion, that they 
were busy in Ho-nan, with the promulgation of a proscribed 
doctrine, the last of them, L. M. Lamiot, who lived in the 
capital of the empire, was during the tribulations caused by 
the detentionofAdiodato, imprisoned, examined, and m 1820 
sent to Canton. He left at Peking the Portuguese congre- 
gation for his procurators, and received by degree the amount 
of sale for which the French church and other property had 
been sold. The remaining Portuguese realized the greatest 
part of their estate, and having made, (we are told,) the Rus- 
siian archimandrite* at Peking, their lawful attorney, the 
members of the mission prepared to leave the court. The 
bishop of Nanking, who resided at Peking, was obliged to 
remain, because the weak state of his health, would not 
suffer him to accompany the bishop elect to Peking. Veris- 
simo Monteiro de Serra, who landed at Macao 1827, and 
took his departure for Lisbon 1830. 



The query whence the missionaries derived their subsist- 
ence and support, most naturally presents itself. The sove- 
reigns of Portugal intent upon extending the sway of Christi- 
anity in all parts of the pagan world, Philip I assigned (1588) 

* By the fifth article of the treaty of 1728, between Russia and China, it 
was stipulated : << the Russians shall henceforth occupy at Peking Uie Kou- 
an or court they inhabited ; a church shall be built by the assistance of the 
Chinese government * * * four priests shall be attached to the church, 
and the Russians be permitted to worship their God according to the rites 
of their religion. Four young students and two of a more advanced age, 
shall be received into their house to learn the language of the countrv. 
Thev shall be maintained at the expense of the emperor, and shall be 
at liberty to return to their own country as soon as they have finished their 
studies. The usual term is ten years, but owing to the dilatory form of 
the Chinese offices, every new appointment is liable to suffer a cfelay of a 
year and upwards. The Russian mission under the guidance of George 
Timbowski, that entered Peking in the beginning of December, 1820, con- 
sisted of an archimandrite, five ecclesiastics of an inferior rank, and four 
young men destined to study the Chinese and Mongol languages. 



Digitized by 



Google 



187 

tttfough his viceroy of India, Dm. Duarte de Meneyes, on 
the royal chest at Malacca, " a reasonable yearly allowance 
to the mission in China," paid till 1616 inclusively. During 
this period a plan of economy for the mission had been di- 
gested by Alexander Valignano, who, in visiting the various 
stations Ricci had instituted in his zigzag tour from Shaou- 
chow to Peking, his resting place, convinced himself that the 
acquisition of landed property, would more than ready money 
insure to the missionaries an almost certain success in their 
undertaking. The Jesuits bound by a vow to serve religion 
without emolument from the Roman see, in any part his holi- 
ness thought proper to send them, had the permission to fat- 
ten by trade with the idolatrous nations whom they settled 
among. Charlevoix says : ^^ Les jesuites ne faisoient autre 
chose que donner leur argent et en recevoir le produit." 
In the latter end of the sixteenth and in the beginning of the 
seventeenth century, ^his privilege was valuable ; trade, we 
know, produced at tliat period an unusus^ profit, a portion of 
which the Jesuits set apart to follow up the plan of Valig- 
nano, who died 1606.* This stock, considerably enlarged 
by the uncommon liberality, which the inhabitants of Macao 
invariably bestowed upon any project, tending to extend the 
influence of the Roman church in China, was invested in 
the purchase of land, on which a fixed yearly rent assured to 
the respective missions a regular income. The Portuguese 
and French Jesuits had many shops and houses at Peking, 
and landed property in the vicinity ; their order, being by 
the bull "tlominus ac redemptor," (2d July, 1773,) of Clem- 
ent XIV abolished, their property passed to the new labor- 
ers in the vineyard of the lord in China. The missionaries 
of the propaganda fide were less favored, they depended on 
remittances from Rome, and on the prudent and candid 
admmistration of their procurator at Macao. 

* £1 yisitador general Valignano accomod6 k cada residencia de treinta 
trea al an5, deapuea de examinar que esta quantia bastaya, aai para el bus- 
tento como para elveatido de loe reUgioaos, que las asistiesen. — Asia Port. 

In Siam^tne allowance, a French misaionarj has aasnred me, is actuallj 
nz dollars per month. 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 



We are not able precisely to determine the actual Chinese 
Roman Catholic christians in China, but we shall approach 
the truth by borrowing from the Rev. J. B. Marchini's map 
of the missions, presented 1810, to the bishop of Macao. 



BiSHOPBics Composed of Europeans. 


Court Chin. 
Priest Christ 


Total. 


Macao, 

Peking, 
Nanking, 
Vicarages. 
Fuh-keen, 

Sse-ehoan, 

Note,* 
Eastern Tnnkin, 

Western Tonkin, 

Coehin China, 
Siam, 


{ Pr. Kwang-tnng, Kwang- 

(Pih.ehlh.le,8han-taDg, 
I East Tartary, 

Keang-nan, Ho-nan, 

(Fah.k«en,Che-keang, 
^Keangse on the uland 
i Formosa, 

( Sze-chnen, Kwei-chow, 
j Ynn-nan, 

Shan-se, Shen-se, Kan- 
sah,Ho»kwang,andWes. 
< tern Tartary. 

^ofthe kingdom Tnnkin, 

\ of Um kingdom Tonkin, 

( Cochin-china, Lian^pa, 
\ Cambodia, and Laos, 

jmatra. 


1 Bishop. 

1 11 Missfons. 
1 Bishop. 

rlbishjlnpt. 
{l Coadjutor. 
M Missions. 

( 1 Bishop, 
M Coadjutor. 
( Q Missions. 

( 1 Bishop. 
^6 Mission- 
Varies, 

Cn Bishop. 
MCoadf. 
(6 Miss. 
( 1 Bishop. 
hCoadj. 
(4 Miss. 

( 1 Bishop, 
i 7 Miss.*^ 

( 1 Bishop, 
is Miss. 


5 
18 
6 

8 
25 
18 

. 60 

70 

15 
6 


7,000 

40,000 
33,000 

30,000 

70,000 

35,000 

132,000 
175,000 

60,000 

30,000 
Total 


215,000 
370,000 


585,000 


aBidn|»riekt, 


• 


10 Bishops. 
4 Coadjutors. 
43 Mis;. 






French 19. 
Spaniards 11. 
Italians 10. 
Portngnese 3. 



JVote.~Dr. J. F. GamelU Careri wrote in 1696, « there are about 900,000 
christians in China." 



Digitized by 



Google 



} 



189 

Papal Legates to China. The reader will no doubt re- 
collect that Miguel Ruggiero came fix)m Goa to Macao, where 
he was taught the Chinese language ; he went then as chap- 
lain in merchant ships to Canton, and succeded in making at 
that place a few converts. His collaborator and successor^ 
Mathew Ricci, must be considered the founder of the Roman 
church in China, for Ruggiero went (1582) by command of 
Alexander Valignano to Rome ; he laid before his holiness 
as full an account of China, as could be expected from the 
man's short residence on the very confines of the empire. 
Valignano solicited the pontiff with many pressing arguments 
to send a legate to China who might prevail on the sovereign 
to confer protection on those Europeans, who were laboring 
to teach to his subjects their way to heaven and eternal bliss. 
Though Ruggiero seconded with all his might the solicited fa- 
vor, all direct intercouse between Rome and Peking was. put 
off for more than a century. 

To prevent vaccillation in the system of instruction, Ricci 
drew up a few rules, reputed by him orthodox, and required 
co-operators to follow them. Scrupulous, timorous priests, or 
rather ambitious antagonists began to rail at the rules as idola- 
trous. A Spanish Dominican, John Baptise Morales, who 
entered 1633, the mission, published many pamphlets agaiiist 
the rites and customs of China, esteemed civil and secular by 
Ricci, by Morales,* superstitious. As such they were con- 
demned by the congregation of propaganda fide, and its opin- 
ion confirmed (1645) by Innocent X. A Jesuit, Martin 
Martini, proved to the satisfaction of the tribunal of inquisi- 
tion, that the rites and customs were of a civilf nature, and 
in that light they were approved (1656) by Alexander VII, 
who neglected to repeal the brief of InnocentX. Each party 
therefore defended, under the sanction and' authority of two 
popes its respective elaborate opinion, till no less than twenty 
five missionaries! met at Canton, to which place they were 

* The Dominioaius had repreiented the hall of ancestors as a teniple, and 
the whole ceremony as idolatry and sacrifice. Mosheim. 

t Martin Martini represents to Alexander VII in a writing at large, that 
the Chinese customs were free from idolatry and superstition, and tended 
only to the peace and welfare of the empire. — Moshkm. 

X Viz. 3 Dominicans, 1 Franciscan, 21 Jesuits, were sent to Canton, four 
others were kept at court.— /)tiAaZ<Ie. 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 

hj an imperial order banished (1665.) This involuntary 
conjunction inspired them with the desire to fraternize by 
settling the sense of those questions on which they had been 
and were still split. Living in a seminary that had belonged 
to the Jesuits, several meetings were held in which the matter 
of a controversy was without passion and animosity, we are 
told, discussed and weighed by philologists, learned and ortho* 
dox men. By them, forty articles, which should hereafter 
serve for rules to the masters of the gospel, were unanimously 
ratified. One of the articles runs thus : " In respect to the 
customs, by which the Chinese worship Confucius and the 
deceased, the answer of the congregation of the universal in- 
quisition, sanctioned 1656 by his holiness Alexander VII, 
shall be invariably followed, for it is founded upon the most 
probable opinion, without any evident proois to the contrary; 
and this probability being admitted, the door of salvation must 
not be shut against innumerable Chinese, who would abandon 
our christian religion, were they forbidden to attend to those 
things to which they may lawfiilly and without injury to their 
faith attend, and forced to give up what cannot be given up 
without serious consequences." 

When we read that John Polanco, procurat9r of the Do- 
minicans at Rome, had induced the congregation of inquisitors 
to resolve, and Clement IX to confirm, (20th Nov, 1669,) 
that the decrees of 1645, and 1666, were both in vigor, we 
are disposed to apprehend that the holy see foresaw with sor- 
row the probability, that the old acrimonious contention would 
be, by the concordate, signed at Canton, set entirely at rest. 
By Clement IXth's decree, peace and harmony vanished once 
more. Almost at the very -moment the missionaries had by a 
special grace of Kang-he, permission to rejoin (1671) their re- 
spective establishments, a Spaniard, Dominic Pi avarette, a Do- 
minican, hoisted (1673,) the standard of reprobation, (in spite 
of the convention he had signed four years before,) against the 
rites and customs of China. He was joined in chorus by 
many missionaries, who from the year 1685, hiaid flocked to 
China. The new comers not being comprehended in the 
edict, (22d March, 1692) by which Kang-he granted to an- 
cient residents a free exercise of their religion, the Mandarins 
opposed every where the project of the intruders. Many of 
them, however, got by the mfluence of the Jesuits and their 



Digitized by 



Google 



191 

friends at court, and in the provinces, leave to remain and 
begin the task of their mission ; but it was not in the power 
of the Jesuits to attend successfully to the pretensions of them 
all. Those who esteemed the favor bestowed on them une- 
qual to their individual desert, and those who complained of 
a wiKul neglect embraced the opinion of Navarette, and sided 
with Charles Maigrot, a Frenchman, apostoCc vicar of Fuh- 
keen, who ventured ^^ without applying to his principal at 
Rome, by his own authority, to supersede a decree of the 
holy inquisition, and that confirmed by a pope, (Alexander 
YII)" to issue- 1693, a mandate which added fuel to the 
already violent dispute. Although Kang-he had (1700) de- 
clared in an edict, communicated to the pope, that the char- 
acter " Teen," means the true God, and that the " customs 
of China" are political, Maigrot"*^ having denied (1693) that 
Teen signifies nothing more than the material heaven, and 
that the Chinese customs are superstitions ; this decision/otir 
inquisitors appointed by Innocent XII, chose to support, and 
Clement XI to confirm by a decree of 20th November 1704. 
At Rome, expectations were entertained, that a dispute 
which had lasted nearly a whole century, would subside, and 
all classes of missionaries reverently obey and observe the 
said decree. To obtain the consent of Kang-he, Clement 
XI constituted Charles Thomas Maillard de Tournan, 
titular patriarch of Antioch, his commissary, apostohc visitor 
and legate, " a latere." Tournan embarked, in spite of the 
king of Portugal's claimed right of patronage, (1703) not 
from Lisbon. He touched at Manila, where the governor, 
Dm. Dominic Sabalburu received the legate, though he 
brought no pass from Spain, very well, an attention the court 
of Madrid disapproved and censured. Tournan landed (1705) 
on Green island at Macao: he was welcomed by Francis 
Pinto, provincial of Japan, and complimented by the bishop, 
and by the governor of the town. Mosheim describes Tour- 
nan a man '* whose good disposition was under the influence 

* CSe Mai^ot ne savoit pas un mot Chinois. — VdUaMa Essai gur Ua 
moeurs. During the stay of Tournan at court Maigrot was summoned and 
admitted to an audience. '' L'empereur lui demanda rezplication de trots 
caracteres en or au-dessusde son trone. Maigrot ne put lire que- deux, et 
Kang-he resolut de se faire expliquer par interprStei. Siede de JjmU XIV, 
T. II ; 405 edition de 1784. 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 

of a narrow spirit and weak understanding." He was num- 
bered among those, who in the Roman Catholic church are 
designated by the appellation of " rigids." His antipathy to 
the Jesuits made him doubt their submission and smcerity, 
though by their supplications and earnest entreaties, Kang-he 
at last condescended to give to the legate an audience (31st 
December, 1705.) Four days previously, ToumsTn trans- 
mitted a memorial, which Kang-he termed a paper replete 
with futilities, and by some other unseasonable pretensions he 
drew upon himself the following censure in writing. 1st. In 
the eyes of the emperor, Bouvet* stands acquitted. 2d. It 
were proper that the pope's legate intermeddled in no con- 
cerns but in those of religion. 3d. Instead of rooting out, as 
you pretend, the discord, it is going on extending all over the 
empire. 4th. Europeans, who were in the habit of living on 
friendly terms, are disunited since the arrival of the visitors. 
5th. The emperor is forced to admit into his vast dominions 
no other missionaries than those who shall have previously 
been examined. On intimation that he should present his 
credentials and titles of legate, Tournan produced nothing 
more than one letter adflressed to the bishop of Peking, and 
another to Maigrot, bishop of Canon " in partibus." This 
disclusure put an end to his representation ; Touman was 
commanded to leave Peking at the expiration of a few days. 
Meanwhile the patriarch received from Europe the news 
that the opinion of the four inquisitors, concerning the contro- 
verted rites, had (26th November, 1704) been confirmed by 
Clement XL This decree the apostolic visitor echoed by a 
mandate (1707) that no Chinese christian should ever prac- 
tice the customs and usages, which the laws of China re- 
quh*ed its subjects to comply with, a piece of audacity fully 
resented. The legate got at first an order to quit China di- 
rectly, then came another, that he should be kept in custody 
till the return of the two Jesuits Kang-he had sent to Rome, 
Touman, an exile and a prisoner, arrived 30th June, 1707, at 
Macao, where he had to encounter disobedience, humiliation 
and confinement. The reader will recollect, that the patri- 
arch did not proceed by way of Lisbon to Asia, probably be- 

* Bouvet had just been sent to Rome as envoy, with present! to the pope, 
a commisflion Touman thought that his auditor ought to have been hon- 
ored with. 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 

cAUde the congregatioti of cardinals came in 1680, to the con* 
elusion, that the right of an universal patronage was unfounded 
and nugatory. The court offended at the legate's having 
taken his passage to the East Indies from any other port than 
Lisbon, commanded 'Dm. Ft. Augustine da Annuncia^ad, 
archbishop of Goa, to revenge this aflfront : he in the quality 
of primate of the east, ordered Dm. John de Cazal, bishop of 
Macao, to publish a pastoral, prohibiting any body in China 
to acknowledge Tournan for an apostolic visitor. By this 
document the public was informed, that Kang-he had as party 
appealed by the mission of two priests, Anthony Barros and 
Anthony Bouvolier, to his holiness, and that the mandate of 
Tournan, in direct opposition to the decree of his imperial 
majesty, would root out the very vestige of the law of Christ 
in China, and be the cause of infallible ruin to Macao. The 
captain general, Diego de Pinho Teixeira, acted in concert 
with the bishop and his vicar-general, Lawrence Gomes. 
They sent the judge, Lobo de Gama, to signify to the patri- 
arch, the wish of the three orders, prelates, nobility, and com- 
mons, that he might refrain from any act of jurisdiction, hostile 
to the right of the royal patronage ; not yielding to this peti- 
tion, the legate was deprived of his liberty, shut up in a priv- 
ate house ; not in the episcopal palace, as Mosheim pretends ; 
and watched by rigorous, inexorable, constantly changing 
guards. Missionaries, who in obedience to the mandate of 
Tournan, did not submit to be examined (1707) at Peking, 
had resorted to Macao, awaiting for opportunity secretly to 
return to their respective hiding places ; even they were re- 
fused admittance to the legate. Disgusted with the incessant 
vexations, Tournan resolved to handle the weapons of the 
Vatican ; he hurled against his principal enemies, ecclesiasti- 
cal censures, but they were treated with so little respect, that 
the bishop of Macao ventured to stick up at the very door of 
the hall of his excellency's residence, a monitory, in which the 
patriarch was exhorted under pain of excommunication to re- 
voke within three days, his censures, and exhibit to the dio- 
cesan, evidence of his power and legateship. By these and 
other mortifications, faithful vassals fulfilled the commands 
contained in a letter, dated Lisbon, 3d April 1709 ; "Deveis 
ter entendido, que se o Cardeal pertender exercitar jurisdic- 
5a6 alguna nos meos dominios em virtude das ordens que levou, 
25 



Digitized by 



Google 



19* 

e das, que novamente che forem, o na5 deveis consentir, e ad- 
vertoreis a todos os-prelados che nao obedecao, e ao Cardeal 
che mandareis intimas terdes este ordem. You must re- 
member that if the cardinal wants to exercise any jurisdiction 
in my dominions by virtue of the orders he took with him, 
or those that may be sent, you must resist it, and inform all 
the prelates not to obey him, and even intimate to the cardi- 
nal that you have such orders. The dignity of a cardinal, to 
which Clement XI raised (1707) Tournan, could not eradicate 
the recollection of painful and undeserved insults, which im- 
pious men, he thought, had levelled against his sacred person, 
though his eminence bore with singular resignation the humil- 
iations ; sorrow hastened, no doubt, the dissolution of his 
bodily frame, for he expired, not as Mosheim mentions, on 
the 8th June, 1711, but at one o'clock, P. M. on the 8th of 
July, 1710. His bones, Mezzabarba, the patriarch we are 
going to speak of, took from Macao 1721, and brought to 
Rome. 

Many friars, but principally Jesuits, rejected the mandate 
of Tournan, and argued that the decision about the rites of 
China, being of an incalculable consequence, belonged es- 
sentially to a general council. A declaration being published 
(1711) by the general of the Jesuits, that the members of 
the company of Jesus always had and would always receive 
with passive obedience, the decision of the holy see, Clement 
XI issued (1715) the bull " ex ilia die," relative to the cere- 
monies that were to be tolerated or absolutely prohibited. 
Still many bishops and apostolic vicars entertained scruples, 
and demanded further instructions, concerning the proscribed 
rites. This bull, enjoying the king of Portugal's influence, 
because John V wanted the pope to grant lus investure to 
the three elect bishops of Macao, Nanking and Peking, 
Clement XI resolved to send his legate a latere to China, 
Charles Ambrose Mezzabarba, patriarch of Alexandria ; 
he took his passage on board the Portuguese ship Francis 
Xavier. The court of Lisbon bore the expenses of the pa- 
triarch from Lisbon to China, and the senate by commands 
of his majesty, those of the legate, his retinue and attend* 
ants, not only during their stay at Macao and in Peking, but 
also those of their return to Europe. Mezzabarba was di- 
rected to express the pope's sincere gratitude to Kang-he for 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 

his magnanimous kindness towards the missionaries * * * to 
beg leave to remain in China at the head^ or as superior to 
the whole mission * * * and to obtain from his assent, that 
the christians of China might submit to the decision of his 
holiness concerning the rites. Papers Touman exhibited, 
and the brief of Clement XI, or the credentials of Mezzabar- 
ba were delivered to the tribunal of the ceremonies ; creden- 
tials from a temporal sovereign, the ambassador at his first 
audience, presents himself to the emperor. Mezzabarba at 
his reception congratulated Kang-he upon the brilliant and 
glorious victories his armies had achieved in Thibet, a speech 
that could hardly fail to conciliate the good wil! of the victor. 
Kang-he distinguished the legate by peculiar affabihty, but 
altered his tone whenever the ceremonies condemned at Rome 
came under consideration. Arguing once this subject, the 
emperor made the following reflections; "how can the pope 
judge of the usages of China, of which he has as little knowl- 
edge as Ihave of the concerns of Euf(>pe," and added what 
we have quoted before, " I am astonished that the pontiff can 
believe men who pretend to teach the same religion, though 
some of them affirm what othew deny." That Kang-he 
could not by theological sopbistty be induced to surrender 
any part of his inherent autl^ority, did not escape the sagacity 
of the legate ; MezizabarH therefore solicited the emperor's 
permission to take leave^of China and return to Europe, that 
he might personally submit to the consideration of his holi- 
ness the ponderous r^^asons the emperor himself and his min- 
isters allege against the bull " ex ilia die." Kang-he agreed 
to the proposd. At his return to Macao the legate was pre- 
vailed upon tc mitigate the severity of the bull, by granting 
eight permissions, dated 4th November, 1721. The Jesuits 
were satisfied, but theu: antagonists succeeded after a struggle 
of more than twenty years in getting the permissions repealed, 
and condenmed (1742) by the bull " ex quo singulari," of 
Benedict XIV. Forty-eight chests with presents from Kang- 
he, an imperial commissary had in charge, and deposited at the 
Senate house : he delivered to Mezzabarba on his arrival, 
those destined for Clement XI, and to father Anthony Mag- 
alhens those intended for the sovereign of Portugal. 

The ship Francis Xavier, going to Europe, was burnt ia 
the harbor of Rio de Janeiro, and nothing saved except the 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 

coffin containing the remains of cardinal Tournan, because 
it happened to be on shore. The presents bestowed on Clem- 
ent XI were also consumed ; but Benedict XIII commissioned 
to Carmelites Fr. Gotardo de Santa Maria and Fr. Ildefon* 
so da Natividade to express, on their arrival in China, the 
pope's gratitude for the memorial its sovereign had honored 
the chief of the Roman church with. The friars arrived at 
Canton 1725. The Tsung-tuh hearing of their errand, and that 
they were also to congratulate Yung-ching on his exaltation 
to the throne, anticipated the commands of his master, and 
transmitted the envoys to the court of Peking. Of their re- 
ception I have met with no detail. The letter from the 
pope was delivered. It began by acknowledging the favor 
of the emperor's gifts which Mezzabarba had been the bearer 
of; it proceeded then to beg the emperor's acceptance of a 
few trifles, esteemed in Europe scarce and curious ; next, the 
pontiff solicits Yung^hing's protection for the Eqropeani 
and those Chinese ^ho professed Christianity ; at last the 
pope promised to pray ibr the welfare of the emperor and 
bis subjects. Yung-chisi^ g^^ve to Benedict a courteous and 
polite answers accompanied with marks of esteem, consisting 
in various articles of Chinese industry. To the petition of 
the envoys, that the missionariet^ exiles at CantOQ, might be 
allowed to return to their respeoiva churches, the emperor 
gave the following despatch* '< I cannot permit the mission* 
aries to live in the provinces. Wb^ does your pope wish 
them to be in the provinces ? If I sent V^onzes to Europe, 
how would you treat them ? As fanatic disturbers of the 
peace and public mind deserve." The carmelites were back 
at Canton the 27th January, 1726 ; on the next day they 
embarked for Pondicherry. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX 



Digitized by 



Google 



/Google 



Digitized by ^ 

■I 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



The following remarks on the climate of dnna^ were written hy 
Dr. Alexander Pearson^ during his residence in the country as 
first Surgeon at Canton^ of the honorable English East India 
Company. 



No. III. 



• " In October, and usually in the early part of that month, 
northerly winds with cool weather prevail for a few days, in 
the greater number returning to the blowing from southerly 
points, when the heat is much increased ; and under sach 
changes, variations from 15 to 20 degrees in twenty four hours 
are usual, and greater ones by no means rare, the atmosphere 
being clear, and the air dry. Such may be stated to be also the 
character of the climate during the two succeeding months of 
November and December, changes of wind from the northerly 
points being of shorter duration, as the season advances into 
winter; and when that sets in early in the northern parts 
of the empire, there are occasionally bleak days with storms 
of wind and rain. 

" From the middle of December to the end of February, the 
weather is more regularly and steadily cold or cool, and this 
period is probably the most salubrious, and certainly to Euro- 
pean feelings, the most agreeable in the course of the year. 
It then freezes occasionally, bnt rarely, not oftener on an av- 
erage than twice or thrice in the season. 

** Throughout March the temperature may be stated to be 
nearly the same, and often bleak ; the sky is clouded, and oc* 



Digitized by 



Google 



\ 



202 

easionallj much rain falls during that month. Although there 
is some advance of temperature, the same may be said of 
April ; and during both months, on the wind veering southerly, 
bringing much moisture into contact with the cooled earth, 
there are thick fogs, and much humidity is suspended in the 
atmosphere, which is occasionally close and sultry, more fre- 
quently towards the latter end of the period : and such con- 
tinues to be the state in May, with a marked advance of tem- 
perature, but still cool, until towards the middle of the month, 
when its advance becomes quick. 

" With June the hot weather commences, and continues 
during the whole of that and the subsequent months. Heavy 
rains often fall in August and September, in the latter half of 
which the nights become cool. The heat of this period seldom 
rises above 9G degrees Fahrenheit, but often approaches that, 
and sometimes exceeds it 2 or 3 degrees, without that allevia- 
tion from land and sea breezes, which similar and more strictly 
tropical climates enjoy. 

*< Respecting the state of the winds, their principal regular 
tion is of course by the monsoons, the law of which they obey 
generally, but with considerable variation of intermediate 
points, especially at Macao, as is usual on the sea-coasts. 
The N. E. monsoon frequently draws more to the eastward 
than that — when it blows harder and gales are frequent, being 
more severe the more the wind approaches the east point. 
That direction exerts every unpleasant and unsalubrious influ- 
ence, which is elsewhene complained of from it» especially on 
the valetudinary and those who hav6. sufibred from intermit* 
tents. The regularity of the monsoon varies much in diflferent 
seasons, generally and more particularly in the two last months 
of its prevalence. Changes to the southward are frequent, of 
which great vicissitudes of the te*mperature are a necessary 
consequence. It may be generally stated, that the seasens, in 
which there are fewest of such changes, are the most sahibri- 
ous, and these winters, in which there is much southerly wind, 
especially from £. 6. E. are the most unfavorable to health. 

*^ During the succeeding monsoon, ranging from S. E. to S^ 
W. whenever the wind veers to westward of the last point, or 
becomes westerly from its reaching* after having passed over 
large tracts of country, it becomes a hot wind ; and such a di* 
rection of it Is frequent during the whole summer monthsi 
most so in June and July ; in a perfectly regular season such 
westerly winds more rarely occur after the middle of the last 
month. Previously to the regular period for the change of 
this monsoon the wind oecasionaUy shifts to the N. W. blow- 



I 



Digitized 



by Google 



203 

ing from and over a continent thoroughly heated by the pre- 
ceding summer, it then becomes oppressively hot, and the air 
remarkably dry. It is from this quarter, and usually after a 
frequent recurrence of such weather, that the hurricanes, 
known by the name of typhons, commence, passing from thence 
easterly round the compass, usually attaining their utmost 
violence immediately after passing the eastward of north, and 
subsiding when the wind reaches at all to the west of the south 
point. They occur most frequently in August and September, 
although occasionally they have been known to happen so late 
as October. Nor are they regular as^ to frequency; a succes- 
sion of seasons (particularly of the cool ones,) passing without 
their occurrence, while at other times, during or after dry and 
hot summers, they happen repeatedly in one year.'' 

26 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 

No. IV. 

IN CAVERNAM UBI 
CAMOENS 

OPUS EGREOIUM COMPOSUISSB FERTUR. 



Hie, in remotis sol ubi rupibus 
Frondes per altas mollius incidit, 
Fervebat in pulchram camuenam 
Ingenium Camoentis ardens : 

Signiim et poetne marmore lucido 
Spirabat olim, carminibas sacrum, 
Parvumque, quod vivens amavit, 
Effigie decorabat antrum : 

Sed jam vetustas, nut manus impia 
Prostravit, eheu ! Trrste silentiura 
Regnare nunc solum videtur 
Per scopulos, virides et umbras ! 

At fama nobis restat — at incljtum, 
Restat poetffi nomen — at ingeni 
Stat carmen exemplum perenne, 
iErea nee monumeuta quaerit. 

Sic usque Virtus vincit, ad ultimas 
Perducta fines temporis, exitus 
Ridens sepulchrorum inanes, 
Marmeris et celerem ruinam I 



Macaio, MDCCCXXXI. 



J. F. Davis. 



Digitized by 



Google 



IMMlLJi 



206 

No. V. 

POPULATION OF MACAO IN 1834. 
In trb Parish St. Peteb. 





Families. 351. 


1 


Men. 


Age. 


Women. 




145 


7 


171 




n 


139 


15 


174 




^ 


182 


30 


306 


H- 
•^ 


a 


176 


60 


338 


Hi- 


^ 


18 


above 


68 






660 




1057 






2 ' 


7 


7 




4 


13 


15 


27 




n 


60 


30 


151 




i 


65 


60 


175 


s 


w 


7 




23 


^ 




147 




383 




Weddings 10 


Interments, 29 




Total 2247, in 1834. 





Signed by the Curate. 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 



Parish of St. Lavbbncb. 





Families 211. 






Men. 


Age. 


Women. 






115 


7 


143 








108 


16 


135 






.§ 


164 


30 


2C(5 




MA 

SB 




146 


60 


233 




14 


aibove 


58 








647 




834 








From Timor 122 


9 


From Timor 


172 




• 


Gaffers, 106 


U 


Gaffers 


78 




1 


Different casts 28 


U 


Dhers Casts 


42 


Ox 


i 


Enfranchised 7 


i< 


Enfranchised 


13 


g 


OQ 


267 




, 


305 




Baptued 67. | 


Weddings, 14| [Interments, 


69 


Total 1943 in 1884. 





Signed by the Curate. 



Digitized by 



Google 



207 



Pakish of St. Anthont. 





Families. 128. 




Men. 


Age. 


Women. 




67 


7 


98 




, 


67 


16 


86 




1 


87 


30 


113 


a> 




63 


60 


94 


^ 


|F 


6 


(C 


24 


' 




280 




416 






3 


7 


6 






6 


16 


13 




S 


38 


30 


41 




1 


16 


60 


77 


)S 


1 


3 




7 


^ 




65 




143 




1 Baptised 29. 1 


Weddings, 8| jlnterments, 19 


Total 903 in 1834. 



Signed by the Curate. 



Digitized by 



Google 



W8 

The Portuguese population of Macao, in Decemberr 1834, 
was 

In the Parish of St. Peter, White men, 660 

" « •*« women, 1057 

1717 

In the Parish of St. Lawrence, White men, . 547 
" " « women, 834 

1381 



In the Parish of St. Anthonj, White men*, 


280 


(( (( 


it 


women,' 


415 
695 
8793 


Slaves in St. Peter, 


male 


slaves. 


147 


(( 


female 


(( 


383 
630 


Slaves in St. Lawrence, 


male 


a 


257 


(( 


female 


t( 


305 
562 


Slaves in St. Anthonj, 


male 


ti 


65 


a 


female 


(( 


143 

206 

1300 

Total, 5093 



Memorandum. Among this population, seventy-five male 
individuals, born in Portugal or in its actual ultramarine do' 
minions (except those of Asia,) they consist in a governor, one 
civilian, six ecclesiastics, a few officers and soldiers, the others 
are merchants and sea-faring people. To tliis number we have 
to add two women frona Portugal. This account received in 
February, 1835, i^ due to the fkvor of the reverend curates of 
the three respective parish churches at Macao. 



Digitized by 



Google 



909 



No. TI; 



Le sage craint le Tien et oublie les hommes^ le mechant 
^raint les hommes et oublie le Tim* 



Mea livres parlent k moo esprit^ mes amis k mon coetir, le 
Tien k mon &iiie ; tont le reste k mes oreilles. 



L'homme qui se conduit mal, pere aussitot la paix du c(Bur : 
c'est ce que nous apellons remords de conscience. Cette- con* 
science est quelquefois etouifee a tel point p^r les passions 
humaines, que quoique Phomme la porte au fond de sou coeur, 
il ne peut le ranimer : il doit done sans cesse combattre les pas- 
sions, pour que le eouscience n'en soit pas la proie. Ainsi 
des que vous appercevez qu' une chose est mauvaise, arretez 
vous sur le champ et tournez vos pas vers le chemin de la rertu. 
Quand vous j serez acooutume, vos passions, yos desirs dere* 
gles s'amortiront insensiblement. 



Les ancients vouloient, *' que l'homme, en toutes choses, fit 
tous ses efforts pour reu«»ir, et^se resiguat eiuiuite JL la volui^e 

An Pifil »» *-i- 



du ciel.^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 



No. vn. 



Measurement of Portuguese ships from Europe oh 
Macao, since the tear 1831. 

Classes. 

let. Ships, the length of which, taken from the mizen to the 
foremast, multiplied by the breadth between the gangway, giv- 
ing a product of 154 chang, (i. e. 1540 cubits,) and upwards 
belong to the first class, and pay for every chang, (i. e. ten 
cubic,) . - . - . 6taels,223. 

2d. Those, measured by the above rule, giving 120 chang and 
upwards, are of the second class, and pay per ' 
chang, - - - - - 5 taels, 720. 

3d. Those measuring 90 chang and upwards, are of the 3d 
class, and pay per chang, . . - 4 taels. 

(N. B. '< By ancient regulations the following charges were 
added to the amount of measurement : 
10 per cent, for loss in melting. 
8 '* for difference in weight with the scales of the 

imperial treasury. 
17 " for reducing it to Sycee. 
2 ** for interpreters.") 
From the year 1831, are added to the amount of measure- 
ment 37 per cent, and 70 taels expenses of Csio-kum, " trans- 
lated public hoppo treasury," formerly it was 82 taels. « 

Hoppofees, 

On ships from Europe, first class, - 250 taels. 

** *' second class, - 240 taels. 

" " third class, - 170 taels. 

On registered ships from Macao and Manila. 

First class, - - - - 50 taels. 

Second class, - - - - 40 taels. 

Third class, - ... 30 taels. 

Registered ships once measured, pay only one third of the 
original measurement : to this indulgence, ships from Europe^ 
though measured, are not entitled. 



Digitized by 



Google 



sii 

ETumple of the third class. 

Length, 52 cubics. 

Breadth, 20 " . 

104,0 
Striking off the last fij^re, remain . 104 chanff. 

at tael, - - 4 per chang. 



37 per cent 

70 taels of Cs&o-num, - 


taelf, 416,000 

153,930 

70,000 


Fee to the boppo, 


639,920 
80,000 

Taels, 669,9-20 



P. "if.. . 4. ship from Portugal or its ultraraanne dominionSf 
pays besides, to the office of the procurator, a fee of fiftj 
dollars. 

27 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 



No. vni. 



CONVENTIONAL 

■ ' ' . 

Twelve Articles in Chinese^ of a Convention, dated Keen-lung^ g 
XlVth year, corresponding to 1749, % which the Mandarins 
rule*. 

Art. I. Any Chinese of bad behavior shall be turned out of 
Macao. A vagrant, having once caused disturbance ; the next 
time he must be expelled, his relations shall give to the Man- 
darin security for his not leaving them again ; tlie procurator 
(chief of the Chinese living at Macao,) shall also be answerable 
to the Mandarin for any vagrant he may permit to remain at 
Macao. Besides, the name of any such person shall be in- 
scribed in a chop and posted up in public places. Moreover, 
the chief of the Chinese at Macao, shall be bound to examine 
now and then, whether any of the vagabond Chinese have re- 
turned ; that being the case, the vagabond and his family shall 
be punished, and the procurator, chief of the Chinese, likewise 
should he, neglect giving information to the Mandarin. 

Art. II. The Tankat-boat shall be examined. AH the boats 
belonging to the Chinese living at Macao shall be examined, 
and a list of them made out, which is to be handed to the Man- 
darin of Heang-shan, that he may mark the boats, examine the 
water-men or women, and require security from them for their 
good behavior; this pledge is to be communicated to the chief 
of the Chinese at Macao, that he may govern them. No wa- 
ter-man or woman shall rest at night any where but at the 
beach of the hoppo-house, and by no means in hidden places, 
that they may be prevented from carrying out, or bringing in 
prohibited goods ; from conducting to Macao not only infamous 
Chinese, but even such who wish to embrace the law, (the Ro- 
man Catholic doctrine,) or visit the churches ; and from clan- 
destinely conveying European merchants to Canton. To put 

*The Chinese original was translated in Portuguese by Francis da Can- 
ha, and the translation verified by Nieuvalle, superior general of the French 
mission in China, and Siqueira, all three members of Sie society of Jesus. 

t Small boats commonly managed by women, who row on the water all 
round Macao. 



Digitized by 



Google 



213 



No. vni. 



PACT. 



Eleven Articles of a Convention, dated Qth November, 1749; to 
them the Portuguese Government of Macao adhere. 

Art. I. All Chinese gamblers and men of bad conduct shall 
be turned out of the place. 



Art. IL Tanka-boats and other barges shall at night-fall go 
to anchor at the sea shore, called *• praya pequena," opposite 
to the hoppo-house. 



Digitized by 



Google 



a stop to all these things, the Mandarin must send every day^ 
four soldiers duly to mark the lurking places. Should they 
fimi any boats there, the case must instantly be reported to 
tiiC Mandarin, that he may punish the culprits, and the chief 
of the Chinese for his ne^redt.' YF the soldiers for the sake of 
a bribe were to connive, they shall be beaten like criminals. 

Art. III. It is forbidden to sell any thing on credit. The 
Chinese shop-keeper must not give any ihing on credit to the 
CafFers, but sell for ready cash ; neither shall they be permit-: 
ed to buy any thing from them ; any body breakinir this order 
snail be punisfied and seiit out of Macao. 

Art. 'IV. ttf in' Chinese b;e apprehended at ilight, &c. Hence- 
forth, when the Chinese of Macao go out at night with a Ian- 
bfrh, fhl^y Hhbit hot bef seized % t2ilro{)e«n '§oTdie)'s, who tnust 
not maliciously put it out. Others; who \night itot tiave'had 
time, for some pressing business, to light the lantern, or who 
are ignorant of the usage of Macao from having arrived but 
lately; and lastly those even who are going to do mischief, 
when other of these is apprehended, the said soldiers must di- 
rectly hand him over to the procurator, chief of the Chinese, 
who shall send him to the Mandarin of the district to be tried 
and punished to the degree of his delinquency ; the procura^ 
tor therefore must not detain him an instant, still less punish 
him at his own caprice : should he act against this prohibition . 
he shall be impeached and severely punished by his own sove- 
reign. 

Aft. V. Airy cfimitic^ European tliutst infallibly be givcin up 
to be judged, &>^.* Frtftt thii tlttife forward, tin European, Who 
for the crime of homicide or plunder, shall desferVte'to be pun- 
ished with death, the regulation of Keen-lung's ninth year shall 
be attended to. The regulations to visit and inspect the dead 
body and to examine the guilty. After the inquest the delin- 
quent must be handed over to the Mandarin of Casa-branca, to 
be carefully secured : for this purpose he grants his bail and 
takes on his responsibility the prisoner ; he is not transmitted 
'to the higher Mandarins, for it is sufficient to inform them of 
the crime, and wait their decision : being received, the district 
Mandarin, accompanied by the senate, shall assist at its execu- 
tion. An European being guilty of a crime, deserving banish- 
ment, shall be tried singly by the Chinese judge in a place near 
Macao, who, having pronounced judgment, dehvers on bail 
the culprit to the senate, who in company with the civil Chi- 
nese magistrate, must see the sentence, confirmed by the su- 
perior Mandarins, fulfilled. OlSences of less magnitude the 



Digitized by 



Google 



L 



J 



m 



Art. IIL The Chinese shall not f^ell on credit any thin^to the 
«la^es,iTor bay what tiiiey offdr for sale, because they ai'e com- 
monly all stolen gOods; if they do, they shall be puuiished and 
4ientfrom Macao. ' 

Art. rV. No Chinese shall go out at night aAer nine o'clock. 
Those who are apprehended shall behronght to the procurator, 
that he Aiay seild them to their Mandarin to be punished. 
No body shall put out the lantern the Chinese use at night, 
those who do so shall be punished by the captain general of the 
place, not being soldiers, or under military command, by the 
ordinary judgb. ' 



^ Art. V. In respect to the proceedings to be observed in the 

T\ case a christian should murder a Chinese, it is resolved, that 

f^ <the'old practise shall be continued, and the matter referred to 

\ thekihg of Portugal. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



216 

senate maj decide on and then inform the Mandarin, whose 
sanction renders the punishment of the convicted lawful. 

Art. VI. It is prohibited to injure or do harm to the Chi- 
nese. Should any Chinese henceforward refuse to pay his 
debts to Europeans, or should he insult an European, recourse 
must directly be had to the Mandarin, and the man delivered 
that he may be examined and punished, meanwhile do not 
throw him in the dungeon, nor beat him at your fancy. Any 
body viokting this command shall be punished. 

Art. VII. It is prohibited to build new houses and churches. 
The number of houses actually existing, shall be inscribed on 
a list ; from henceforward no new ones are allowed to be raised, 
the old and ancient may be repaired. Any body violating this 
order shall be punished like a criminal who breaks the law of 
the empire ; the new houses shall be demolished or sold, and the 
amount applied to the imperial fee. 

Art. VIII. Neither Chinese nor Europeans are allowed to 
sell sons and daughters of Chinese breed. Any body violating 
this regulation shall be punished in conformity to the law of 
Keen-lung's IXth year. 

Art. IX. Things stolen by Caffers are prohibited. Hereaf- 
ter when slaves shall have prevailed on Chinese to steal from 
Europeans, the Chinese must directly be accused and handed 
over to the Mandarin that he may punish and banish them from 
Macao : the slave boys must also in pursuance of European 
laws, be severely punished. Offences must not falsely be 
imputed to Chinese, pretending e. g. that they have in- 
duced Caffers to steal, and still less must punishment at one's 
own whim be inflicted on Chinese. When the slaves 
have stolen something from the Chinese, the senate must 
fairly inquire into the case ; and if a judicial decision 
be required, the slaves must be sent to the Mandarin for trial 
and judgment. Having proclaimed his sentence, the Manda- 
rin shall send the slaves back, that the senate may give it full 
execution* If the Mandarin advise and warn the senate 
against arbitrarily defending culprits, by suffering them to ab- 
scond, that they may not be brought before the Mandarin. 

Art. X. It is forbidden to European villains and the Euro- 
pean public women to harbor Chinese rogues. The senate 
ought effectually to prohibit Europeans of vicious habits from 
screening at their houses mischievous Chinese ; it ought also 
to examine and forcibly urge European women to change their 
manner of living, by forbidding them from sheltering in their 
houses young Chinese, for the sake of gambling, stealing, &c.^ 
Should any body dare act against this order, not only shall 
the Chinese be punished for their crimes, but also shall the 



Digitized by 



Google 



217 



Aft. VI. If a Chinese be indebted to christians^ or if he 
^oes mischief to him, hand him over to the Mandarin of the 
emperor, that he may punisli him, but do not thrust him in 
the prison of christians. ^ 



Art. VII. No edifice shall be erected on new foundations, 
hut those dilapidated by age, may be rebuilt ; if any new ones 
are constructed, they shall be thrown down, and the law 
breaker punished by the Portuguese justice. 



Art. VIII. Buy no Chinese children ; should any be bought, 
the purchaser shall be severely punished. 



Art. IX. When slaves leagued with Chinese shall steal some 
thing, they shall be examined and puni^ihed by the ministers 
of the emperor and the judge of this city. 



Art. X. The strictest order shall be issued to the inhabitants 
of this place, not to lodge at their houses any vagabond Chi- 
nese of vicious habits ; those who transgress this law shall be 
rigorously punished, and so shall women be who harbor Chi- 
nese of the above specified description. 



Digitized by 



Google 



2id 

European who shelter them, he punished for having violated 
the law which forbids fornication. Those too, who transgress 
the positive . mandates against thieving and gambling, reputed 
worse than fornication, shall be subjected to heavy punishment. 
The senate shall likewise be punished for their neglect on this 
point, and, lastly, shall every person be puhibhed, who, knowing 
this prohibition, ventures to release a Chinese by letting him 
run away. 

Art. XI. It is not allowed to the Europeans to ramble out 
of Macao. Anciently the Europeans were not permitted to 
go out of Macao: at present there are among them many wretch- 
es who, under the pretence of going a hunting, come to disturb 
the people in the country, or to solicit women ; this is quite 
against old custom. TLe senate must severely prohibit similar 
deeds. Tlie heads of the villages have perniisF^on to stop and 
seize those who break this order, and to deliver them to the 
Mandarin to be punished in virtue of the law, which prohibits 
violating those of the empire ; the senate shall also be punish- 
ed in proportion to their negligence. 

Art. XI f. It is prohibited to promulgate and follow the law 
of God. Though all Europeans at Macao are christians, and 
taught the doctrines of God, nevertheless it is not permitted to 
teach or induce Chinese to become converts, because it pollutes 
the habits and the heart ; the senate and tlie chief of the 
Chinese at Macao must frequently \isit the houses one afler 
the other, prohibiting and not suffering any Chinese to be- 
come christians. Any person acting against this command ; 
those who teach as well as those who embrace the religion, 
shall be banished from Macao : the chief of the Chinese, and 
the senate shall also be punished, either in a corresponding 
degree to his delinquency. 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 



219 



IX. Art. Christians must not go a hunting on the other side ; 
thej are onlj allowed to go for tiie sake of their trade to Can- 
ton : those who infringe the rule of this paragraph shall be 
jeverallj punished bj the civil authority of the place. 



Xllth Article omitted. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



) 

i 



Digitized by 



Google I 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



-i*:Aj4^-.>>:^3g.jau> liWI" i^ll—lWl ,.^ M ^ ».. ,^-^W>^^ 



. 226 

received its present name, Kwang-tung sang in the reign of 
Hung-woo, the first emperor of the Ming dynasty. It was 
at the same time also (about A. D. 1368,) that Kwang-chow, 
the principal district of the province, was first called a foo ; 
previously it had been usually called Kwang-chow loo* 

For three or four centuries previous to this time, consider- 
able intercourse was maintained between the inhabitants of 
India and the people of Canton. But it was not until about 
A. D. 700, and in the time of the Tang dynasty, that a reg- 
ular market for foreign commerce was opened at Canton, and 
an imperial commissioner appointed to receive the " fixed 
duties " in behalf of the government. " Extraordinary com- 
modities and curious manufactures began to be introduced ;" 
and in 705 the famous pass was cut by Chang-kew-ling, 
through the Meiling chain in order to facilitate intercourse 
between Canton and the more northern parts of the empire. 
Multitudes of trading vessels now flocked to Canton ; but in 
795, either because the extortions were insupportable, or 
firom some failure in' affording proper inducement to the mer- 
chants, they all deserted the place and repaired to Cochin- 
china. Near the close of the next century, the Cochin-chi- 
nese came by land, and made war on Canton; provisions / 

became scarce, and large vessels were built to bring grain v^ 

from the province of Fuh-keen. ^^jj^' 

After the fall of the Tang dynasty, A. D. 906, there arose, y ^ 

reigned and fell, all within the period of about fifty-three 
years, five dynasties. To the first of these the people of 
Canton sent tribute of gold, silver, ivory, and various other 
valuable commodities, to the amount of five millions of tales. 
In consequence of this, the emperor created Lew-yen, the 
principal persop concerned in sending the tribute, king of 
Canton, under the title of nan-hae-wang, " king of the south- 
em sea." The court of Canton is represented, at this time, 
as having been cruel and extravagant in the extreme ; " crim- 
inals were boiled and roasted, and flayed, and thrown on 
spikes, and were forced to fight with tigers and elephants." 
The horrid tale of these awfiil cruelties shocked the founder 
of the Sung dynasty, who in the fourteenth year of his reign, 
A. D. 964, declared it to be his duty to rescue from evil the 
people of this region. A prodigy was now seen in the heav- 






Digitized by 



Google 



ensv '^ all the stars flowed to the north;" and in the ensaing 
^ear the people obtained peace and tranqmiUty. 

The first emperors of the Sung dynasty appear to have 
studied muoh the welfiure of Canton, whose inhabitants then 
lived in a very barbarous state. Witches and wizards were 
prohibited; sorcery was interdicted; and the temples^which had 
been built for the practise of superstitious rites, were thrown 
down by order of government. The people were forbidden 
also* << to kiU men to sacrifice to demons ;" and to relieve the 
sufibrers from the noxious diseases which were prevalent^ 
dispensaries of medicines were established. Useless and ex<- 
tirftvagant articles of apparel were discountenanced; and 
pearls and ornaments of gold for head dresses were disallowed. 
Government likewise forbade expeditions against Cochin- 
china, r^fMToba^mg the idea of distressing the people from a 
mere covetous desire of gaining useless territory. In 1067, 
during the reign of the fifth emperor of this dynasty, the city 
of Canton was inclosed by a wall, at an expense of 50,000 
taels. This wall was about two English miles in circumfer- 
ence, and was built for adefence against the people of Cochin- 
ebinaj who had fi«quently invaded and plundered Canton. 

The founders of the Yuen dynasty, who beeame masters 

i of the throne in lSr79, rushed in upon tlie south of China 

■^v J^ like bloodhounds. Towns and villages were laid in ruins^ 

^^ '*'. and such multitudes of the people were slain, that " the blood 

flowed insounding torrents." For a time the foreign com- 

merce of Canton was interrupted ; but when peace and 

c^ 'V tranquility were restored, commerce began again to revive. 

\ / In 1800, an << abundance of vessels came to Canton ;" and 

'"Xp " not long afterwards the ports of the provmces of Che-keang 

and Fuh«keen were also opened for the reception of foreign 

ships. 

Femao Peres de Andrade seems to have been the pioneer 
in European commerce to China by the cape of Good Hope. 
He reached Canton in 1517, during the peaceful and most 
prosperous times of the Ming dynasty. Spanish, Dutch, 
and Engliedi adventurers, soon followed the Portuguese. And 
the ports of Canton, Macao, and Teen-pih in this province ; 
those of Ning«>po and Chusan in Cbe-keang ; and that of 
Amoy in FuhlfaeeD, beeame lai^ marts for European com^ 
merce. 



Digitized by 



Google , 



227 

We pass now to the time when the present Tartar family 
gained possession of the throne of China. In the third year 
of Shunche, A. D. 1647, the inhabitants of the city and 
province of Canton " had rest and tranquility ;" and the 
divisions and government continued as they had been during 
the time of the preceding reign. But this quiet state of 
affairs was not long to be enjoyed. Yung-leih, endeavoring 
to revive the authority of the Ming family, raised the stand- 
ard of rebellion : imperial armies, composed partly of Tartar 
and partly of Chinese soldiers, were dispatched from Peking ; 
and the provinces of Fuh-keen, Kwang-se and Kwang-tung, 
soon submitted — excepting only the city of Canton, which 
resolved to try the fortune of war. The place was well pre- 
pared for defence, and the people for obstinate resistance. 
The river on the south, and the ditches on the east and west 
of the city, rendered it accessible to the enemy only on the 
north ; for the Tartars " had neither boats nor skill to manage 
them, but the city had both the one and the other," and a free 
.navigation of the river southward to the sea. The garrison 
of the city too was strengthened by great numbers who fled 
hither for safety. For more than eleven months the Tartars 
continued to make frequent assaults, and were as often re- 
pulsed and driven back with great slaughter. Tlie final cap- 
ture of the city is described by Martin Martini, a Jesuit who 
was at that lime in the south of China, in the following 
words : — 

" This courage (of the people of Canton) made the Tar- 
tars fall upon a resolution of beating down the walls of the 
city with their great cannon, which had such an effect, that 
they took it on the 24th of November, J 650; and because it 
was remarked that they gave to a prefect of the city the same 
office he had before, it was suspected that it was delivered by 
treason. The next day they began to plunder the city ; and 
the sackage continued till the fifth of December, in which 
they neither spared man,, woman, nor child ; but all whoever 
came in their way were cruelly put to the sword ; noi- was 
there heard any other speech, but fctVZ, kill these barbarous 
rebels. Yet they spared some artificers to conserve the ne- 
cessary arts, as also some strong and lusty men, such as they 
saw able to cany away the pillage of the city. But finally, 
December 6th, came out an edict, which forbade all further 
29 



:r^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



venation, after they, had killed a hundred thousand mefiy be^ 
sides those that perished several ways during the siege. 

Native writers, while they differ very little from the above 
accounts, add other. particulars, sorae of which we subjoin. 
The imperial troops were commanded by Shang-ko-he and 
sKang-Jce-woo, two Tartar officers of high rank, who had or- 
ders first to subdue, and then to remain and govern the south- 
ern provinces. Of the rebels, Top-yung-ho was the com- 
mander-in-chief, who, as soon as he saw that the Tartars were 
victorious, deserted his men and fled by sea to Hainan. 
The second in command was Fan-ching^gan, the traitorous 
prefect, who by plotting with the enemy enabled them to 
enter the city. Accoi^ding to a manuscript account, the whole 
number of sl^in, during the siege and the plundering of the 
city, was 700,000 ; " every house was left desolate." The 
Tartars, after they had finished this work of death, took up 
their quarters in the old city, where they still live, and civil 
officers were appointed to reside in the new city. It is said, 
that in the old city only one house, built before the sacking 
of the city, is standing at the present time. The destruction 
of prqperty, as well as life, was very great. All prospect of 
escaping with their treasures being cut off, many of the peo- 
ple dug holes in the ground and there deposited their money 
in earthen jars ; these are son^etimes found by persons when 
sinking wells or breaking up the old foundations of houses 
and temples. 

From these ruins the city has gradually risen ; and up to 
the present period, has increased in population, wealth, and 
influence. Bands of pirates and robbers, especially during 
those periods of misrule which generally attended a change 
of dynasties, have frequently harassed the people and em- 
barrassed their commerce. Even to the present time, law- 
less rovers prowl in the neighborhood of the city, and often 
carry off property, and sometimes human victims ; but they 
are too few and timid to hazard any open attack on the inhab- 
itants. Foreigners have suffered very little from the depre- 
dations of these freebooters, and are even much more secure 
than the natives themselves. 

Without further remarks rejative to the history of this city, 
we now proceed to take a survey of it in its present condition. 
In every age of the world, and in every country, large cities 



Digitized by 



Google 



m 

hare exerted a potv^erftil, c6tttfolKhgiiifluefie6''on "tb^ nl6ral, 
political and commercial destinies of naribn^; This perhaps 
is true in its fullest extent in old and populous countries. The 
ancient cities of western Asia: and of Egypt, and the metrop- 
olis of the Roman empire, did very' much t6 promote civili- 
zation, and the cultivation of arts, sciences and literatui'e. 
In modern Europe the influence o( "these worlds in minid^ 
ture,^ is very clearly seen. Take for example the citiies of 
northern Italy. " In spite of their bloody contests with ea6h 
other, and the vices to which these^ gave rise, they must be 
considered ks having lighted thfe torch of modern civilization." 
Elsewhere, and in numerous instances, the same position is 
illustrated. Cities — comparatively speaking — rose rapidly ; 
" and weakhi industry, knowledge and equal laws spread 
from them through Europe." In India the influence of large 
towns and cities is noticeable. In China it is more difficult 
f6r us to estimate accurately the kind and extent of power 
which they possess and exert. That it is very great, there 
can be no doubt. But whether Canton is on the whole ex- 
erting a salutary or an injurious influence on the Chinese 
empire, can best be determined after we have surveyed* its 
extent, and the various institutions, resources, occupations and 
character of its inhabitants. 

That part of the city which is surrounded by a wall is 
built nearly in the form of a square, and is divided by a wall 
running from east to west, into two parts. The northern, which 
is much the largest part, is called the old city ; the southern 
part is called the new dty. According to some foreign, as 
well as native books, the northern part was once** composed 
as it were, of three difierent towns, separated by very fine 
high walls, but so conjoined, that the same gate served to go 
out from the one and enter the other." These divisions 
ceased long ago to exist. The new city was built at a much 
later period than the old. The entire circuit of the wall 
which now includes both divisions of the city, is variously 
estimated by the Chinese. At a quick step we have walked 
the whole distance in little less than two hours, and think it 
cannot exceed six English miles. On the south side the 
wall runs nearly due east and west, parallel to the river, and 
distant from it perhaps fifteen or twenty rods. On the north, 
where the city " rests on the brow of the hill," the wall takes 



Digitized by 



Google 



230 

a serpentine course ; and its base at its highest point on the 
hill is perhaps 200 or 300 feet above the surface of the 
river. 

The walls are composed partly of stone and partly of 
bricks : the former is chiefly coarse sand stone, and forms the 
foundation and the lower part of the walls and the arches of 
the gates ; the latter are small and of a soft texture. In sev- 
eral places, particularly along the east side of the city, the 
elements have made such inroads on the walls as to afford 
satisfactory evidence, that before the prowess of a modern foe 
they would present but a feeble resistance. They rise nearly 
perpendicularly, and vary in height from twenty-five to thirty- 
five or forty feet. In thickness they are twenty or twenty- 
five feet. They are the highest and most substantial on the 
north side, evidently so built because in that direction hostile 
bands woul^ be the most likely to make an attack. A line 
of battlements, with embrasures at intervals of a few feet, 
are raised on the top of the wall round the whole city ; these ' 
the Chinese call ching-jin, literally, city-men; and in the rear 
of them there is a broad pathway. There are two " wings," 
or short walls, one at the south-east, and the other at the 
south-west corner of the city, which stretch out from the 
main walls; these were designed to block up the narrow 
space between the walls and the ditches of the city. Through 
each of these, there is a gate in every respect similar to those 
of the city. 

The gates of the city are sixteen in number: four of these 
J lead through the wall which separates the old from the new 

; r city ; so that there are only twelve outer gates. Commenc- 

ing on the north and passing round to the west, south and 
east, the following are the names of these twelve gates, 
viz : — 

1. Ching'pih mun: — this is the principal gate on t])e 
north ; before it, is a small semi-circular space surrounded by 
a wall similar to those of the city ; it forms the entrance for 
government officers and the bearers of public dispatches when 
arriving from Peking by land : officers not unfrequently come 
to Canton in boats, in which case they usually make their 
entrance at one of the southern gates. 

2. Ching-se mun: — this is the only gate on the west which 
leads into the old city ; for a Chinese city this gate is very 
broad and high — perhaps fifteen feet wide and twelve high ! 



Digitized by 



Google 



231 

3. Tae-ptng mun : — ^this is the only entrance into the tuevf 
<city on the west ; it is similar to the other western gate, but 
not so large. 

4. Chuh-lanmun : — this is a small gate, and the first one 
you find after passing round the south-west comer of the city ; 
it is the nearest gate to the foreign factories. 

5. YeW'lan mun : — this is near the chuh-lan gate, and like 
it seems designed chiefly for the conveyance of heavy mer- 
chandise into the city. 

6. Tsing'hae mun: — this perhaps was intended to be 
the water gate, as both its situation and name seem to in- 
dicate. 

7. WoO'see mun : — is " the gate of the five genii," and has 
nothing remarkable except its name. 

8. Yung'tsing mun : — ^there is nothing around this " gate 
of eternal purity" that can indicate such a name, but very 
much to suggest an opposite one : it is moreover the gate 
which leads to the field of blood — ^the royal execution 
ground. 

9. Seaou-nan mun :— this " small southern gate" is the 
sixth and last on the south of the city. 

10. Yung-gan mun : — this "gate of eternal rest " leads 
into the new city on the east, and corresponds in every res- 
pect with the Tae-ping gate on the west. 

11. Ching'tung mun : — ^this is the only gate on the east 
which leads into the old city, and it corresponds with 
the Ching-se mun on the west, to which it stands directly 
opposite. 

12. SeaoU'pih mun : — this " little northern gate " forms a 
convenient entrance for bringing in water and provisions, and 
also building materials, to supply the northern part of the 
city. Having oow gone round the city we pass to the inner 
gates. 

13. Kwei-tih mun : — reckoning from the west, this is the 
first gate in the wall which separates the old from the new 
city. 

14. Tae-nan mun: — "the great southern gate," is the 
second. ^ 

15. Wan-ming munis th& third; and 

16« Ting'hae mun is the fourth* and last gate. 



Digitized by 



Google 



282 

Of tiiese sixteenti gates^ the' 1st; 26, 3d, 4thf 5th> 6\h, Tihf 
ftnd 13tfa, as we haye nmnbered them above^ telong^to the 
Nan-hae, and the other eight belong to the Pwan^^u districts 
A. few soldiers are stationed at each of the gates^ to watch 
them by day, and toiclos^ and guard them by night. They 
are shut at an early hoar in the evening, and opened at dawn 
of day. Except on special occasions no one is allowed to 
pass in or out during the night watches : but a smal^ fee will 
usually open the way, yet always exposes the keepers to 
punishment." 

We must now extend our description so as to include the 
suburbs ; the streets, and buildings of which, differ very little 
if at all, from those within the walls. On the west they 
spread out nearly in the form of an isoscle» right angled tri** 
angle, opening to the north#west, having the river' on the 
south, and the western wall of the city, for its two equal 
sides. On the south they occupy the whole space between 
the wall and the river. On the eaet they are much less ex- 
tensive than on the west. There are no buildings on the 
north except a few small huts near the principal gate. Taken 
collectively, the suburbs are scarcely less extensive or less 
populous than the city withm the walls. 

The streets, of Canton are numerous, — ^we have before us 
a catalogue containing the namesof more than six hundred^ 
among which we find the " dragon street ;:' ' the " flying 
dragon street ;" the " martial dragon street ;" the " flower 
street;'* "the golden street;" the " golden flower street ;" 
and among many more of a similar kind, we meet with a few 
which we should not care to translate. There are several 
long streets, but most of them are short, and crooked 5 they 
vary in width from two to sixteen feet, but generally they are 
about six or eight feet wide^ and they are everywhere flagged 
with large stones, chiefly granite. The motley crowd that 
often throngs these streets is very great indeed. At a busy 
hour of the day, the stout, half naked, vociferating porters^ 
carrying every description of merchandise, and the nimble 
sedan bearers, in noise and bustle njake up for the deficiency 
of carts and carriages ; these together with the numerous- 
travellers, various kind of retailers, pedlers, beggars, &c. pre- 
sent before the spectator a scene which we shall not attempt 
to describe. 



Digitized by 



Google 



2S3 

Woti^ few.of the visitoxs, and nbtaliltle ofuhcmwrohan- 
idise, brought together. here, are conveyed into the city by 
uneansof canaU, or ditches. There .aj?e several of these.; 
one of the largest of them extnads along the whole-length of 
'the wall onfheeast of thie city/and another one on the west 
side* 'Between these two, and communicating with them, 
itbere.is a third canal which fXUQs along near the wall on the 
:.iiorth side of the- new city, *80 that boats can enter on the 
west, pass through the city, and out at the eastern side ; and 
vice versa. There are other canals. in the eastern and west- • 
.em suburbs:: and one in the southern. Into these larger 
channels a great number of smaller on«s flow: these the 
*Chinesecall the " veins of the city.'' There are also several 
reservoirs ; but none of them are of great extent. Much of 
the water farthe use of :the inhabitants is supplied from the 
river and canals ; wells are frequent ; rainwater is employed 
also ; and for tea, &;c., fine, wholesome water is plentifully 
furnished from several Siprings, which 'break out on the north 
of the city, both within and without the walls. There are 
•several bridges, some built of stone, thrown over these 
canals. 



Digitized by 



Google 



254 

A MAP OF THE CITY AND SUBURBS OF CANTONT, 

In the absence of an accurate map of Canton, the accofnpanyins' 
one, executed by a native hand — we dare not say artist, — will afforS 
a tolerable idea of the general plan and outline of the city. It is a 
&csimile of one of the best native maps, except only in the lettering, 
in which the Chinese character has been wholly omitted, and a few 
Roman letters, for convenience in reference, placed in their stead. 

a a. These letters mark the situation of the Chao-kean^, or Pearl 
riv'.T. A small fort, called the French folhf, stands in the river a short 
distance from the south-east corner of the city ; another fort, called the 
Dutch foUy, stands further up the river: a little higher up are ledges 
of rocks, which atlo^ water are seen above the suHac^. Beyond the 
foreign factories westward, several smajl canals branch off into the 
suburbs ; but for a mile or two the river itself is nearly straight. 

b. This letter points out on the map the situation of the foreign 
factories on the north bank of the river. 

c. This letter marks the locality of the Mohammedan mosque, in 
the old city near the western gate ; it stands erect, and not inclined as 
represented on the map. 

d. A native pagoda. This stands north of the mosque, or Mohani- 
medan paffoda, as it has often been called. 

e. A lofty and conspicuous building called the five-storied pagoda; 
it stands on the north side of the city. 

fl The Grovemor's house ; it stands in the new city not far from the 
Yewvlan gate. 

g. The Foo-yuenV house, which stands near the center of the old 
city. 

h. House of the Tseang-keun or Tartar general ; this is also in the 
old city, and not far from the two pagodas. 

i. The house of the Hoppo; it is situated on the south side of the 
new city, a few rods east ot the Tsing-hae gate. 

k. House of the Heo-yuen, or literary chancellor of Canton ; it is 
in the south part of the old city. 

1. House of the Poo-ching-sze, or treasurer of the provincial reve- 
nue, near the center of the old city. 

m. House of the Gan^cha-sze, or criminal judge of the province, 
near the house of the literary chancellor. 

n. The house of the Yen-yun-sze, or superintendent of the salt 
department ; it stands near the Kwei-tih gate. 

o. Kung-yuen ; a hall for the reception of literary candidates at the 
regular examinations; it stands near the south-east corner of the old 
city. 

p. Yuh-ying-tang ; a foundling hospital, on the east of the city, 
about half a mile from the walls. 

' q. Teen-tsze ma-taou ; the execution ground ; without the south- 
ern gates, near the river. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC | 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Necessity, wWch has always guided inhnl nations, in thek 
first efforts towards improvement, seems every wh^re to have 
«idapted her lessons to the circumstances of those who werd 
to be instructed. Prompted by her suggestions, the ancie«t 
Egyptians and Greeks went on rapidly from one improve-^ 
roent to another ; and, taking advantage of diose advance9> 
the nations of the west are at this moment moving forward 
with unexampled celerity smd majesty, attracting universal 
attention, and confeitring substantial good on all the families 
and kindreds of the earth. 

It has been far otherwise with this nation* So faras.ne-^ 
cessity urged them, the Chinese went on quickly ; .but sel- 
dom have they ventured or desired to step beyond the limits 
which circumscribed the efforts of their remote ancestors $ 
and they have been equally slow and unwiUbg to adopt or 
imitate the usages and improvements of'' distant foreigners." 
This is a prominent characteristic of the Chinese, and one too 
in which they glory. Hence, without having much claim 
to origkMiiity, they are exceedingly unlike the nations of 
the west. In giving a description of this people, therefore, 
or of any thing that belongs to them, we are not to esti* 
mate either it or them by the criterion of European taste 
and usage. Non disputandum de gUsiibus. With the Chi- 
nese, the left takes precedence of the right, as the place of 
honor ; and white instead of black is the appropriate badge 
of mourning. From the peculiar structure of th.eir compass 
perhaps, which they call che nan chdy, '<,a chariot pointing 
towards the south," they do not number the cardinal points 
in our order, but always mention the sQuth before the iiorth, 
as in the following prosaic verse >^ 

Yue nan pih, yue se tang : 
South and north, west and eut. 

And for north-west, &c., they say west-north, west-south. 
Without attempting to account for this contrariety, it is obvi- 
ous to remark that the fact itself ought to be kept in mind, 
while surveying the various works, occupations, institutions, 
and habits of the Chinese. 

It is generally supposed that the remote ancestors of this 
nation, in their migration eastward, dwelt in tents : their cir- 
30 



Digitized by 



Google 



236 

Ctirfistances would require such habitations ; and when fhey 
became stationary, their wants would prompt them to seek 
some more substantial covering from the heat and the storm. 
But the tent was the only model before them ; and that they 
imitated it, their houses and temples and pagodas, built at 
the present day, afford abundant proof. The roof, concave 
on the upper side, and the veranda with its slender columns, 
show most distinctly the original features of the tent. In 
fact, the whole fabric of ordinary buildings is light and slen- 
der, retaining the outline of primeval simplicity. Those 
therefore who seek here for grand and stately edifices, built 
after the Grecian and Gothic models, will seek in vain. Bar- 
row, after having visited the imperial palaces, and travelled 
firora north to south, through the whole breadth of the em- 
pire, affirmed that all the buildings of the Chinese are " with- 
out elegance or convenience of design, and without any set- 
tled proportion, mean in their appearance, and clumsy in 
their woirkmanship." Macartney was much better pleased 
with their architecture ; though it is " totally unlike any 
other, and irreconcileable to our rules," yet "it is perfectly 
consistent with its own, and upon the whole, it often produc- 
es a most pleasing effect; as we sometimes see a person, 
without a single good feature in his face, have, nevertheless, 
a very agreeable countenance." 

In the buildings of Canton, we have doubtless as great a 
variety of. structure and style, and as fair specimens of Chi- 
nese taste and art as can be found in the whole empire. 
A large part of the city and suburbs is built on low ground 
or flats. Special ctire, therefore, is requisite in order to se- 
cure for houses and temples a solid basis. Near the river, 
and in all the most loose or muddy situations, houses are 
raised on wooden piles, which make the foundation as secure 
as brick or stone, and perhaps even more so. In some cases 
the piles rise above the surface of the ground, and then the 
buildings, constructed of wood, rest directly on them ; but in 
other instances the piles reaoii only within a few feet of the 
surface, and the remaining part of the foundation is made of 
mud, brick, or stone. When this is done, the walls of the 
houses are usually carried up and completed with the same 
material. Not a few of the houses are entirely baseless, or 
have only a slender foundation of mud, of which also their 



Digitized by 



Google 



237 

walls are composed; and hence in severe rain-storms and 
overflowings of the river, such as have recently happened, 
many of the walls are prostrated. 

Bricks are in most general use for the walls of houses ; 
perhaps three-fifths of the whole city are built of this mate- 
rial : of the remaining part, a very large portion is constructed 
of mud ; most of the Tartars in the old city are said to in- 
habit houses of this description. Stone and wood are not 
very extensively used for the walls of houses ; the first is fre- 
quently employed about gateways and for door posts ; and 
the second for columns, beams, and rafters. Many of the 
floors of houses and temples are formed of indurated mud : 
marble flags are sometimes used for the same purpose, and 
often tiles. These latter, when made very thin, are used for 
roofs ; they are laid on the rafters " in rows alternately con- 
cave and convex, and forming ridges and furrows, luted by a 
cement of clay." Windows are small, and rarely supplied 
with glass ; paper, mica, or shell, or some other similar trans- 
lucent substance taking its place. Very little iron is employed 
in building houses. 

All these materials for building are procurable here at 
moderate prices, and in great abundance. Wood, usually a 
species of the fir, is floated down the rivers, and brought to the 
city in large rafts. Bricks are made in the neighborhood of 
Canton, and are brought hither in boats, and sold at various 
prices from three to eight dollars a thousand. These bricks 
are chiefly of a leaden blue color, or of a pale brown ; a few 
are red ; these various tints are occasioned by the different 
modes of drying and burning them ; the red bricks are the 
only ones that are thoroughly burnt ; the leaden blue, are 
those which have been exposed to the action of the fire only 
for a short time ; while those that have experienced no other 
heat than that of the sun, are pale brown. Excellent stone 
for building is found in the hill-country on the north of the 
province, and also in several of the islands south of the city. 
The stone is chiefly granite and sand-stone ; of each there 
are several varieties. 

Such is the general style, and such the usual material of 
the buildings of Canton. In passing through the streets of 
the city, the spectator is struck with the difference which he 
finds in its various buildings, — though this diversity does by no 



Digitized by 



Google 



nteans ftiDy exhibit the relative condition and circumstances 
of the people. A few only are rich ; and the external ap- 
pearance of their houses does not at all exceed in elegance 
those of th6 middling class. Many are very poor; and the 
aspect of their habitations exhibits abundant evidence of their 
abject state. The poorest people are to be found in the ex>- 
treme parts of the suburbs, along the banks of the canals, and 
in the northern part of the old city ; their houses are mere 
mud hovels — ^low, narrow, dark, uncleanly, and without any 
division of apartments. A whole family of six, eight, or ten, 
and sometimes twice that number of individuals, is crowded 
into one of these dreary abodes. It is surprising that people 
can live, and enjy>y health, and even long life, in these cir- 
cumstances. To pass through the streets or lanes of such a 
neighborhood, is sufficient to reconcile a person to any ordinary 
condition of. life. Neither intelligence nor industry could 
ever be confined in such miserable cells. 

In habitations a little more spacious and cleanly than these 
perhaps one third part of the population of Canton have their 
abodes. These stand close on the streets, and have usually 
but a single entrance, which is closed by a bamboo screen 
suspended from the top of the door ; within these houses 
there are no superfluous apartments : a i^ingle room allotted 
to each branch of the family, serves for a dormitory, while a 
third, which completes the number into which the whole en- 
closure is divided, is used by all the household as a common 
eating room. Chinese houses usually open towards the south ; 
but in these, as also in the poorer kind, this favorite position 
is disregarded. Houses of this description are rented at four 
or five dollars a month. 

Another class of dwellings, inhabited by a more, wealthy 
but less numerous part of the community, are the residences 
6f those in easy circumstances, who enjoy plenty, without 
any of the accompaniments of luxury. These houses, to- 
gether with the plot of ground on which they stand, are sur- 
. rounded by a wall twelve or fourteen feet high, that rises and 
fronts close on the street, so as completely to conceal all 
the buildings from the traveller as he passes by. Indeed, the 
prospect as you go along the narrow streets, which are lined 
with this description of houses, is very cheerless. ^ But if 
allowed to enter some of those dwellings, more pleasing 



Digitized by 



Google 



289^ 

scenes wiH open hetore you, differeint^ enough however from 
the home of your childhood. You would enter the outer 
enclosure througii a^ large folding door into an open court, 
thence you would be conducted by a servant to the visitor's 
hall,— which is usually a small apartment furnished with 
chairs, sofas, tea-stands, &c. Here your host would meet 
you, and perhaps introduce to you the younger members of 
his family. These halls are open on one side ; and the oth- 
ers are commonly ornainented with carved work, or hung 
with various scrolls, presenting in large and elegant charac- 
ters the moral maxims of their sages, or perhaps exhibiting 
rude landscapes, or paintings of birds and flowers. The re- 
maining part of the enclosure is occupied with the domestic 
apartments, a garden, and perhaps also a small school-room. 

The houses of a few of the most opulent in Canton are in 
no respect inferior, except it may be in the space they 
occupy, to the imperial palaces. The family residences of 
some of those merchants who are licensed by government to 
trade with foreigners, furnish good specimens of this kind of 
buildings. The seat of the late Consequay which is now half 
in ruins, was once superb ; that of the present senior hong 
merchant is on a scale of great magnificence; "it is a villa, 
or rather palace, divided into suits of apartments, which are 
highly -and tastefully decorated." The houses of the officers 
of government, and also the numerous temples of the city, 
need not be particularized in this place ; — suffice it to remark, 
that they are usually more spacious than private dwelling- 
houses, and that at present most of them are in very ordi- 
nary condition. 

Very few of the houses or temples of Canton have more 
than one story, the halls of which are usually of the whole 
height of the fabric, without any concealment of the beams or 
rafters of the roof. Terraces are often built above the roofs ; 
and when surrounded by a breast-work, afford in the cool of 
the day a pleasant and secure retreat, where people can as- 
cend to enjoy a purer air, to secure a wider prospect, or to 
witness any event that transpires in the neighborhood. These 
terraces are riot, perhaps, very unlike the flat roofs of other 
orientals. In some other points also there is a coincidence 
between the houses of the Chinese and those which are no- 
ticed in sacred literature. Referring to these latter buildings, 



Digitized by 



Google 



240 

professor Jahn, m his Biblical Archaeology says: *the gatesF 
not only of houses, but of cities, were customarily adorned 
with an inscription, which was to be extracted from the law 
of Moses ; a practice in which may be found the origin of 
the modem Mezuzaw, or piece of parchment inscribed with 
sacred texts, and fastened to the door-posts. The gates were 
always shut, and one of the servants acted the part of a por- 
ter. The space immediately inside the gate is called the 
porch, is square, and on one side of it is erected a seat for the 
accommodation of those strangers, who are not to be admitted 
into the interior of the house. From the porch we are intro- 
duced, through a second door into a court, which is commonly 
paved with marble, and surrounded on all sides, sometimes, 
however only on one^ with a peristyle or covered walk, over 
which, if the house have more than one story, there is a gal- 
lery of the same dimensions, supported by columns and pro- 
tected by a balustrade. In this court, large companies are 
received, at nuptials, &c. On such occasions, a large veil of 
thick cloth is extended by ropes over the whole court, to ex- 
clude the heat of the sun. The back part of the house is 
allotted/to the women, and is called in Arabic, the harem, 
and in Hebrew by way of eminence, the palace. Behind 
the harem there is a garden, into which the women enjoy the 
pleasure of looking from their apartments. In the smaller 
houses the females occupy the upper story. This is the 
place assigned them also by Homer in the Iliad and Odys- 
sey.' 

Now, in the buildings of the Chinese, the various inscrip- 
tions seen on their door-posts ; the porter at the outer gate, and 
the porch and court within ; the peristyle with its columns, 
and perhaps a gallery above, and the palace kin-te or " for- 
bidden ground " with its garden, have a striking resemblance 
to those in the above description. The inner apartments of 
the emperor are in like manner called by way of eminence, 
kung'teen or " the palace." 

We pass now to notice the government of Canton. Here, 
as every where else throughout the wide dominions of the 
Mantchou-chinese, all power emanates from the one man, 
who, enthroned on the * dragon's seat,' is honored as the 
vicegerent of ' high heaven.' Hence, the present line of 
monarchs have not been satisfied with the dignity of sove- 



Digitized by 



Google 



241 



♦ 



iteigns, but have laid claim to the character of sages. " The 
sovereign of men," say they, " is heaven's son ; nobles and 
statesmen are the sovereign's children ; and the people are 
the children of nobles and statesmen. The sovereign should 
serve heaven as a father ; never forgetting to cherish rever- 
ential thoughts^ but exerting himself to illustrate his virtue, 
and looking upwards receive from heaven the vast patrimony 
which it confers ; thus the emperor will daily increase in fe- 
licity and glory. Nobles and ministers of state, should serve 
their sovereign as a father ; never forgetting to cherish rever- 
ential thoughts ; not harboring covetous and sordid desires ; 
not engaging in wicked and clandestine plots, but faithfully 
and justly exerting themselves ; thus their noble I'ank will 
ever be preserved. The people should never forget to cher- 
ish reverential thoughts towards the nobles and ministers of 
state ; to obey and keep the laws ; not to excite secret or 
open sedition : not to engage in insurrection or rebellion ; — 
then no great calamity will befall their persons." 

In accordance with these views, a spacious hall, called 
wanrshoW'Jcung, is dedicated to the emperor in the capital of 
every province of the empire. The walls and all the appur- 
tenances, of these halls are yellow^ which is the imperial 
color. In Canton, the wan-show-kung stands near the south- 
east comer of the new city, within the walls. It is used solely 
for the honor of the emperor and his family ; and annually, 
three days before and three days after the imperial birth-days, 
all the officers of government, both civil and military, togeth- 
er with the principal inhabitants of the city, assemble in it, 
and there pay him adoration. The same solemnities are re- 
quired on these occasions, as would be were he present. No 
seats are allowed in the sacred place ; and every one that 
goes thither takes with him a cushion, upon which he sits 
cross-legged on the ground. So much is done for absent 
majesty. 

The principal of those officers who hold authority in the 
city, we will mention here in their order. 

1. Tsung'tuh : — this officer is styled leang kwang tsung- 
tuh, or " the governor of the provinces of Kwang-tung and 
Kwan-se." He is clothed with high authority, and in many 
cases acts independently of all the other officers within the 
limits of his jurisdiction ; usually however he acts in concert, 



Digitized by 



Google 



24S 

and confers with those,- who like himself, have 'been comtnts^ 
sioned and sent hither from < the. Capitol. He cannot originate 
and carry into execution any new law or regulation without 
the sanction of the emperor ; he is required to act according 
to precedents and existing statutes, iln certain cases, pointed 
out by law, he, together with the /oo-ywen, can inflict imme- 
diate death. New regulations are frequently proposed to- the 
emperor by the governor and his council, and when these 
have received the imperial sanction, (which they almost al- 
ways do,) they have the force of law. The governor is, ex-' 
officio, an honorary president of the supreme tribunal of war 
at Peking ; and occasionally, also, a member of the imperial 
cabinet. 

His commands are most peremptory, and his authority is^ 
never to be slighted or resisted with impunity. His respon- 
sibility too, is very great ; he is held accountable to his maj- 
esty for the good management of all affairs in the two prov- 
inces — nay, almost for the prosperity of the people, and the 
fruitfulness of the seasons. Every calamity occasioned by 
fire, water, drought, earthquake, locusts, or by 'whatever 
means it may occur, he must faithfully report to the emperor 
and to the supreme tribunals, on penalty of being dismissed 
from office. Any real or supposed deficiency in his capacity 
or conduct, subjects him to the severest punishment. Witness 
the late governor Le ; who, during the last year, for the " un- 
toward aflfair " at Leen-chow, was deprived of all rank and 
honors, put in chains, imprisoned, condemned, and* sent into 
remote banishment. In case of fires breaking out in the 
provincial city, when more than ten houses are consumed, 
the governor is fined nine month's pay ; if more than thirty 
houses are burnt, he forfeits one year's salary ; if three hun- 
dred are burnt, he is degraded one degree. Fires occurring 
in the suburbs do not subject him to the same punishment. 

All the principal officers of Canton, and also a few of the 
most respectable private citizens, frequently wait on his ex- 
cellency. These " calls " are visits of business or ceremony, 
according to circumstances, and more or less frequent, accord- 
ing to the disposition of the parties. .^On certain occasions, 
such as the arrival of a new governor, all the civil and mili- 
tary officers of both provinces are required to send to him " an 
accurate and perspicuous " account of themselves, their term 



Digitized by 



Google 



243 

tst service) and the condition of their respective districts. 
But " whoever of the superior or inferior officers, with their 
advisers, or the salt or hong merchants, or any other persons, 
shall represent that he is intimate with me," said one of the 
late governors, " and in my confidence ; or If persons shall 
write to each other to this effect, or shall suffer themselves 
to be thus deceived, — they shall all be arrested and brought to 
trial : and those who conceal such things shall be considered 
equally guilty with those who commit them. 

All ultimate appeals in the two provinces are made to the 
governor* At the gate of his palace are placed six tablets, 
on which are written appropriate inscriptions for those who 
wish to appeal to his authority ; the first is for those who 
have been wronged by covetous, corrupt, or sordid officers ; 
the second is for those who have suffered by thieves and rob- 
bers ; the third, for such as have been falsely accused ; the 
fourth, for those who have been injured by swindlers and 
gamesters ; the fifth, for such as have suffered by wicked 
persons of any description ; and the sixth, is for those who 
wish to give information concerning any secret schemes or 
machinations. On the 3d and 8th, 13th and I8th, 23d and 
28th days of each month, the people are allowed to take 
these tablets in their hands, and to enter one of the outer 
apartments of the palace, where they may in person present 
their complaints to his excellency. This mode of procedure 
is seldom adopted. To send or carry up a petition to his 
gate, is the most common method of seeking redress from the 
hands of the governor. When all these means fail, an ap- 
peal may be made to Peking. This. mode of appeal by en- 
tering the gales of the magistrate, is allowed also at the offices 
of the foo-yuen and an^cha-sze. 

The governor's house stands in the new city, near the 
yew-Ian gate ; it is spacious and belongs to government. 
His salary is 16,000 iaels annually ; and it is generally be- 
lieved, that his other emoluments, during the same period of 
time, amount to more than twelve times that sum, — although 
presents of every description to officers of government are 
disallowed. Loo-kwan, the present governor, is an aged 
man, and a native of one of the northern provinces. He 
seems to belong to that class of persons, who are fond of 
ease and pleasure, not very ambitious, but desirous that all 
31 



Digitized by 



Google 



244 

tinder their authority should know their places and perform 
their respective duties. He has abou( him a large number 
of persons, employed as advisers, secretaries, servants, &c* 
He has also attached to him a small number of troops, who 
serve for a body-guard, and at the same time constitute a 
part of the city police. 

2. Foo»yuen ; — this officer, who is also called seun-foo, is 
usually styled by foreigners, * lieut. governor ; ' he is second 
in authority in this province, to which his jurisdiction is con- 
fined. The title of Choo, the present foo-yuen, as it ap- 
pears in governmental papers runs thus ; — an attendant offi- 
cer of the military hoard ; a member of the court of uni- 
versal examiners ; an imperial censor ; patrolling soother of 
Canton ; a guide of military affairs ; and a controller of 
the taxes. — Division of power, when it is to be entrusted to 
those who have been selected from the people, is the policy 
of the Mantchou family. The foo-yuen though second lo 
the governor, is not under his control, and in certain cases 
acts independently of him. They often confer together, and 
in matters about which they cannot agree, they refer for a 
decision to Peking. He holds the wang-ming; ' king's or- 
der ' or death warrant, by virtue of which, criminals, in cases 
of great emergency, can be put to the sword without a refer- 
ence to the emperor. His residence is in the old city, in a 
palace built in the reign of Shunche by one of the Tartar 
generals who was sent hither to ' pacify' the rebellious sub- 
jects of the south. Choo is a native of Keang-soo, and a 
thorough-bred son of Han,— stern, resolute, and even obsti- 
nate ; rather careless about emoluments, a contemner of 
bribes, a terror to bandits, a hater of "divine vagabonds," 
respected by a few, and feared by all. In his person he is 
tall and well formed ; and his looks show that he has not 
" gone hither and thither " discharging the functions of public 
life without toil and anxiety. He rose from very humble 
circumstances, and has grown old in the service of his coun- 
try ; he has now no family but one son, and he is a sorrow to 
his father. Like the governor, he has a small body of sol- 
diers under his command, but the number of persons kept in 
his immediate employ is few ; and in his habits of living-^we 
have his own word for it, — the patrolling soother is both eco- 
nomical and simple, and " an example to the people." 



Digitized by 



Google 



245 

3. Tseang'keun :-^thi3 officer, usually denominated the 
Tartar general, is commandant of the Tartar troops of Can- 
ton, and is answerable for the defence of the city. In most 
cases he acts independently of the tsung-tuh and foo-yuen* 
The soldiers under his immediate command, except a small 
detachment stationed on the river, are quartered in the old city^ 
where the general keeps his court and camp. He is always, 
we believe, a Mantchou, and not unfrequently a member of 
the imperial family. Subordinate to the tseang-keun there 
are two foo-too-ttmgs^ or lieutenant-generals ; and a great 
number of inferior officers, who rank as majors, captains, lieu- 
tenants, &c. &c- His house, which was built by Tsing-nan* 
wang, is said to exhibit some of the finest specimens of archi- 
tecture that can be found in the provincial city. 

4. Hae^kman keen^tuh .-—this functionary is known to 
foreigners, and is often addressed by them, as '' the Grand 
Hoppo of the Port of Canton.'^ He is usually a member 
of the imperial household, and receives his appointment im- 
mediately from his majesty : as commissioner of customs, his 
jurisdiction is limited to the maratime commerce of Canton. 
Some further particulars of this department of government 
will be given when we come to speak of the commerce of the 
city. 

5. Heo^yuen : — ^this is the highest literary officer in the 
province ; he is usually called the literary chancellor of Can- 
ton. His office is one of very great influence and respecta- 
bility, inasmuch as literary rank, of which by imperial ap- 
pointment he is a judge and dispenser, is necessary for pre- 
ferment to all civil offices in the state. He has a general su- 
pervision of all the public schools, and colleges, and literary 
examinations in the province. On some special occasions 
also, his authority extends to the military. 

6. Poo'^hing-sze : — this officer is the controller of the 
revenue of the province ; and, under the foo*yuen, directs the 
appointment and removal of all the subordinate officers of the 
iocal government. The principal officers under him are, a 
Jcing'leih or secretary, a chaou-mo or keeper of the seal, and 
a Jcoo ta*8ze, or keeper of the treasury. 

7. Gan-cha-sze^ or an-cha-sze: — this officer is criminal 
judge of the province ; and all the principal criminal cases 
which occur withb its limits are brought before him for trial. 



Digitized by 



Google 



246 

Sometimes he sits in judgment alone ; but in case? involving 
the life of the accused, he is usually assisted by the other 
chief officers of the province. At times also, be holds a de^ 
gree of civil power in conjunction with the pooK^hing-sze. 
The government posts, likewise, are under his control. 
Among other officers attached to this department of the pro-' 
vincial government, theje is a sze-yo, who has the general 
control of the provincial prisoners ; his rank and duties are 
similar to those of the keeper of a state prison. 

8^ Yen-^un-^ze : — 'this officer has the superintendence of 
the provincial salt department. Under him there are a yun- 
tang who attends to the transportation of salt from one place 
to another, a secretary, a treasurer, and several other minor 
officers. The salt trade is a government monopoly, the du- 
ties upon which form an important branch of the imperial rev- 
enue. The trade is limited to a small number of licensed mer- 
chants, who are usually very rich, and are often called upon 
to make liberal grants for the support of the provincial gov- 
ernment. 

9. Tuh'leang^taou : — all the public granaries of the prov- 
ince are under the direction of this officer ; and their super- 
intendents are subject to his control and inspection. There 
are fourteen public granaries in and about the city of Canton. 
These are required to be kept filled, in order to furnish sup- 
plies for the people in times of scarcity. 

10. Kwang-chow-foo che^foo, or magistrate of the depart- 
ment of Kwang-chow-foo. The title of this officer is often 
abridged, sometimes to Kwang-chow-foo, at others to Che- 
foo. Kwang^chaw is simply the name of the foo. Che-foo 
means literally, " knower of the department (or foo,)" and 
denotes that it is the office or duty of this magistrate to be 
fully acquainted with the portion of territory over which he is 
placed. This foo, or portion of territory, to which we have 
given the name of department, has been otherwise translated 
" county." Either term is sufficient to denote, pretty nearly, 
what is the authority of an officer placed at the head of all the 
affiiirs of such a division of the province. There are numer- 
ous civil officers, stationed in various, parts of the department, 
all of whom are under his immediate inspection. This offi- 
cer has under his authority a sze^yOj whose duties, as super- 
intendent of the prisoners of the department, are similar to 
those of the chief jailor of a county prison. 



Digitized by 



Google 



247 

11. iV(in«-Aae«-Aeen cAe-Aeen ;— this officer is subordiDate 
to the che-foo ; and is to the district of Nan-hae, what the 
che-foo is to the department of Kwang-chow. As che-heen^ 
he is required to know all the affairs of the district. The de- 
partment of Kwang-chow is divided into fourteen heens or 
districts ; of which Nan-hae and Pwan-yu are two of the 
principal ones, and include the city of Canton. 

12. Pwan-yu-heen che^heen ;— the rank and duties of this 
magistrate are the same in the district of Pwan-yu, as the 
last named officer's are in the district of Nan-hae. Their 
titles, like that of the che-foo, are commonly abridged ; thus, 
when speaking of the Nan-hae magistrate, the people usually 
say, Nan-hae^heen ; and, when it is not necessary to mention 
the district, they say simply, che-'heen, — designating by each 
of these two phrases, the magistrate of the district of Nan- 
hae. 

We havQ now mentioned and characterized, as far as our 
limits will admit and the nature of the subject requires, the 
principal of those officiars who exercise authority in the city 
of Canton. The reader will doubtless iSnd it difficult, as we 
have done, to determine the exact limits of their respective 
spheres, whfch like the course of the planets, often seem to 
intersect each other. At the first sight of so ipany bodies, 
all in motion within so narrow limits, we feel surprised that 
they do not immediately come into collision, destroy each 
other, and carry destruction through the whole empire. On 
closer inspection, however, we are ^ble to discern some of the 
secret laws that govern this complicated system, preserve it in 
being, and keep it in motion. Two influences, the one mili- 
tary and the other literary, are perhaps the principal forces 
which regulate and control the measures of the Chinese gov- 
ernment. Religion, which often has a gigantic power over 
governments, is here blended with civil and state ceremonies, 
and exerts but a feeble, and that usually a most baneful influ- 
ence on the political destinies of the nation. 

AH the officers enumerated in the foregoing list, excepting 
the two che-heens, the che-foo, and the tseang-keun, are gen- 
ers^l officers, — their jurisdiction extending to all other parts of 
the province, as well as over the metropolis. There are like- 
wise two other officers, commanders-in-cTiief of the land and 
naval forces, who, like the other members of the provincial 



Digitized by 



Google 



248 

govetament, act alone in certain cases, and sometimes in con* 
cert with the other general officers. The government is des" 
potic as well as military ; and so constructed that those who 
form the provincial government shall, while they enjoy a de-' 
gree of independence, serve as mutual checks ; and, at the 
same time, each superior officer be held responsible for those 
who are subordinate and accountable to himself. Even in the 
location of these officers there has been a cautious reference 
to *•' division and balance of power." For example; the 
tsung-tuh is stationed in the new city almost within a stones- 
throw of his majesty's most faithful " slave," the Hoppo ; the 
foo-yuen and the tseang-keun ate placed in similar position in 
reference to each other : and these two last are so located in 
the old city, that — should circumstances require, they could 
act against the two first in the new city. 

The same principle is observable likewise, if we mistake 
not, in the disposition which is made of the troops. The 
whole land and naval force throughout the province has been 
estimated at (nominally) about 100,000 men ; all of whom 
are with fixed limitations, under the control of the governor j 
he has however the immediate and sole command of only 
5000 ; and these are stationed at a distance from the city. On 
all ordinary occasions, except when he goes to a distance 
from Canton, he is escorted by a detachment from the kwang- 
choW'hee^ (the chief military officer of Kwang-cbow,) which 
in the absence of his own troops, serves him for a body-guard, 
and constitutes at the same time a part of the police of 
the city. The foo-yuen has only 2000, at his command ; 
while the tseang-keun has 5000, which, in an extreme case, 
would enable him to be master of the city. The prQper seat 
of the governor is at Shaou-king-foo, several miles west of 
this city ; but on account of the superior advantages of Can- 
ton, he is allowed to reside here ; he cannot however bring 
his troops hither, lest, in conjunction with the foo-yuen, they 
should prove more than a match for the Tartar general-com- 
mandant and his 5000 fighting men. It should be remarked 
here, in passing, that no individual can hold an office in any 
province, department, or district of the empire, that includes 
the place of his nativity, or that extends within several hun- 
dred le of it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



N 



349 

The whole number of soldiers ordinarily quartered in the 
city does not probably exceed 7000. There are in the im- 
mediate vicinity of Canton a few small forts, and the city it- 
self is intended to be a strong hold ; but neither are in such a 
state that they could serve any very valuable purposes of de- 
fence. Even the late rain storm carried away one of the gates 
of the city, and opened a wide breach in the walls. Most of 
the forts are dismantled and defenceless, and present noth- 
ing more formidable than the frightful paintings of tiger's 
heads on the wooden lids which block up their port-holes. 
The two folliesy which are situated in the river opposite to 
the city, are very fair specimens of the forts about Canton. — 
There are likewise for .the defence of the city, what have been 
called cavalry and artillery ; but of these we have heard lit- 
tle, and seen nothing. Of the Tartar troops, there are 200 
-chosen men ; who, on state occasions, appear well clad and 
warlike. But generally the soldiers are badly equipped and 
poorly disciplined. All their armor and accoutrements, con- 
sisting of shields and helmets, bows and arrows, spears and 
javlins, short swords and matchlocks, seem ill fitted either for 
defence or attack. The heavy losses sustained by the troops 
of Canton, during the late highland war at Leen-chow, fully 
confirm these remarks ; as do also recent imperial edicts, in 
which the soldiery are accused of idleness and lazy habits, and 
of "indulging in all the softness of civilians." 

The police of the city is, on the whole, vigilant and effi- 
cient. Besides those who act in the capacity of constables, 
thief-takers, &c., and constitute the regular police, there are 
many neighborhoods, as well as private individuals, which 
make arrangements for a constant nocturnal watch. During 
the night, almost all the streets of the city are shut up by 
strong gates at each end ; near one of which there is usually 
a guard house. The night-watches are distinguished by bells, 
or some similar instruments kept by the watchmen. In the 
winter months, when there is great danger from fire as well as 
thieves, watch-towers are built on bamboo poles, high above 
the roofs of the houses ; thus constituting a double watch. 
When thieves are discovered, or when a fire breaks out in any 
part of the city, the alarm, by means of the watchmen, spreads 
quickly from one extremity of the city to the other. When 
riotous assemblies collect in the streets, they are, in most cases 



Digitized by 



Google 



260 

Speedily dissolved bj a vigorous application of the bamboo Of 
whip. Many, doubtless, " shove by justice," and to the day 
of their death go unpunished ; yet the number who are ar- 
rested and brought to trial, annually, is very great. Justice 
is often administered in the most summary manner. Not un- 
frequently, in minor cases, the man receives the punishment 
and again goes free, the same hour in which he commits the 
crime. 

The forms of trial are simple. There is no jury, no plead^ 
ing. The criminal kneels before the magistrate, who hears 
the witnesses and passes sentence; he is then remanded to 
prison or sent to the place of execution. Seldom is he ac^ 
quitted. When witnesses are wanting, he is sometimes tortur- 
ed until he gives in evidence against himself. There are four 
jails in Canton ; which together contain several hundred prison- 
ers. The jail is called te-yo, hell, or literally, earth's prison. 
All capital offenders suffer just without the southern gates, 
near the river. Hundreds die there annually. When brought 
to the fatal spot, they kneel with their faces towards the em- 
peror's court, and bending forward in the attitude of submis- 
sion and thanksgiving, suddenly expire beneath the bloody 
sword of the executioner. 

The literary institutions of China, are the pillars that 
give stability to the government. Her military forces are ut- 
terly inadequate to hold together the numerous and exten- 
sive provinces and territories that constitute the wide domin- 
ions of the reigning dynasty. With great difficulty the Tar- 
tar troops overrun the country — conquering province after 
province, and gradually extending their authority over the 
territories on the west of China Proper. But for a long pe- 
riod both the discipline and the energies of the Chinese sol- 
diery have been on the wane ; and at this moment the impe- 
rial hosts presents nothing formidable but their numerical 
amount; — the recent insurrections of Leen-chow and For- 
mosa have afforded the most complete evidence of this im- 
becility. And not only in this part of the empire, but 
along the whole coast up to the great wall on the north, and 
even beyond that in Mantchou Tartary, both the land and 
naval forces have become so exceedingly enervated and dis- 
solute, ths^t they exercise no salutary influence or control,— 
except it may be over a few who are equally debased with 



Digitized by 



Google. 



iberbselveB. As poIiceHtneiiy m the cafNicitj of lictots^ tfaie^ 
lakefs^ and executtooefft) they ajre not ieits detested tfaaki tw* 
ed by the comnioii people. They are in fact, for all por** 
poses of defeftce> little better than deed men; hay^ were they 
stricken from the catalogue of the living) we can scarcely 
doubt that the stability of the empune would remain unini* 
paired. 

Many there are who look with astbnishmeiit at the magni* 
tud^ of this empire) and believe it strong knd iramoveable as 
the everlasting bills* But an examination of its history and 
present organization) woilld show them that it has been fre* 
quendy rent and broken by Hebel chieftains, ambitious states* 
meh, and haughty kings ; and that its present gi«atness is 
chiefly attributable to its peculiar literary institutions. Tfaese> 
though they are the glory and strength of the nation^ are, ex« 
cept for mere purposes of government,, amazingly de6cient ; 
«nd it is then: relative rather than their intrinsic value, that 
renders them worthy of special notice. Wealth And patron* 
age have great influence here > they often control the acts of 
government, stay the course of justice, cov^ the guilty, and 
confer honors and emoluments on those who deserve them 
not. But as a general rule, learnings while it is an indispen- 
sable pre-requisite for all those who aspire to places of trust 
and authority in the state, is sure to commana respect, influ- 
ence and distinction. Thus, without the dreadful alternative 
of overthrowing the powers that be^ a way is opened to the 
ahibitioiis youth, by which he may reach the highest station 
in the empire, the throne only excepted. Usually the most 
distinguished statesmen are those who have risen to eminence 
by intellectual efibrts ; and they are ^t 6nce the philosophers, 
the teachers, and rders of the land. These distinctions they 
cannot maintain, however, without yielding implicit obedience 
to the will of the monarch, which is most absoli^te and un» 
controlled. Let them honor and obey the power that is over 
them, and they stand-'^ependent indeed on the one hand| 
but on the other-^n proud and env^d distinction. High 
rank in the state is the brightest glory to which this people 
aspire ; and with them learning derives its chiefest value from 
the simple fact that it brings them within the reach of that 
daizling prize. 



Digitized by 



Google 



252 

Strict . examinations, regulated by a fixed code of f aw^^ 
have been instituted and designed solely to elicit from the 
body of the community the " true talerU^^ of the people, 
with the ulterior intention of applying it to purposes of gov* 
ernment. At these examinations, which are open to all, 
except menial servants, lictors, play-actors^ and priests, it is 
determined who shall rise to distinction and shed glory back 
on their ancestors, and forward upon their posterity ; and who 
shall live on in obscurity ; and die and be forgotten. The 
competitors at the Olympic games never entered the arena 
before the assembled thousands of their countrymen, with 
deeper emotion, than that which agitates the bosoms of those 
who contest the palm at these literary combats. The days 
on which they are held, and their results published in Can*- 
ton, are the proudest which its inhabitants ever witness. — 
A brief notice of them may be interesting to the reader, and 
at the same time enable him to understand more fully the 
nature and object of the schools and colleges of the provin- 
cial city, 

. The highest literary examinations in the empire are trien- 
nial, and take place at Peking. Beside these stated, there 
are also other occasional examinations, which are granted by 
special favor of the emperor. Up to these contests, the 
most distinguished scholars go from all the provinces. This 
privilege is not gained without long, patient, and successful 
endeavor ; the examinations, at which it is determined who 
shall enjoy it, occur also triennially, and are held in the 
metropolis of each province. These examinations are of 
incomparable interest to great multitudes of the people in 
every department and district of the empire. High honors, 
rich emoluments, and, in a word, every thing that th« young 
aspirant and his numerous kindred most esteem, are at stake. 
A long season of preparation has been endured ; heavy 
expenses incurred ; and now the decisive hour approaches. 

Two examiners are chosen from the distinguished officers 
at Peking, under the immediate superintendence of the eiw- 
peror. They must leave the capital within five days after 
they are ohosen. They are allowed the use of the post* 
horses belonging to government. Upon those who come 
to Canton six hundred taels are conferred to defray their 
expenses while on the road ; two hundred of which are paid 



Digitized by 



Google 



263 

Trhen they commence their journey from Peking ; and the 
remainder, by the governor of the province, when they are 
about to return after the examination is completed. These 
are assisted by ten other examiners, who are selected from 
the local officers, over whom the foo-yuen presides. Be- 
sides these there are many inferior officers, who are employed 
as inspectors, guards, &c. All these, together with the can- 
didates, their attendants, &c., amounting to 10,000 and 
upwards, assemble at the Kung-yuen^ a large and spacious 
building designed solely for these occasions. It contains 
numerous apartments, so-that each candidate may be seated 
separate from his competitors. All of the seats are num- 
bered. The apartments are low and narrow, and have only 
a single entrance, and no furniture except a chair and a nar- 
row writing desk. 

The number of candidates who assemble in Canton is 
between seven and eight thousand. They are often attended 
by their friends, and continue here for several weeks, and 
sometimes for months; during which time the hum and 
bustle of the city is greatly increased, and every kind of 
mercantile business receives a new impulse. These candi- 
dates are always persons of some distinction, which they 
must have gained, either at previous examinations or by the 
payment of large sums of money. They are all called sew^ 
tsae, — a title not unlike that of master of arts ; but they 
are divided into several classes, and those who have pur- 
chased their degree are often despised by the others, and 
are generally regarded with less respect than those who have 
gained it by their own merits. They meet now on equal 
terms, and their ^ true ability ' is to be determined by per- 
sonal efforts, which are to be made during a given period 
and under given circumstances. 

The candidates assemble on the 8th moon ; but none are 
allowed to enter the examination except those who have 
been previously enrolled by the literary chancellor of the 
province. The age, features, place of residence, and Jineage 
of each candidate must be given in the chancellor's list ; and 
a copy of it lodged in the office of the foo-yuen. They must 
all attend at the examinations in their ^native province; and 
those who give in a false account of their family and lineage, 
or place of nativity^ shall be expelled ^d degraded ; — 'for 



Digitized by 



Google 



864 

BO caadi^Mtt oan be admitted ^t any plaoe^ wilfaoot prosfig 
ibat bis family has been resident there for three geperations^ 
The exami&atioo contioues for severai days, and eacb 
student must undergo a series of trials. The first trial is oa 
the 9th of the moon; the second, on the 12tb ; and the 
thirdy on the 15tb. The candidates are required to enter 
their apartments, on the. day preceding the. ei^amination, and 
are not allowed to leave them until the day after it is closed. 
Thus they must pass two nights in close and solitary confine-* 
menu On the first .day of their examination, three themes, 
which are selected from the ^ Four booTcs,^ are proposed to 
them, and they are required to give the meaning and scope 
of eacb; and a fourth theme, on which they must compose 
a short poem in rhyme. On the second day^ a theme is 
given them from each of the ^ Five classia;^ and on the 
third day, fiire questions, which shall refer to the history or 
political economy of the country, are giveii them. The 
themes must be sententious, and have meanmg which is 
refined and proibund. They must not be such as have often 
been discussed. Those which a^re given out for poetry, must 
be grave and important. In the themes for essays, on politi-- 
cal economy, the chief topics must be concerning things of 
seal importance, the principles of which' are clear and evi-' 
dently of a correct nature. '< There is no occaaon to search 
9nd enquire into devious and unimpcnrtant subjects." All 
questions concerning the character and learning of statesmen 
o( the present dynasty, as well as all topics which> relate to its 
policy, must be carefully avoided. 

The paper on which the themes and essays- are written is 
prepared with great care ; and must be inspected at the office 
of the poo-ching*sze. It is a firm, thick paper ; and the only 
kind that may be used. The price of it is fixed by authority. 
The number of characters, both in the themes and essays, is 
limited. The line&must be.straight ; and all the characters full 
and fair. At the close of every paper, containing elegant com- 
position, veraes, or answers to questions, it must be stated by 
the student how many characters have been blotted out or 
altered ; if the number exceeds one hundred, the writer is 
l«ee chuhy ' pasted out :'r--which means, that his name is past- 
ed up at the gate of the hall, as hainng violated the rules of 
tbfr e^aouiiajjbD, apd. ht. vk ftx^iRiib^ Q^^cluded frona that 



Digitized by 



Google 



ymr\ exaiQiDation. There are usii0% a bwdr^Df mw^ 
persons at every exainiDation in Canton, aubjeot U). this punn 
ishincnt, fiDor. breaking this or some other of the regulastions. 

The candidates ace not allowed ** to get drunk and. bebaye 
disorderly '' dyring the ex^minatioo. All intercourse of ci- 
vility betiv«een the examiners aod» the friends, and relation^.of 
the students, must be discontinued ; and there must be no in* 
terchange of letters, food, &c» On entering the outer gate 
of the kungryueuy each candidate must write bis nanie in a 
register kept for that purpose ; and if it is afterwards discov* 
€red that the name was erroneously written, then the officer 
superintending ttie register, shall be immediately arrested and 
delivered over to a, court of inquiry ; and if it shall be ascer- 
tained that the studeqt has employed any person to compose 
his essays for him, or if he is found guilty of any other simi- 
lar illegality, both he and his accomplices shall be tried and 
punished. Moreover, the student on entering the hall of ex- 
amination must be searched ; and if it be discovered that he 
has with him any precomposed essay, or miniature copy of 
the classics, he shall be punis^hed by wearing the wooden col- 
lar, degraded from the rank of sew-tsae, ajnd forever incapa- 
citated to stand as a candidate for literary honors ; and the 
father and tutor of the delinquent shall both be prosecuted 
«nd punished. 

All the furniture and utensils, such as the writing desks, 
inkstands, Sec, in the apartments where the students write 
their essays, must be searched ; and also each and all of the 
managers, copyists, attendant officers, servants, porters,, &£c. 
&c. If in any manner a learned person, who 'is to de- 
cide on the papers, be admitted to the apartments of the stu- 
dents, dressed as a servant, he shall be punished, and the 
chief examiner delivered over to a court of inquiry. A watch 
composed of military officers and soldiers, is maintained day 
and night both in the inner and outer courts of the hall ; and 
if any of these men are guilty of conveying papers to the can- 
didates, concealed with their food, or in any other way, they 
shall be punished. There are many other regulations and 
precautions which have been adopted to prevent fraud: but 
Ave have given enough to show something both of the interest 
which j[atbers around these examinations^ and of the schem,es 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 

V9\nch are formed to gain distinction without the toil and fa^ 
trgue of hard studyr 

Of the thousands of candidates assembled at these exami- 
nations in Canton, only serventy-one can obtain the degree of 
Keu-jin ; the names of these are published by a proclama-^ 
tion, which is issued on or before the 10th of the 9th moon, 
and within twenty-five days after the examination is closed* 
This time is allowed the examiners to read the essays and 
prepare their report. The proclamation, which contains the 
names of the successful candidates, after it has received its 
appropriate signatures, is pasted up on the office of the foo- 
yuen. At a given hour, three guns are fired ; and the foo- 
yuen at the same time comes forth from his palace accompa- 
nying the official paper ; it is forthwith pasted up, and again 
a salute of three guns is fired ; his excellency then advance* 
and bows three times towards the names of the ' promoted 
men ' (Keu-jin ;) and finally retires under another salute of 
three guns. 

Ten thousand anxious minds are now relieved fr<5m their 
long suspense. Swift messengers are dispatched by those who 
have won the prize to announce to their friends the happy 
result of the long trial which they have undergone ; and while 
the many return with disappointment to their homes, the suc- 
cessful few are loaded with encomiums and congratulations, 
and their names with their essays sent up to the emperor. 
To crown the whole, a banquet is prepared for these newly pro- 
moted men ; and the examiners, and all the civil officers of 
rank in the province join in these festivities. Gold and silver 
cups for the occasion must be provided by the provincial 
treasurer. The chief examiner from Peking presides ; the 
foo-yuen, at whose palace the banquet is given, and who i» 
present as visitor, is seated on his right, and the assistant 
examiner on his l^ft. The governor of the province is also 
present ; a train of inferior officers wait as servants, and two 
lads, dressed like naiads, holding in their hands branches of 
olive, grace the scene with a song from their ancient classics. 
There are three other examinations in Canton, which oc- 
cur twice in three years, and are attended by great numbers 
of aspirants. " At the first, which is attended by the students 
of Nan-hae and Pwan-yu, the che-beens preside ; at the sec- 
ond, which is attended by candidates from all the districts of 



Digitized by 



Google 



^7 

•Kwaaig-cbow-foo, the che-foo presides ; but the third is con- 
tlucted by the literary chancellor of the (Mrovince, whose pre- 
rogative it is to confer the degree of sew-tsae upon a limited 
number of the most distinguished competitors. These are 
preparatory to the triennial examination, and inferior to it in 
•interest ; they need not therefore be further particularized. 
It may be remarked, however, in passing, that they are open 
to persons of all ages ; and a case very recently occurred, 
where a hoary head of eighty, accompanied by a son and 
grandson, attended the examination ; all of them were candi- 
dates for the same literary honors. 

To qualify the young for these examinations, and thereby 
prepare them for rank and office in the state, is a leading ob- 
ject of the higher schools and colleges among the Chinese. 
But a great majority of the schools in Canton are designed 
only to' prepare youth for the common duties of private life. 
These latter, as well as many of the higher schools, are pri- 
vate establishments. And though there are teachers appointed 
by government in all the districts of the empire, yet there are 
oo public or charity schools for the benefit of the great mass 
of the community. Whatever may be bis object and final 
destination, almost every scholar in Canton commences his 
course at some one of the private schools. These, among 
the numerous inhabitants of this city, assume a great variety 
of form and character, according to the peculiar fancy of in** 
dividuals. The opulent, who are desirous of pushing forward 
their sons rapidly, provide for them able teachers, who shall 
devote their whole time to the instruction of two, three, or 
four pupils. A schocrf of this description we have repeatedly 
visited, it is in a hall belonging to merchants from Ning-po, 
and is kept by an old man who has three lads under his care, 
one five, another seven, and a third, nine years old ; he in- 
structs them in the learned dialect, and the youngest has al- 
ready made greater proficiency than is usually done by boys 
^t the age of ten. Sometimes the inhabitants of a single 
street, or a few families who are related to each other, unite 
and hire a teacher and fit up a school*room, and each defrays 
a stipulated part of the expenses. At other times, the teach- 
er publishes the rules and terms on which he will conduct 
his school, and seeks for scholars where ever he can find 
them. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Cbildrefff wte iidt generaily setil to sehool until ihey tM 
feren or eight years old : th^y enter, usually, for a whole 
v^r^ aod must pay for that term, whether they attend regu-^ 
mrly or liot. The wagesi of the teachers vary greatly : 10 
some instances, (and they are not unfrequent in the country,) 
tlie lads pay only two' or three dollara, but generally dfteen or 
twenty, per annum. When the teacher derotei? fais whole 
time to two or three pupils^ he often rec^reS a hundred doW 
krs or more from eacn. 

The ordinary sehck>l-roons^ with all it9 defects^ presents an 
interesting scene. At the head of it there is a tablet, on 
which the name oS the sage,^ ^*ihe teacher and pattern for 
myriads of ages '^ is written in hrge ca{tttals ; a small altar is^ 
placed before it. upon which incense and candles are kept 
continually burning. Every morning when the scholar enters 
the room, be bows first before the taUet and then to his 
teacher ; the former is not merely a tribute of respect, but afif 
act of worship, which he is taught, nay, compelled to pay to* 
Confucius. The boys usually continue in school from six 
o'clock in the morniDg until six in the evening, except two or 
three hours which they are allowed for their meals. When 
in school they all study aloud; and each one raising his voice 
at the same time, and striving to out-da his fellows, the noise 
of the whole is very great. Upon those who are idle or 
disobedient, the teacher piies the rattan with wofitl severity .^ 
Every lesson must be committed perfecdy to memory ; and 
the lad who fails in this, is" obliged to bow down and learn k 
upon his knees ; and those who are the most incorrigible are 
itiade to kneel on gravel and small stones, Of something of 
the kind, in order to enhance their punishment. 

The San-tse^kingy the famous '^ three character classic," 
is the first book which is put into the hands of the learner. 
Though written expressly fbr infant minds, it is scarcely bet-- 
ter fitted for them, than the propositions of Euclid would be 
were they throwii into rhyme. Bui " it is not to be uoder^ 
stood " at first ; and the tyro, when he can rehearse it cor- 
rectly from beginning to end, takes up the Four books and 
masters them in the same manner. Thus far .the young 
learners go, without uuderstandbig aught, or but little of wlutt 
they recite ; and here, those who are not destined to a lite-^ 
rary course, after having learned to write a few characters,- 



Digitized by 



Google 



269 

tttist cldse theiif educatibu. The others not^ cbmitii&tice the 
commentary on the Four Books, and commit it to memory in 
the same way ; and then pass on to the other classics. The 
study of arithmetic, geography, history, &c. forms no part of 
a "common-school" education. 

The high schools and colleges are numerous ; but none of 
them are richly endowed^ or well fitted for the purposes of 
education. The high schools, which are fourteen in num- 
' ber, are somewhat similar to the private grammar schools in 
England and America ; with this difference, that the former 
are nearly destitute of pupils. There are thirty colleges } 
most of which were founded many centuries ago. Several of 
them are now deserted, and are falling to ruins. Three of 
the largest have each about two hundred sttidents, and, like 
the others, only one or two professors. We have sought long 
and diligently — ^but thus far in vain, •'—for some definite infor- 
mation Coticerning the existing discipline and regulations of 
these colleges ; should we affirm that they are without rules 
and order, we should say what we do not doubt, but what we 
cannot prove. All those systems of instruction which have 
sprung up in modern times, and are now doing so much for 
the nations of the West, are here entirely unknown. There 
are, indeed, a few books in the Chinese language which con- 
tain excellent maxims on the subject of education, give nu- 
merous rules to facilitate the acquisition of knowledge, and 
detail systems of gymnastic exercises for the preservation of 
health. 

Of the whole population of Canton, not more than one half 
are able to read. Perhaps not one boy out often is left en- 
tirely destitute of instruction ; yet of the other sex not one in 
ten ever learns to read or write. There is scarcely a school 
for girls in the whole city. Public sentiment here is against 
the education of females ; immemorial usage is against it } 
many passages in the classics are against it ; and the conse-f 
quence is they are left uninstructed^ and sink far below that 
point in the scale of being, which they are fitted and ought 
ever to hold. The degradation into which the fairest half of 
the human species is here thrown, affords cause for loud com- 
plaint against the wisdom and philosophy of the sages and 
legislators of the celestial empire. 
33 



Digitized by 



Google 



m0 

Wq ,4q not kpQwiogVy detract from tjia merits of th^ Chn 
nese ; in cooipafifon v^itb otb^ Asi^t^s, they a|ie a learQe4 
9Xki polisbed race. Those who baire b«en educated are gen-^ 
erally remarkably fond of book$ : and though there are na 
public libraries in Canton ; yet the establishments for manu'^ 
facturing ^nd vending books are numerous. And to supply 
those whp are uuable ^ purchase for themselves the wqrksr 
tbey need, a gr^at number of circulating libraries are kept 
GonslMutly in motion. But almost all of these books are had | 
this cbarge, however, does not fie with €iqual force agaiost 
those works which usually constitute the text4xK)ka of liter-^ 
vy men. 

We are admirers of Greek and Roman literature, but we 
deprecate the practice of putting m the hands oi young stu- 
dents the *' master pieces '' of some of their most celebmted 
authors* The moral tendeacy of many of those heathm 
writings, which, ever since the dark ages have continued ta 
form the basis of the literary education of not a hwehrhtian 
^schools, IB decidedly iflferior to the Chi0e8e. An elegant 
Jinglish scholar ha? spoken well on this point. ' The Chi-' 
i^epe student,' says be, 'not being secured from error by the 
light of revealed religion, cai) only derive hi$ moral precepts^ 
from hi^ school learning. Ub is certainly therefore fortunate 
ip the posse3sidn of a body of aiicient native li^eratore, whicb^ 
while he culti^tes his taste and improves bis understandings 
contains nothing to inflame bis passions or corrupi bis hearts 
The Chinese are not compelled, as we are^ upon the authority 
of great names, and £>r the sake of the graces of style and 
lapguage, ta place in the hands of their youthy works coih 
taining passage^ which put modesty to tlie blush, — ^works, ia 
which the mo$|t admirabte maT^ims of morality, are mixed and 
C^onfounded together in the ^ame page, with avowals and de^ 
scriptions of most diisgusti^g liceptiousness. The Chinese^ 
press is certaJiQly by no means free from the charge of gross-? 
9m$ and indelicacy ; but the bighei- class, at least, of Chi-^ 
nese literatu^, that which usnally forms the I&rary of the 
youthful student, is in this re^>ect wholly unexceptionable.' 

The r^ligi&nks instiiutioQ?' of Canton present for contem-^ 
pJa^ion a dajrk afid ii^^ejanicholy picture. Created lo the like^ 
ness of the infinite, the high, and lofty ons, and entrusted 
with the dominion of this lower world, man is fitted for sub-^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



261 

lime action. His intellettual faculties capatle of uhli^itetl 
imprbvemetit, and his ^* Kviiig soul " parting after immoitality, 
prove Ms origin divine, and tnat by the ex:6l*cis6 of his strertgtfi 
he can accomplish dteeds that shall assobiate him with glorified 
spirits, and make him heir to an eternal kingdom. In thetii- 
selves princes are but worms ; yet with a renewed spirit tti« 
humblest man on earth majr rise, and, hblding boihmurtioti 
with his Maker, shed a benign influence around him that ishall 
cause multitudes to rise up and cdl him blesseti. The day- 
spring from oh high has visited the earth ; and millions of our 
race are rejoicing in the glorious liberty of the children of 
God. But here, alas, where ." sages" have taught, and 
where the good and perfect gifts of the Father of lights ha^e 
be6n richly enjoyed, the creaturb denies his Creiator, perverts 
the use of talents given him for noble purposes, and bows 
down attd pays divinig homage tb wood and stone. Facts 
«hall speak for themselves : arid the reader hiust forttt his 
tjwn opinion on a case, the final decision of which rests Efdt 
with man. 0\ir jadgmtfitlt and that of the idolater is tviih 
Ate Almighty : so<jn these earthly sbenes will pass away, 
and the great and small staild together^, then gold and dia- 
dettis will be worthless ; then all human distinctions will 
vanish ; and then religion — ^that religion which is pure and 
tihdefiled before God, will alone be valuable. 

We will notice the temples or religious houses of Canton 
in order, (as we find them in a native manuscript.) and nar- 
rate only such facts, as are only necessary to illustrate their 
real character and condition. 

1. Kwang'heabu-sze^ that is < the temple of glory and filial 
duty.' The Chinese are remarkably fond of splendid names, 
and this peculiarity is strikingly illustrated in the rich and 
flowery language which the Budhists have employed in gam- 
ing their temples. Sze is one of the most common terms 
used to designate the temples of Budha, and the other two 
characters, Ktvang-heaou, form the proper name of the tem- 
ple. It is unnecessary and often difBcult, to translate the 
names of these temples ; we shall, therefore, usually write 
them just as they are found in native books. 

The Kwang-heaou temple is one of the largest and richest 
in Canton ; it stands within the walls, near the northwest cor- 
ner of ihd old city. There are thirty-five hundred acres of 



Digitized by 



Google 



262 

land belonging to it ; which are rented for the support of its 
inmates, about two hundred in number. This temple was 
first built in the time of San^^kwo, a. d. 250 ; it has ofteo 
been repaired, and supplied with new recruits of idols^ which 
are numerous in all its principal halls* In the records of its 
early history there are frequent allusions to Se-chuh and Se- 
yih. iSe-cAuA, also called Teen-chuh, is India ; but the lise 
of Se-yih seems not to be well settled. Professor Neumann 
in his notes on the catechism of the Shamans, says ; <^ the 
meaning of these words [Se-yih] is very extensive, and 
changes from one century to another. All the countries 
within and without the northwest frontiers of China, and the 
northern parts of Hindostan, are now comprehended under 
this denomination." It denotes ' the west,' much in the same 
manner in which we speak of ' the east.' 

2. Tsing'hvjuy^sze. This stands near the Kwang-heaou 
temple, and though inferior to it in extent, is quite like it in 
almost all other respects. There is indeed, a very great 
similarity in these establishments, not only here but through- 
out the empire ; we need not therefore repeat what is com- 
mon to them all. The Tsing-hwuy temple was first built 
in the time of the Leang dynasty, and is remarkable chiefly 
for a lofty pagoda that rises within its enclosures. 

3. Hwae-shing. This temple was built during the reign 
of the Tang dynasty, by fan-jin, ' foreigners ;' it has a lofty 
dome and spire, rising one hundred and sixty feet in height ; 
which the Chinese call kwang-ta, the ' unadorned pagoda.' 
In the time of Ching-hwa of the Ming dynasty, a. d. 1468, it 
was rebuilt ; and AJi-too-lah, (Abdulla,) a civil officer, and 
seventeen families, resided in or near the temple. These 
were all, probably, Mohammedans : they now amount to about 
3,000 individuals, and are distinguished firom the other in- 
habitants, as ^ persons who have no idols, and who will not 
eat swine's flesh.' 

4 — 9. Hae-choo-tsze-too ; Paou-to ; Keae-yuen ; Se- 
chen-kwei-fung ; Se-hwa, and Tae-tung-koo. — ^We fear our 
readers will frown at these hard, and, to all but natives, very 
uncomely names ; but they are, in fact, infinitely less un- 
seemly, than the establishments which they designate. No 
habitations on earth are more to be abhorred ; they are full 
of idols and all manner of abominations. Their outer courts 



Digitized by 



Google 



265 

are comtDQD retreats for crowds of vagabonds and gamesters ; 
while tbeir inner apartments are usually inhabited by those 
miserable beings, who, having abandoned society, and their 
better reason too, drag out an ignorant, idle and misanthropic 
life. 

10. Chanff^shaw gan. Gan is often applied to nunne- 
ries, of which there are several in Canton. But there are no 
nun^s in this temple. The number of priests is about one 
hundred, who are maintained at an annual expense of more 
than 7000 taels. This money is obtained by the lease of 
lands, which have been given to the establishment. The 
temple, with its various buildings and gardens, occupies three 
or four acres of land. Some of the halls are spacious ; and 
one of them, which has' been recently built by a member of 
Howqua's family, is neat and kept in a good condition. In 
one of the largest halls there is a fine image of Budha, in an 
attitude, of a half-naked, gross, well fed lounger, which does 
honor to the deified mortal whom it represents ! Directly a- 
bove him, in another apartment, stands the 'goddess of mer- 
<5y)' — a well favored image, but undistinguished by any su- 
perhuman characteristics, except in the dimensions of her 
person, being twelve or fifteen feet in height. This temple 
stands without the walls of the city, about three quarters of a 
mile directly north from the foreign factories. It is frequently 
visited by Europeans ; and from the upper story of one of its 
buildings, they may enjoy a fine view of the western suburbs. 

11 — 13. Che-yuen; Chun^-Mi ; diud Hwa-linrsze, This 
last, " the flowery forest " temple, stands about a hundred 
rods northwest from .the foreign factories. It was founded, 
A. D. 503, by Ta-mo, a teacher of the contemplative school, 
who came from India ; " he sailed over a wide expanse, and 
was full three winters in completing the voyage hither." In 
the 11th year of Shun-che, a. d. 1766, the temple was re- 
builtj-and its gardens were adorned with forest trees. It has 
now about two hundred inmates. 

14 — ^26. Se-chuh sin-gan (the new Indian temple ;) Ta- 
fuh ; Wan-shen ; Fuh-hwuy ; Ching-tsew ; Poo-keen ; Pih- 
yun ; Tung-shan ; Hoo-kwo ; Hae-kwang ; Leen-tseuen ; Yue- 
ke, and Hae-chwang-sze ; this last is the far famed ^^Honam 
jos'hoiLse^^' or the 

Temple of Honan. It was originally a private garden ; 



Digitized by 



Google 



mi 

hat 2&ermard3, and several hundred T^tra a^,'8 priest, flflk 
med CJbe^-yne, bnik lop aa estiiblishineiit, wbich li^ called 
^ the temple of ten *tho«»fltid auttfifias/' and dedioaied >it to 
Budba^ It remain^ an obscure fulace, hoj^^&rety tioeit aboiit 
A. D. 1600, when a priest of eminent devotion, with hi» popit 
Ah-^sze, together with -a eoncurreace of extraordinary cir- 
cumstances, raised it to its ptesent tnagni&tence. In th« r^iga 
of Kang-he, and as late as a- d. IlOO, the province of Can- 
ton was not fuHy subjugated ; and a so«wn-iwv <rf the- empe- 
ror, was set>t hither to bring the whole country tinder his fath- 
er's sway. This he accomplished, received the title of Ping- 
nan wtmg, " king of the subrogated south," and took up his 
head quarters in the temple of Honan. There were then 
thirteen villages on <the isIsum!, which \^ bad orders to extier- 
minate for their oppositTfOn to the imperial forces. ^*Just be- 
fore casing into effect this order, the king, Ping-oan, a 
blood-thirsty man, cast his eyes on AlUts^e, a fat happy priest^ 
and remarked, that if be lived on vegetable diet, he could not 
be so fat ; he must be a hypociite aud should be ptinished 
with death. He drew his sword to execute with his own 
hand the sentence ; but his arm suddenly stifened, and he 
was stopped from his purpose. That mght a di\^ine person 
appeared to him in a dream, and assured him, that Ah-tsze 
was a holy man, adding "you must not unjustly krll him."" 
Next morning the king presented himself before Ah-ts^e, 
confessed his crime, and his arm was immediately restored. 
He then did obeisance to the priest, and took him for his tu- 
tor and guide ; and morning and evening the kiog waited on 
the priest, as his servant. 

" The inhabitants of the thirteen villages now heard of this^ 
imiracle and solicited the priest to intercede in their behalf, 
that they might be rescued from the sentence of extermina- 
tion. Trie priest interceded, and the king listened, answer- 
ing thus : — * I have received an imperial order to exterthinate 
these rebels ; but since you, my master, say they now submit, 
be it so ; I must, however, send the troops round to tfee several 
villages before I can report to the emperor; I will do this, 
and then beg that they may be spared.' The king fulfilled 
his promise, and the villages were saved. Their gratitude 
to the priest was unbounded ; and estates, and incense, and 
money, w«re poured inupcto him. The king also, per- 



Digitized by 



Google 



^BiM }ii» offieiers to make dooatioaa to ibe temfk> Uni U 
became laAoeni fiom tilat day. . 

^< The teaip}e> had then no ball of ceUeud Idngs ; and a|: 
the ouleir gate doere was a pool belcmgfflg t» a rieh laao^ whot 
refused to js^U it, altboiagh Ah-lsze dfered hiaii « large com* 
pensatio». The king oonversing witk the> pck^t one day^ 
said) ^ this lei»{de is deiicmht^ for it has bo hail for die oele^* 
tial kings ; ' the piiest replied) ^ a tenrestml king> please your 
faigbnese, is )he proper pierson to rear a pavilion to. the celaa*^ 
tial kings.' The king took die hint^ and seized on the pool 
of the rich mtan^ who waa now very glad to present it *with» 
out Mky compensation ^ and! he gave eomxnaad) raoreo^er^ that 
a paviiioa shcHilid be completecl in fi&een days; but at the 
prifest's inteixsessioa, the workonen weris allowed one mootb^ 
to finisb it ; and by laboriiig d^ently mght and day, they 
' ^aCGompUshed it ki that time." 

-Such i» the history of the tempie of Honan, the largest 
^nd best endoived religious establbhmeiit in CdBlson.^^Sonant 
h an island, and is situated^ as its name denotes^ (literally 
translated) *' sovth cf the river ^ ' ■ bat the village, which fiwr 
^ considerable distance • lines the bank of the Choo-beang 
"direcdy opposite to the city, may be considered as forming 
a part of its southern suburbs. ^ As the family residences of 
^several principal Chinese merchants^ and the open fields 
lying beyond the village^ together with the attractions of the 
^(jo9-houae,'' make Honan a plaee of frequent resort for stran'' 
^ers who visit CantcNo^ some &rther particulars concerning 
the present extent and condition of the temple^ may be 
^ceptafaie. 

Its buildings^, whieh ate chiefly of brick, are numerous^ 
^aod occupy*, with the gardene belonging to. the temple, sis: or 
eight English acres. These grounds are surrounded by a 
high wail. Ciiossing the river a few rods east of the foreign 
factories, cSrectly after landiag you enter the outer gate, pass 
through a long court yard to a second^ called ' the hill gate,* 
X)ver which Hae^-chwang^ the name of the temple> is written 
in large capitals. Here, as you stand in the gateway, you 
see two t^olossal figures^^^images of deified warric^rs, stationed 
one on your right, the other on your left, to guard, day and 
night, the entranace to the inn^ courts. Passing further on, 
ihrough another court you enter ^^ the palace of the four great 



Digitized by 



Google 



266 

celestial kings '' — ^images of ancient heroes. Still advancing;/ 
a broad pathway conducts you up to the great, powerful pal-^ 
ace. Procidi O, procul^ este profanu You are now in the 
presence of '^ the three precious Budhas," three stately im-^ 
ages, representing the past, the present, and the future Bud-^ 
ha. The hall, in which these images are placed, is about 
one hundred feet square, and contains numerous altars, statues^ 
&c., it is occupied by the priests while celebrating their daily 
vespers, usually at about 5 o'clock p. m. Further onward, 
there are other halls, filled with other images, among which 
that <jf the " goddess of mercy " is the most worthy of notice. 

On the right side, after you have entered the temple^ 
there is a long line of apartments ; one of which is used for 
a printing office ; and others are formed into narrow cells for 
the priests ; or into stalls and pens for pigs, fowls^ &c. 
These animals are brought to the temple by devout devotees^ 
when they come to make or pay vows to the beings who 
inhabit the temple- On the left side, there is another set of 
apartments — a pavilion for Kwan-foo-tsze, a military demigod; 
a hall for the reception of visitors ; a treasury ; a retreat for 
Te-tseang wang^ the king of hades ; the chief priest's room ^ 
a dining hall ; and a kitchen. Beyond these there is a spacious 
garden, at the extremity of which there is a mausoleum, 
wherein the ashes of the burnt priests are, once a year, de- 
posited ; also a furnace for burning their dead bodies, and a 
little cell in which the jars contaming their ashes are kept, 
till the annual season of opening the mausoleum returns. 
There are likewise tombs for the bodies of those who leave 
money for their burial. There are about 175 priests now in the 
temple. They are supported in part by proj»erty belonging 
to the establishment, and partly by their own private resources. 
Only a few, and a very few, of them are well educated. 

27 — 75. These forty-nine temples we must pass over 
without mentioning even their names ; several of them are 
large, and it would require many volumes to contain all that 
the Chinese have written concerning them. 

76 — ^78. Yuen-meaou kwan ; Woo-seeri kwan, and Peih- 
keu kwan. These three temples belong to priests of the 
Taou sect ; and their history is filled with those wild and 
extravagant vagaries, which are so characteristic of that order. 



Digitized by 



Google 



fi67 

The first of the three was rebuilt in the fifth year of Kattg- 
hej A. D. 1667, and very richly endowed by officers of the 
provincial government. The Woo-^seen Icwan, or " temple 
of the five genii," derived its name from the " five immortals," 
who, at a very early period (as already noticed,) came hith- 
er, riding upoii five rams, as a token of prosperity to the 
inhabitants of the country. The temple is spacious, has 
many images, and a great number of pavilions for " the immor- 
tals." 

79 — 86. Fow-yew ; San-yuen ; Fung^hin ^ Nan-hae- 
shin ; Lung-wang ; Kwan-te ; Fung-shin ; Teen-how kung. 
These are all temples of considerable note, to which great 
numbers of the people resort. The Teen*-how kung, or " tem- 
ple of the queen of heaven," is much frequented by seafaring 
people, of whom her ladyship is " defender and protector." 

87. Ching-hwang-meaou. The superintendent of this 
temple pays ^4,000 for his situation ; which sum, with a 
large profit, is obtained again in the space of three or four 
years, by the sale of candles, incense, fcc, to be used by 
Worshippers. 

88 — 124. Most of these are ** temples of ancestors," and 
they complete the list before us ; which, large as it is, does 
not, we believe, include the whole number of temples in 
Canton. 

There are, moreover, a great number of public altars, 
which are dedicated to the gods of the land and/ of grain, of 
the wind and clouds, of thunder and rain, and of hills and 
rivers, &c. At these, as also in all the temples, sacrifices 
and oflferings, consisting of various animals, fish, fowls, fruits^ 
sweetmeats, cakes, and wines, are frequently presented, both 
by officers of government and private citizens. There are 
also in these temples, and at these altars, numerous attend- 
ants, whose whole lives are devoted to the service of the 
idols. On the birthday of the gods, and at other times, 
processions are fitted out at the different temples ; and the 
images are borne m state, through all the principal streets of 
the city, attended by bands of musicians ; by priests ; lads on 
horseback ; lasses riding in open sedans ; old men and boys 
bearing lanterns, incense-pots, flags and other insignia ; and 
by lictors with rattans, and soldiers with wooden swords. 
In addition to all these, the different streets and trades, have 
34 



Digitized by 



Google 



their seUgious festivals, which they celebrate with illumilil' 
tioQ, bonfires, songs, and theatrical exhibitions. A great 
deal of extravagance is displayed on these occasions^-^-^acb 
street and company striving to excel all their neighbors. 
The private and domestic altars, shrines crowded with house-' 
hold gods, and daily offerings of gilt paper, candles, incense^ 
be, together with numberless ceremonies occasioned by nup-' 
tials or the burial of the dead, complete the long catalogue of 
religious rites and institutions which are supported by the 
people of Canton. 

And why, all this array of men and means? To what 
useful end is it devoted? Does it adorii the city i Does it 
enrich its inhabitants? Clothe the naked? Feed the bun-' 
gry? Instruct the ignorant? Reclaim the vicious? Heal 
the sick ? Does it, in short, bring any consolation, or any 
real support to the poor and afflicted i The whole number 
of priests and nuns, (there are said to be a thousand of the 
latter,) is probably not less than 3000 } and the annual ex-' 
pense of the 124 temples, may be put down, on a moderate 
estimate, at $250,000. An equal sum is required to sup-^ 
port the annual^ monthly, and semi-monthly fei^tivals, and 
daily rites, which are observed by the people in honor of 
their gods. But it is not the mere outlay, nor even the sink-' 
ing of half a million annually, that makes the full amount 
of the evil ; it is incalculable ; like consumption in the hu-^ 
man frame, it preys on the vitals, and destroys with a slow 
but steady step the whole system. Budhism and Taouism^ 
with the religious doctrines of the Sage, acting conjointly for 
a period of more than 1700 years, have had full opportunity 
to exhibit their legitimate results; this they have done : and 
those results are too numerous and too palpable to be misun^ 
derstood. We know^ and blessed be God for the assurance^ 
that " in every nation he that feareth Him and worfceth right-^ 
eoiunessy is accepted with him f^ but we challenge the abet-' 
tors of idolatry to point out to us even so much as one solitary 
mstance, where the directresults of these three religious creeds 
have been in the least degree salutary. 

We have already alluded to the only two pagodas in this 
city, viz: the Hwa-ta, or ^adorned pagoda,'^so called in con-^ 
tradistinction from the Kwang-ia^ or ^ tmadomed pagoda/ 
They both stand j&ear the west gate of the old city ; and 



Digitized by 



Google 



269 

when approaching Canton from the east, thi&jr ate the first 
objects that arrest the attention of the traveller. The geo- 
mancers say, the whole city is like a great junk : the two pa- 
godas are her masts, the five story house (which rises on the 
hill close by the northern wall,) her stem sheets ! The 
. Hwa-ta was built more than thirteen hundred years ago ; it 
has nine stories, is octagonal, and 170 feet in height. The 
Kwang'ta was built in the time of the Tang dynasty, which 
closed A. D. 906. It is broad at the base, and slender to- 
wards the top. Its height is 160 feet. Anciently it was 
surmounted by " a golden cock, which turned every way with 
the wind ; " but that was broken down and carried off to the 
capital, and its place afterwards supplied by a wooden one, 
which long since disappeared. 

The account of the charitable institutions of Canton is 
brief. They are few in number, small in extent, and of re- 
cent origin. 

1. Yuh-ying'tang, or "the foundling hospital." This 
institution was founded in 1698, and it was rebuilt and con- 
siderably enlarged in 1732. It stands without the walls of 
the city, on the east ; it has accon^modat'ions for two or three 
hundred children, and is maintained at an annual expense of 
2,522 taels. 

2. Ta^g'tse-yuen : — this is a retreat for poor, aged, and 
infirm, or blind people, who have no friends to support them. 
It stands near the foundling hospital, and like it enjoys impe- 
rial patronage — ^receiving annually 5,100 taels. Both ms 
sum, and that for yuh-ying-tang, are received, in p»ft, or 
wholly from duties paid by those foreign ships wWch bring 
rice to Canton. Every such ship must pay the stim of 620 
taels, which by imperial order, is appropriated to these two 
hospitals. The number of « rice ships '' last year was 28, 
yielding the sum of 17,360 taels. What became of the sur- 
plus, 9738 taels, does not appear from any statements, which 
we have obtained. 

3. Ma-fung-yuen, or *the hospftal for lepers.' This is 
also on- the east of the city ; tb^ number of patients in it, is 
341, who are supported at an expense of 300 taels per 
annum ! 

Some centuries ago, a public dispensary was set up, in 
order to furnish the mdigent sick with medicines ; but for a 



Digitized by 



Google 



270 

long time the establishment has been closed. Small plots of 
ground, situated on the east and north of the city, have been 
appropriated as burying places for those who die friendless 
and moneyless. There are, we believe, no tombs or places 
of interment within the walls of Canton. But the hills be- 
yond, and in every direction round the city, are covered with 
monuments and hiUocks which mark the places of the sleep- 
ing dead ; thither the lifeless bodies of the poor, are carried 
out and buried, usually, we believe, at the public charge. — 
All the above named appropriations are under the care of 
government, and are meted out with a sparing hand. The 
condition of the three hospitals, if such they may be called, 
is wretched in the extreme. The foundlings, are often thosQ 
infants which have been exposed ; and who when grown up 
are often sold, and not unfrequently for the worst of purposes. 
Such is a specimen of the benevolent institutions of the celes- 
tial empire ! 

The situation of Canton and the policy of the Chinese 
government, together with various other causes, have made 
this city the scene of a very extensive domestic and foreign 
commerce. With the exception of the Russian caravans which 
traverse the northern frontiers of China, and the Portuguese 
and Spanish ships which visit Macao, the whole trade between 
the Chinese empire and the nations of the west, centres in 
this place. Here the productions of every part of China are 
found, and a very brisk and lucrative commerce is driven by 
merchants and factors from all the provinces. Here also 
merchandise is brought from Ton-quin (Tung-king,) Cochin- 
china, Camboja, Siam, Malacca, or the Malay peninsula, the 
eastern archipelago, the ports of India, the nations of Europe, 
the different slates of North and South America, and the isl- 
ands of the Pacific. We shall, as briefly as possible, notice 
the several branches of this extensive commerce ; enumerate 
some of the principal commodities which are brought to this 
city, as well as those which are carried from it : and add, 
in the same connection, such remarks concerning the situation 
and circumstances of the trade and those who conduct it, as 
seem necessary to exhibit its full magnitude and importance* 

Concerning the domestic commerce we can do little more 
than mention the articles which are here bought and sold for 
the several provinces; each of which provinces we shall no- 



Digitized by 



Google 



271 

tice separately, that we may at the same time, by taking a 
view of their position and number of inhabitants, see to what 
advantage the present trade is conducted, and what is the 
probability of its future increase or diminution. We com- 
mence with the maratime provinces : then notice those on 
the northern, western and southern frontiers; and finally 
those in the centre of China Proper. The, colonial trade we 
do not bring into the account. We give the population in 
round numbers, according to the Ta-tsing hwuy-teen for the 
year 1812. 

From the province of Kwang-tung are brought to the me- 
tropolis, silks, rice, fish, salt, fruits, vegetables, and various 
kinds of wood ; silver, iron, and pearls in small quantities : 
also cassia and betel-nut ; and in return a small amount of 
almost all the imports, whether from foreign countries or from 
the other parts of China, are sent out from Canton through 
the province. The population, amounting to nineteen mil- 
lions, consumes a large amount of foreign imports, and might 
under better regulations, furnish a much greater supply of 
exports; 

From Fuh'Tceen come the black teas ; also camphor, sugar, 
indigo, tobacco, paper, lacquered ware, excellent grass-cloth, 
and a few mmeral productions. Woolen and cotton cloths of 
various kinds, wines, watches, &c. are sent to that province ; 
which, with its population of fourteen millions, might in dif- 
ferent circumstances receive a far greater amount of foreign 
manufactures and productions in exchange for its own. The 
trade of the province is carried on under great disadvantages. 
It has* been shown by an accurate and detailed comparison 
between the expense of conveying black teas from the coun- 
try where they are produced, to Canton ; and of their con- 
veyance from thence to the port of Fub-chow in Fuh-keen, 
that the privilege of admission to the latter port, would be at- 
tended with a saving to the East India Company of £150- 
000 annually, in the purchase of black teas alone. This 
opinion, given by Mr. Ball, formerly inspector of teas m 
China, and quoted by Sir G. T. Staunton, is deserving of 
consideration. 

* Che-keang sends to Canton the best of silks and paper ; 
also fans, pencils, wines, dales, " golden flowered " hams, and 
hng'tsing-cha — an excellent and very costly tea. This 



Digitized by 



Google 



272r 

pwjvmce has a pbpulatlon of twenty-dx miffions, and makey 
large deitlands for fowlgn imports ; these, however, by way 
of Canton, go to that province at no small expense to the^ 
consumer. 

Keang-nan^ which is now divided iuto the tw^ provinces^ 
Keatig'Boo and Oan-kwHy^'mth a poptriation of seventy-ttoa 
millions, has the resources^ as well a» all the Wimts of a king- 
doiii; And notwithstanding its distance from this city, large 
quantities of produce are amiually sent hither and exchanged 
for the productions and manufactures of the western world- 
Green teas and silks are the principal articles of traffic which 
are brought to Canton ; and they tasually yield the merchant 
a g^eat pro6t. 

From Shantung, fruits^ vegetables, drugs, wines, and 
skins are brought down the coast to Canton : and coarse 
fabrics for clothing are sent back in return. The carrying of 
foreign exports from Canton to Shutt-tung, whether over land 
or up the coast in native vessels, makes them so expensive 
as to prevent their use among the great majority of the inhab- 
itants, who are very poor and very numerous — ^amounting to 
twenty-height millions. 

From Chih4e, ginseng, raisins, dates, skins, deer^s fleshy 
wines, drugs, and tobacco are sent hither ; and cloths of va- 
rious kinds, also clocks, watdies, imd sundry other foreign 
imports go back in return. The population, amounting to 
twenty-se'cen millions, is in a great degi*ee dependent on the 
productions of othei* provinces and countries for the necessa- 
ries of life. 

Shan-se sends skins, wines, ardent spirits, and musk. 
Among its fourteen millions of inhabitants, there are many 
capitalists who come to Canton to get gain by loaning money. 
Various kinds of cloths, European skins, watches, and native 
books are sent up to the province of Shan-se. 

Shen-se also supports a large money trade in Canton ; and 
sends hither likewise brass, iron, precious stones, and drugs ; 
and takes back woolen and cotton cloths, books, and wines^ 
The population is about ten millions. 

Kan-suh sends hither gold, quicksilver, musk, tobacco, &c., 
and receives in return, for its fifteen millions of inhabitants, 
a small amount of European goods. 



Digitized by 



Google 



iSze*-chuen sends gold, brass, iron, tb, musk, and it gresct 
Variety of other drugs ; and receives in exchange Euvopean 
>tilotbs, lacquered ware, looking glasses, &^c. Sze-cbuen is 
the largest of the ^eighte^ provinces, and has a population ^f 
twenty-one millions. 

Ynn'^nan yields^ for the sh0ps of Canton, brass, tin, pre-^ 
clous stones, miisk, betel*nut) birds, and peacock's feathers ^ 
^nd receives from Canton silks, woolen and cotton cloths, 
various kinds of provisions, tobacco and boc^. The popu* 
Nation is ^t^e naillions. 

Kwang*se has a population of seven millions, atid furnishes 
this market with large quatitities of ^ce and cassia ; also irocv, 
lead, fans, and Wood of vitrious kinds ; and takes in return 
many native productions and most 'of the articles that come 
to Canton from beyond sea. We now turn to the central 
provinces. 

From Kwei^how are brought gold, quicksilver, iron, lead, 
tobacco, incense, and drugs ; and a few articles, chiefly for- 
'eign goods, find their way back to that pFovince^ Its popu* 
lation is Jive millions. 

From the 4wo provinces, Moo^nan aad Hoo^pihy come 
large quantities of rhubarb, also musk, tobacco, honey, hen\p, 
and a great variety of singing birds ; the number of inhabi- 
tants is forty-Jive millions, and they make very considerable 
demands on the merchants of Canton, both for native produc- 
tions and foreign imports. 

Keang^se sends to this market coarse doths, hemp, china 
ware, and drugs; and takes in return woolens, and native 
'books. The population is twenty-three millions. Ho-nan 
has an equal number of inhabitants, and sends hither rhubarb, 
musk, almonds, honey, indigo, iicr, and woolens, and a^few 
other foreign goods are received in return^ 

This account of the domestic commerce of Canton is taken 
from a native manuscript. We have sought long, but in vain, 
for some official document which would show at once the dif- 
ferent kinds and the amount of merchandise which is annually 
brought from, and carried to, the several provinces of the 
empire. The account which we have given, must be regard- 
^«d<^only ^«n ap|>rOKiraation to the truth. Some articles^have 
<ioubtless been omitted which ought to have been noticed ; 
and vice versa. One commodity in particular which is known 



Digitized by 



Google 



274 

fd be carried into alt f be provinces, and used to the atn6flfiC 
of more than $12,000,000 annually, is not even mentioned* 
Still the statements, which we have brought into view^ show 
tliat there is in every j>art of the empire, a greater or less 
demand for foreign productions, — a demand which, so fcng as 
the commerce is confined to this port, will be supplied very 
disadvantageously both for the foreigner add the native ; but 
while it does remain thus restricted, there is reason to suppose 
that it will, under all its disadvantages, gradually increase ; 
and even if the northern ports of the empire should be imme- 
diately thrown open, it will not soon cease to be important. 

Though the merchants and factors from the other provinces 
enjoy a considerable share of the commerce of Canton, yet 
they do not confine themselves to the domestic trade ; they 
participate largely in that to Tung-king, Cochinchina, Siam, 
and the islands of the eastern archipelago. The whole num- 
ber of Chinese vessels^ annually visiting foreign ports south 
of Canton, is not, probably, less than one hundred ; of these 
one third belong to Canton : six or eight go to Tung-king ; 
eighteen or twenty to Cochinchina, Camboja, and Slam ; four* 
or five visit the ports of Singapore, Java/ Sumatra, and Pe- 
nang ; and as many more find their way to the Celebes, Bor- 
neo, and the Philippine islands. These vessels never make 
but one voyage in the year, and always move with the mon- 
soon. Many of the vessels from Fuh-keen and the northern 
ports of China, which go south, touch at Canton both when 
outward and homeward bound. But the whole amount of 
trade to foreign ports, carried cm by the Chinese merchants 
of Canton, is not very great ; not so, however, that which 
is in the hands of foreigners, and which we now proceed to 
notice. Portugal, Spain, France, Holland, Sweden, Den- 
mark, England, 'and the United States, have all shared in the 
commerce of Canton. 

The Portuguese ships led the way to China. Raphael 
Perestrello arrived here in 1516; and the next year eight 
ships, four Portuguese and four Malay, under the command * 
of Fernao Peres de Andrade arrived on the coast ; six of 
these anchored near St. John's island, and the other two 
came into the port of Canton. From that early period the. 
trade of the Portuguese began to increase rapidly ; but diffi- 
culties soon arose, and the (adventurers were restricted to 



Digitized by 



Google 



276 

Macao ; to which place they have ever since beeti limited, 
except at short intervals, v^rhen they have been allowed, with 
other foreigners, free access to all the ports of the empire. 

Spanish ships also, are excluded from this port ; but are 
allowed tlie privilege, which they neglect to improve, of ti-ad- 
ing at the port of Amoy* 

The French reached the port of Canton in 1 520 ; but then: 
trade has never been very extensive, though it has beencon- 
tinued to the present time. During the last few years they 
have employed annually two, three, or four ships in this trade. 
In the season 1832—^3, there were three French ships in 
port. 

The Dutch trade commenced, if we may rely on native 
authority, in 1601 ; it had to struggle, in its origin, with very 
many difficulties ; and during its progress through more than 
two centuries has fluctuated exceedingly. Its present pros- 
pects are improving ; a few years ago there were only three 
or four ships annually employed in this trade. During the 
year 1832, there were seventeen Dutch vessels which came 
to China ; these were all from Holland and Java. The value 
of imports was ^467,128, exports, $656,645, — ^not includ- 
ing the private trade of the commanders. 

Sweden has never, in one season, we believe, sent more 
than two or three ships to China. This trade opened in 
173^ ; and during its first fifteen years, 22 ships were dis- 
patched to China, of which four were lost. Peter Osbeck, 
who was here in 1750-51, as chaplain of the Prince Charles, 
a Swedish East-Indiaman, relates, that there were that sea- 
Son, eighteen European ships in ipovty viz: one Danish, two 
Swedish, two French, four Dutch, and nine English. For 
the last fifteen years no Swedish ships have visited China. 

The Danes seem to have come to China earlier than the 
Swedes ; but the year in which their trade began we cannot 
ascertain. During twelve years, commencing in 1732, they 
sent 32 ships to China, of which only 27 returned. Their 
trade has never been very great, though it has been contin- 
ued to the present time. 

The English did not reach the coast of China till about 
1635. It is stated, on good authority, that queen Elizabeth 
5n 1599, sent John Mildenhall from Constantinople over 
land to the court of the great Mogul in order to obtain cer- - 
35 



Digitized by 



Google 



2^ 

tain priviieg^st fer the English, for whom she teas tbefi pf4» 
pitting^ charter. Mildenhall was long opposed by the art^ 
asd presents of the Spanish and Portuguese jesuita at that 
court ; and it was some years before he entirely "got the 
better of them.'' It is also recorded that the same wise 
princess wrote strong recommendatory letters to the emperor 
«►/ CSiiha to be delivered by the chiefs of an expedition in- 
tended (ot this country $ but misfortunes at sea, prevented 
the ships from reaching the place of tlieir destination. In 
1^4, a " truce and free trade " to China, and all other 
places where the Portuguese were settled, was agreed to 
betweeen the viceroy of Goa and several English merchants, 
to whom a license for trading to tiie East Indies had been 
granted by king Charles I. Several ships were fitted but by 
these gratitees, under the command of captain Weddell, who 
thought it sufficient^ in consequenice of the agreement mad6 
at Goa, to bring letters for the governor of Macao, in order to 
be effectually assisted in his projected intercourse with the 
Chinese at Canton. The account of this first enterprise i® 
eurious ahd interesting. We subjcnn a few extracts which 
^re found in the works of sir George Staunton. 

" Th6 iirocundor of Maoao watm [after the fleet arrived] impaired on 
board the principal ship of the Englisn^and said, that for matter of refresh^ 
ing, he would provide them ; but that there wa« a main obstacle to their 
trying, Ipiiich was the non consent of the Chinese, who, lie pretended[, 
litfld the Portuguese in miserable subjection. The English, however, de- 
termined to discover the river of Canton; and fiitted out a barge and pin- 
nace, with above fifty men, which, after two days came in si^ht of (he 
iBouth of the river, oejng a very goodly inlet, ana utterly prohibited to the 
Portuguese by the Chinese, who do not willingly adnnt any strangers to 
the view of it, being the passage and secure harbor for their best jnnks/ 
both of war ahd merchandise ; so that the Portuguese traffic to Canton^ 
was only in small vessels, through divers narrow shoal straits, among many 
broken islands adjoining the mam.- The barge anchoring for a wind and 
tide to carry them in, a Ashing boat was OTSCried early in the mornings 
which Thomas Robinson followed, [a tedious chose by reason of their many 
oars,] hoping to have found some one on board who might serve, either as- 
pilot or interpreter ; but binding neither, haviftg used them with all cour- 
feiy, dismissed iSiem contrary to their timorous expectations ; and after- 
wards, for the same causes, and with the same success, spake with another: 
butafter a delay of several days, a small boat made towards the pinnace ; an(f 
having sold some refreshments, signs were made to carry some of the £n- 
^Nsh to Canton, aild bring them to the speech of the mandarine, which the* 
boatmen accepted of; but the next day, the pinnace being under sail with 
a fair wind ahd tide, after having passed by a certain desolate castle, a fieet 
6f about tWetfty ImiI of tall janks, conAoanded by an admiral, passing down 
£g9m GantekiS eaeountered the EngBsb^ aad, in courtoeu* tevtaatf dewiett 



Digitized by 



Google 



277 

tkem to uchot, whidli necordinfflv tb«y (ii4 > and pr,9Mn,tly J, Moui;tt9^i^ 
and T. Robinson weojt oo bcMurd toe chief mattdajcin, wWe. wer« ce:ctW. 
negrroes, ftigitives of the Portuguese, that interpreted. 

" At first, the Chinese began somewhat roughl;^ to expostulate ; what, 
moved them to come hithec and disco^ver theprohituted g^Modaaod the con^. 
cealed parts and passages of sa great a prince's dominions ? Also, who. 
were their pilots ? T. Robinson replied ; that they wei^ com« frpm, EuxQpe, 
to treat of suoh eapitulation as nushi conduce to the. good of both prince^ 
and subjects^ hoping that it might oe lawiul for them, as well as for the in^ 
habitants of Macao, to exercise a firee conunerce, paying duties as the oth- 
evs ; and as for pilots, they had none ; but ererj one was able by his art, t« 
discover more difficult passages than they had found. The Chinese here- 
after beg^n to he more afihble, and in con^lusiou^ appointed a soudl juuk to 
carry up whomsoever they pleased to Canton, if the English would prom- 
ise tnat the pinnace would proceed no further ; for though each of the^ft 
vessels was well armed, yet they durst not oppose her m any hostile way). 
The same night, captain Carter, T. Robinson and J. Mounteney left the 
pinnace, with orders to expect their return ; and, beinff embarked in asa^n 
junfe of tlurty tons, proceeded towaida Canton, with intent to deliver te 
the viceroy a petition, for obtaining permission to settle a trade in those 
parts. The next day they arrived within five leagues of CanUui^ whither 
1* seems the rumor of tibeir coming, and the fear of them, w<^. already 9,1" 
rived ; so that they were required, in a friendly manner» to proceed no 
further, but to return to their own ships, with promise of assistance in tb^ 
procuring of license for trade, if they would seek it at Macao by the solici- 
tations of those they should find there, and instantly abandon the river; 
the which, (having satisfied themselves with this discovery, and willing to 
remove the anxiety which their long absence might occasion in the rest of 
the fleet,) they readily performed. In a little time, the Portuguese fleet of 
six small vessels set sail for Japan ; upon whose departure it was expected 
the permission to trade would have been granted ; but being then freed of 
their conceived fear lest captain Weddell and his men should have sur- 
prised their vessels, they sent the £nglish aflat demal. 

<< The same dav,ata consultation called on board the admiral (Weddell,) 
captain Carter, J. Mounteney, and T. Robinson delivered to the whole 
council, together with a draught of the river, the sum of their attempts, 
success and hopes ; which bemg well pondered, it was generally consented 
that the whole fleet should sail for the river of Canton. They arrived in a 
few days before the fbrementioned desolate castle ; and being now furnished 
with some slender interpreters, they soon had speech with divers manda- 
rins in the kinj^'s junks, to whom the cause of their arrival was declared, 
viz : to entertam peace and amity with them, to traffic freely as the Portu- 
guese did, and to be forthwith supplied for their monies, with provisions 
lor their ships ; all which those mandarins promised to solicit with the 
prime men resident at Canton ; and in the mean time, desired an expecta- 
tion of six days, wJiich were granted; and the English ships rode with 
white ensigns on the poop. But their perfidious friends, the Portuguese, had 
in all that time, since the return of the pinnace, so beslandered them to the 



night time they put forty -i 

lying close to the brink of the river ; each piece being between six and 
seven hundred weight, and well proportioned ; and afler the end of four 
days, having, as they thought, sufficiently fortified themselves, they dis- 
charged divers shot, though without hurt, upon one of th^ barges passing 
by them, to find out a convenient watering place. Herewitli the whole 
flieet, being instantly incensed, did, on the sudden, display thair bloody 



Digitized by 



Google 



278 

enBigm ; a&d weighing their anchors, iell up with the flood, and berthed 
themselves before the castle, from whence came many shot ; yet not any 
^at touched so much as hull or r6pe. Whereupon, not being able to eu" 
dure their brarados any longer, each ship began to play furiously upon 
them With their broadsides ; and after two or three hours, perceiving their 
Cowardly fainting, the boats were landed with about one hundred men } 
which sight occasioned them,' with ^at distraction, instantly to abandon 
the castle and fly ; the boats' crews, in the mean time entering the same, 
and displajdng his majesty's colors of Great Britain upon the walls, having 
the same night, put aboard all their ordnance, fired the council house, and 
demolished what they could. The boats of the fleet also seized a junk 
laden with boards and timber, and another with salt. Another vessel of 
small moment was surprised, by whose boat a letter was sent to the chief 
mandarins at Canton, expostulating their breach of truce, excusing the as- 
sailinfiT of the castle, and withal, in fair terms, requiring the liberty of trade. 
This tetter, it seems, was delivered ; for the next day, a mandarin of no 
great note, some time a Portuguese Christian, called Paulo Noretty, came 
towards the ships in a small boat with a white flag, to whom the English 
having laid open the injuries received, and the sincere intent they had, to 
establish a fair trade and commerce, and were no way willing, (but in 
their own defence,) to oppose the Chinese, presented certain gifts, and dis- 
missed him to his masters, who were some of the chief mandarins, and who 
being by him duly informed thereof, returned him again the same nifht^ 
with a small junk and full authority to carry up such persons as should be 
appointed to Canton, there to tender a petition, and to conclude further upon 
the manner of their future proceedings." 

The English had now gained their point : two individuals 
proceeded to Canton and were favorably received by officers 
of high rank in the city ; and arrangements, which were agree- 
able to both parties, were soon made. Such was the com- 
mencement of a commercial intercourse which, though always ^ 
important, may very soon command a far more extensive 
and salutary influence than it has ever before exerted.* The 
British trade with China forms a very important item of the 
commerce of the world. It is divided into two branches ; 
that which is carried on directly with Great Britain, i. e. the 
Company's trade ; and that which is carried on between 
China and the British possessions in India, nearly the whole 
of which is in the hands of private individuals. 

The whole number of vessels which arrived in China un- 
der the British flag, during the year 1832, was seventy-four; 
seven of these made two voyages ; and three of them made 
three voyages, during the twelve months : and one of these 
last, the Red Rover, captain Clifton, made her three voy- 
ages from Calcutta ; she arrived in China on the 28th Feb., 
5th June, and 6th October. The whole number of arrivals 
was eighty-seven ; 9 from London; 31 from Bombay; 24 



Digitized by 



Google 



279 

from Calcutta ; 2 from Madras ; 5 from Singapore, (most of 
the English ships to or from China touch at this port); 3 
from Sourabaya; 1 from Batavia; 1 from N. S. Wales; 8 
from Manila ; 1 from the east coast of China ; 1 from Lew- 
chew ; and 1 from the straits of Malacca. Of these ships, 
there arrived in Jan., 2 ; in Feb., 2 .; March, 4 ; April, 2 ; 
May, 10 ; June, 16 ; July, 5 ; Aug., 15 ; Sep., 17 ; Oct., 8 ; 
Nov., 3 ; Dec, 2. There were 14 departures in Jan. ; 2 in 
Feb. ; 5 in March ; 2 in April ; 5 in May ; 4 id June ; 1 1 in 
July ; 4 in August ; 11 in Oct ; 17 in Nov* ; 9 in Dec.;— and 
two or three vessels remained stationed at Lintin. 

These vessels brought to China, broadcloths ; long ells ; 
camlets ; British calicoes ; worsted and cotton yarn ; cotton 
piece goods ; Bombay, Madras and Bengal cotton ; opium ; 
sandal-wood ; black-wood rattans ; betel-nut ; putchuck ; pep- 
per ; cloves ; cochineal ; olibanum ; saltpetre ; skins ; ivory ; 
amber ; pearls ; cornelians; watches, and clocks; lead ; iron; 
tin ; quicksilver ; shark's fins ; fish-maws ; stock-fish &;c. 
Returning from China they were laden with teas, silk, silk 
piece goods, sugar, cassia, camphor, vermilion, rhubarb, al- 
um, musk, and various other articles. The value of these 
exports' and imports is exhibited in the following table. 



Seasons. 


Impokts. 


Exports. 


1828-29. 


f 21, 313,526 


$19,360,625 


1829-30. 


22,931,372 


21,257,257 


1830-31. 


21,961,754 


20,446,699 


1831-32. 


20,536,227 


17,767,486 


1832-33. 


22,304,763 


18,332,760 



The American trade to China is of very recent origin ;. it 
commenced shortly after the ' revolutionary war. The first 
recorded facts which we are able to obtain, carry back the 
trade only to the season 1784-5 ; in which season two Amer* 
ican ships were laden at Canton ; they carried to America, 
with their other cargo, 880,100 lbs. of tea: in the next sea- 
son there was only one vessel, which exported 695,000 lbs. 
In 1786—7 there were^t?c ships engaged in the trade; they 
exported 1,181,860 pounds of tea ; one of these ships was 
the " Hope ; " other ships which were in port during this, and 
the following season were the << Washington," the ^^Asia," 



Digitized by 



Google 



280 

ttid the ''Canton ;" the two kst were from Plnladelphiff:^ 
The number of American ressels which arrived in China 
ehiring the season of 1882^3 ending June 1833, was^^y- 
nine ; some of tbese^ howeyer, did not take in cargoes at this 
port. These ships brought quicksilver, lead, iron, South 
American copper, spelter, tin plates, Turkey opium, ginseng, 
rice, broad^cloths, camlets, chintzes, loog ells, long cloths, 
cambrics, domestics, velvets, bombazettes, handkerchiefs, 
linen, cotton drilhngs, cotton yam, cotton prints, land and 
sea otter skins, fox skins, seal skins, pearl shells, sandal-wood,, 
cochineal, music boxes, clocks, watches, and sundry other 
artk;les; and in return were laden with teas, silks, cassia, 
camphor, rhubarb, vermilion, china ware, &c.; these articles 
of merchandise were carried to the United States, Europe, 
South America, Sandwich Islands, and Manila. The follow-^ 
ing table will aflbrd some idea of the piK>gress of the trade, 
smd show its present amount. 

Seasons. Imports. Exports. 

1805—06. $5,326,358 $5,127,000 

1815—16. 2,527,500 4,220,000 

1825— S6. 3^43,717 4,363,788 

1830—^1 . 4,223,476 4,344,548 

1831—32. 5,531,807 5,999,731 

1832—33. 8,362,971 8,372,175 

From the foregoing statements it appears that the China 
trade, employing annually 140 first rate vessels and a large 
amount of capital, constitutes a very important branch of 
modern commerce. But the trade has always been carried 
on, and still exists, under circumstances peculiar to itself; it 
is secured by no commercial treaties ; it is regulated by no 
stipulated rules; mandates and edicts not a few, there are 
" on record," but these all emanate from one parly : still the 
trade lives, and, by that imperial favor which extends to " the 
four seas," flourishes and enjoys no small degree of protection. 
All vessels arriving on the coast of China, are, unless destin- 
ed for the harbor of Macao or the port of Canton, considered 
by Chinese authorities as intruders, and as such " must in- 
stantly be driven away." Year after year, however, vessels 
have fouod a safe and coft^venienl aiichorage at Lintin and vi- 



Digitized by 



Google 



^tiity ; where la large ^^amoUBt of busini^ss, mcluding nearljr 
4be wbole of the opium trade, is transa-Gted. Those vesseliB 
that iat^ to etiter the Bogue, must procure a pemiit aad a pilol 
-at the Chinese custom-house near Macao^ and the pilot, 
'having received license to act, must proceed on board imme»- 
^lately and condact the vessel to the anchorage at Whampoa. 

As soon ^s the ship is officially reported at Canton, ap- 
^arangements are made for discbdirging 4md receiving cargo, 
the whole business of wbidi is sometimes accomplished in 
three weeks, but Usually in not less time than two or three 
months. But before dais business can proceed, the con- 
signee or owner of the ship most obtain for her a secwrity 
merchant, n Ungmst, and a comprador^ and a ^written decla^ 
ration must be given for 'every ship, except those of the E. 
I. Company, that she has on board no opium. 

The security merohant, or individual who gives security 
to government fcMr the payment of her duties and for the con*- 
^^uct of her crew, must be a member of the co-Aon^ ; at 
present tliis company is conaposed of twelve individuals, usu- 
ally called hong merchants : some of these men rank among 
^be most wealthy and respectable ^habitants of Canton ; th^y 
pay largely for the privilege of entering the co-hong, and 
when they have once joined that body, tbey are seldom al- 
lowed to retire from their station, and are at all times liable to 
heavy exactions from the provincial government. Formerly 
4he whole, or nearly the whole, foreign trade was in their 
hands ; within a few years, it has extended to others who 
-are not indued in the co-hong ^nd who are commonly 
called outside merchants. The linguists, so called, hold 
the rank of interpreters^; tbey procure permits for deliv- 
^^ring and taking in cargo, transact all business at the custom- 
house, keep account of the duties, etc. The comprador 
provides stores, and all nece«sary provisions, for the ship 
while she remains in port. 

The ^ort charges consist of measurement duty, cumsha, 
.pilotage, linguist's and comprador's fees. The measurement 
duty varies ; on a Vessel of 300 tons it is about $650 ; and 
*on vessels of the largest sifce, say 1300 tons it is about $3000; 
tbetonnage of the vessel however, afibrds no fixed criterion 
ibr thlB amount of measurement duty. . But for alUshipis, of 
whatever size, the dUm^shaw, pilotage, linguisfs and compra'^ 
dor's fe$s are the same, amounting to about $2,573. Those 



Digitized by 



Google 



282 

vessels that enter the port laden only with rice are not te^ 
quired to pay the measurement duty and cumshaw, but are 
liable to other irregular fees amounting to nearly ^ 1000.—*' 
The management and general supervision of the port charges 
are entrusted to an imperial eommissioner, who is sent hither 
from the court of Peking^ In Chinese he is called hae-kwan 
Jceen^iuh ; but by foreigners is usually styled the Hoppo ; his 
regular salary is about 3000 taels per annum^ but his annual 
income is supposed to be not less than $100,000. 

The arrangements between the native and foreign merchants 
of Canton for the transaction of business are on the whole 
convenient, and pretty well calculated to promote despatch 
and secure confidence in the respective parties. The Chi-* 
nese merchants have a well earned reputation for shrewd 
dealers ; generally they have but little confidence in each 
other, and every contract of importance must be " fixed " — 
made sure, by the payment of a stipulated sum : but they 
place the most unlimited confidence in the integrity of their 
foreign customers. Only a small part of the trade is in the 
hands of the outside merchants ; and their number being un- 
limited, there is often among them a great deal of competi^ 
tion. The whole of the E. I. Company's business, and a 
large portion of the English private trade and that of other 
foreigners, is confined to the hong merchants and those who 
transact business in connection with them. The establish- 
ments of the principal hong merchants are extensive they 
have numerous and convenient ware-houses, in which they 
store their goods, and from whence export cargoes are con- 
veyed in lighters to the shipping at Whampoa. 

The foreign factories, the situation of which we have al- 
ready noticed, are neat and commodious buildings. The 
plot of ground on which they stand is very limited, extending 
about siicty rods from east to west, and forty from nordi to 
south ; it is owned, as are also most of the factories, by the 
hong merchants. The factories are called shih^an hangf 
" the thirteen factories ; " and with the exception of two or 
three narrow streets, they form One solid block ; each factory 
extends in length through the whole breadth of the blocks 
and has its own proper name, which if not always appropriate 
is intended to be indicative of good fortune ; the 1st, com- 
mencing on the east, is e-Ao hang, the factory of ^justice and 



Digitized by 



Google 



283 

peace ;^ by foreigners it is called the creek factory j the 2cl id 
the Dutch ; it is called tseih^t hang, < the factory of collected 
justice ;' 3d, is the British factory, which is called paov-ho 
hongy ' the factory that ensures tranquility ;' a narrow lane 
separates this from the 4th, which is called fung-^tae hang^ 
* the great and affluent factory ;' 5th, is the old English factory, 
called lilng^shun hang : 6th, the Swedish factory, called Su^ 
hang : 7th is ma-ying hang, commonly called the Imperial 
factory : 8lh, paou-shun hang, the ' precious and prosperous 
factory :* the 9th the American factory, called Tcwang^yuen 
hang, ' the factory of wide fountains ;' a broad street, called 
China street, separates kwang-yuen hang from the 10th, 
which is occupied by one of the hong merchants ; the 11th, 
is the French factory : the 12th is the Spanish ; the 13th and 
last is the Danish factory ; the l2th and 13th are separated 
by a street occupied by Chinese merchants, and usually call- 
ed New China street. Each factory is divided into three, 
four or more houses, of which each factor occupies one or 
more according to circumstances. The factories are all built 
of brick or granite, two stories high, and present' a rather 
substantial front ; and with the foreign flags which wave over 
them form a striking, and to the stranger, a pleasing contrast 
with the riational banner and architecture of the celestial 
empire. 

The style of living in Canton, we speak of the foreign soci- 
ety, is similar to that of India, except in the important par- 
ticular, that here a man is deprived of that " help,'^ appoint- 
ed to him by a decree which no human authority can justly 
abrogate, and enjoyed by him in every other land but this. 
A gentleman, fitting up an establishment in Canton, must first 
obtain a comprador; this is an individual who is permitted 
by special license to act as head servant ; he has the general 
superintendence of the domestic affairs of the house, procures 
other servants, purchases provisions, &;c., according to the 
wishes of his employer. Visitors to Canton usually speak in 
high terms of the domestic arrangements of the residents. — 
But this place presents few objects of much interest to the 
mere man of pleasure. Considering the latitude, the climate 
IS agreeable and healthy; provisions of good quality and vari- 
ety are abundant ; but the want of a wider range and a purer 
36 



Digitized by 



Google 



284 

air than are enjoyed in the midst of a densely populated me* 
tropolis, to which the residents are here confined, often makes 
them impatient to leave the provincial city. 

The manufactories and trades of Canton are numerous. 
There is no machinery, properly so called, and consequently 
there are no extensive manufacturing establishments, similar 
to those which, in modern times and under the power of ma- 
chinery, have grown up in Europe. The Chinese know 
nothing of the economy of time. Much of the manufactur- 
ing business required to supply the commercial houses of 
Canton is performed at Fuh-shan, a large town situated a few 
miles westward of this city ; still the number of hands em- 
ployed and the amount of labor performed here, are by no 
means inconsiderable. There are annually about 17,000 per- 
sons, men, women and children, engaged in weaving silk ; 
their looms are simple, and their work is generally executed 
with neatness. The number of persons engaged in manufac- 
turing cloth of all kinds, is about 50,000 ; when there is a 
pressing demand for work, the number of laborers is consider- 
ably increased; they occupy about 2,500 shops, averaging 
usually twenty in each shop. We have heard it said, that 
some of the Chinese females, who devote their time to em- 
broidering the choicest of their fabrics, secure a profit of twen- 
ty, and sometimes even twenty-five dollars per month ! The 
shoemakers are also numerous, and they support an exten- 
sive trade ; the number of workmen is about 4,200. Those 
likewise who work in wood, brass, iron, stone, and various other 
materials, are numerous ; and those who engage in each of 
these respective occupations form, to a certain deo;ree, a sep- 
arate community, and have each their own laws and rules for 
the regulation of their business. The book trade of Canton 
is important ; but we have not been able to obtain particulars 
concerning its extent. 

The barbers of Canton form a separate department, and no 
one is allowed to discharge the duties of tonsor until he has 
obtained a license. According to their records, the number 
of the fraternity in Canton, at the present time, is 7,300. 

There is another body of men here, which we must not pass 
over in silence, but which we know not how to designate or 
to describe ; we refer to the medical community. That these 
men command high respect and esteem whenever they show 



Digitized by 



Google 



286 

themselves skillful irj their profession, there can be no doubt ; 
it is generally admitted also, that individuals do now and then 
by long experience and observation become able practition- 
ers ; but as a community they are any thing, rather than mas- 
ters of " the healing art." They are very numerous, a- 
mounting, probably, to not less than 2,000. 

No inconsiderable part of the multitude which composes 
the population of Canton live in boats. There are officers 
appointed by government to regulate and control this portion 
of the inhabitants of the city. Every boat, of all the vari- 
ous sizes and descriptions which are seen here, is registered ; 
and it appears that the whole number, on the river adjacent 
the city, is eighty-four thousand. A very large majority of 
these are tan-^kea (egg-house) boats ; these are generally not 
more than twelve or fifteen feet long, about six broad, and so 
low that a person can scarcely stand up in them : their cov- 
ering, which is made of bamboo, is very light and can be easily 
adjusted to thje state of the weather. Whole families live in 
these boats ; and in coops lashed on the outside of them, they 
often rear large broods of ducks and chickens, designed to 
supply the city markets. Passage boats, which daily move 
to and from the neighboring villages and hamlets ; ferry-boats 
which are constantly crossing and re-crossing the river ; huge 
canal-boats, laden with produce from the country ; cruisers ; 
pleasure boats, &c., complete the list of these floating hab- 
itations, and present to the stranger a very interesting scene. 

The population of Canton is a difficult subject, about which 
there has been considerable diversity of opinion. The division 
of the city, which brihgs a part of it into Nan-hae and a part into 
Pwan-yu, precludes the possibility of ascertaining the exact 
number of inhabitants. The facts which we have brought into 
view in the preceding pages, perhaps, will afford the best 
data for making an accurate estimate of the population of the 
city. There are, we have already seen, 50,000 persons en- 
gaged in the manufacture of cloth, 7,300 barbers, and 4,200 
shoemakers; but these three occupations, employing 61,500 . 
individuals, do not probably include more than one fourth 
part of the craftsmen of the city ; allowing this to be the fact 
the whole number of mechanics will amount to 246,000. 
These we suppose are a fourth part of the whole population, 
exclusive of those who live on the river. In each of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



286. 

84,000 boats there are not, on an average, less than three in- 
dividuals, making a total of 252,000. If now to these we add 
four times 246,000 (which is the number of mechanics) we 
have a total of 1,236,000, as the probable number of inhabi- 
tants of Canton. This number may be far from the truth ; 
no one, however, who has had opportunity of visiting the city, 
of passing through its streets, and viewing the multitudes that 
throng them, will think of its being much less than 1,000,000. 
It only remains now, in conclusion, to remark briefly con- 
cerning the influence which Canton is exerting on the char- 
acter and destinies of this nation. Intelligent natives admit 
that more luxury and dissipation and crime exist here, than 
in any other part of the empire ; at the same time, they main- 
tain that more enterprise, more enlarged views, and more gen- 
eral information prevail among the higher classes of the inhab- 
itants of Canton, than are found in most of their other large 
cities : these bad qualities are the result of a thrifty commerce 
acting on those who are not guided by high moral principles : 
the good, which exist in a very limited degree, result from an 
intercourse with * distant barbarians.' The contempt and 
hatred which the Chinese authorities have often exhibited 
towards foreigners, and the indifference and disdain with which 
the nation generally has looked down upon every thing not 
their own. ought to be strongly reprobated; on the other 
hand, the feeling which foreigners have often cherished, and 
the disposition and conduct which they have too frequently 
manifested towards this people, are such as should never have 
existed ; still, notwithstanding all these disadvantages, we 
think that the intercourse between the inhabitants of the west- 
ern world and the Chinese has been beneficial to the latter. 
Hitherto this intercourse has been purely commercial ; and 
science, literature, and all friendly and social oflices, have 
been disregarded ; but men are beginning to feel that they 
have moral obligations to discharge, and that they are bound 
by the most sacred ties to interest themselves in the mental 
improvement of their fellow-men. But concerning the future 
influence and destiny of this city, we cannot proceed to re- 
mark. 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX. 



On preceding pages we have given the population of the 
several provinces of China, in round numbers. We now give 
it in exact numbers, for the 17th year of Kea-king, A. D. 1812, 
according to a new edition of the Ta-tsing humy'teeni which 
was published hj imperial authority at Peking, in- the 8th year 



of Taou-kwang, A. D. 1828. 


. . ,.„.„g, ... — . 


■-"" J ~— • 


Namei of 


Population in 


6q. miles 


'Eag. •««• in 


Pop. on 


th« eighteen 


the I7th year 


in each 


each 


aiquate 


PrOVINCC!!. 


of KCA-KIIVCk 


Province. 


Province. 


miii>. 


Chihle, 


27,900,871 


58,949 


37,727,360 


644- 


Shantung, 


28,958,764 


65,104 


41,666,560 


368 


Shanse, 


14,004,210 


55,268 


35,371,520 


488 


Honan, 


23,037,171 


65,104 


41,666,560 


384 


Keangsoo, 
Ganhwuy, 


37,843,501 1 
34,168,069 if 


92,961 


59,495,040 


344 


Keangse, 


23,046,999 


72,176 


46,192,640 


263 


Fuhkeen, 


14,777,410 


53,480 


34,227,200 


260 


ChekeiEing, 


264156,784 


39,150 


' 25,056,000 


536 


Hoopih, 
Hoonan, 


27,370,098 ( 
18,652,507 


144,770 


92,652,800 


187 


Shense, 
Kansuh, 


10,207,256 ) 
15,193,125 ] 


154,008 


98,565,120 


195 


Szechuen, 


21,485,678 


166,800 


106,752,000 


162 


Kwangtung, 19,174,030 


79,456 


50,851,840 


264 


Kwangse, 


7,313,895 


78,250 


50,080,000 


128 


Yunnan, 


5,561,320 


107,969 


69,100,160 


74 


Kweichow, 


5,288,219 


64,554 


41,314,560 


140 



860^9,897 1,397,999 890,719,360 267 



Digitized by 



Google 



288 

This 6en8uk for the jetit 1812, besides the population ofther 
eighteen provinces as f^iven above, includes also the inhabitants^ 
of Sliingking, Keihlin, Turfan, and Lobnor, and the Island of 
Formosa, in all 1,413,932 ; there are also to be added 188,32& 
families on the west and north of China Proper, which allow- 
ing onlj four individual^ to a family amounts to 753,304. — 
These two last sums added to that of the eighteen provinces, 
gives as the total population of the Chinese empire, Threb 

HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO MILLIONS, FOCtC HUNDRED AND FORTT- 
SEVEN THOUSAND, ONE HUNDICED AND EtGHTT-THREE. 

Those who wish to investigate this subject for themselves^ 
maj find a variety of facts and statements in support of the 
census given above, in the first volume of the Chinese Reposi- 
tory : where tliey may also find references to the principal au- 
thors who have written ou' the subject. 

CHINESE WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 

The Chinese weigh all articles that are bought and sold that 
a're weighable ; as money, wood, vegetables, liquids, &c. This 
renders their dealings simpler than those of other nations who 
buy and sell commodities with more reference to the articles 
thenmelves. Their division of weights and measures^ are into 
monetf and commercidl weights^ and hng^ land measures, &c. 

1. Monet Weightst.. 

The circulating medium between forei|^ners and the Cliinese 
is broken Spanish dollars, the value of which are usually com- 
puted by weight. Dollars bearing the stamp of Ferdinand 
have usually borne a premium of 1 to 1^ per cent, while those 
of Carolus have risen as high as 7 or 8 per cent., but are sub- 
ject to a considerable variation, according to the season and 
different times of the season. Those coins bearing the stamp 
of the letter G. are not received by the Chinese except at a dis- 
count. Mexican and United States' dollars do not pass among 
the Chinese, but are taken at par by foreigners. Every indi- 
vidual coin has the mark of the person through whose hands 
it passes stamped upon it ; and as the number of these marks 
soon becomes very numerous, the coin is quickly broken rn 
pieces, and this process of stamping being continually repeatedv 
the fragments gradually become very small. The highest 
weight used in reckoning money is the tael, which is divided 
into mace, ^andartem and cmsh. The relative vfdue of these 



Digitized by 



Google 



2189 

terms, both among the Chinese and in foreign money can "be 
seen by the following table. 



TaeL|Maoe»|Cand.|Cash>|Qnncetr>|Grs. tr.|Stergv| DoJJars. 



1 I 10 I 100 11000 I 1^208 |570,84 \6s. 8d.\U289ahS9^ 



1 I 10 I 100 I |57,1)84 1 8^-1 



1 I 10| |5,7984| ,8^.| 



The value here given for the tael, in sterling money and 
dollars, is not the exact value ; and it is difficult to ascertain 
it, owing to the ignorance of the Chinese of such money among 
•other nations. The value given to the tael in sterling money 
is that which is found on the books of the Enst India Company: 
that given to the dollar is the extremes of its value, as different 
transactions have a different estimate for its value. 

The on]y>coin of the Chinese is called cash (or tseen,) which 
is made of 6 parts of copper and 4 of lead. The coins are 
thin and circular, and nearly an inch in diameter, having a 
square hole in the centre for the convenience of tying them to- 
gether, with a raised edge both around the t)utstde and the 
hole. Those now in use have the name of the emperor stamped 
upon them in whose reign they were cast. Notwithstanding 
their little value they are much adulterated with spelter ; yet 
on account of their convenience in paying small sums and for 
•common use, they generally bear a premium, and but 850 can 
•commonly be obtnined for a tael. The use of silver coin, how- 
ever, appears to be increasing among the Chinese, as by recent 
accounts we learn that silver dollars have been matie in Fuh- 
keen and other places, contrary to the laws of the empire. 

Bullion is rated by its fineness, wiiich is expressed by divid- 
ing the weight into a hundred parts, called touches. If gold 
is said to be 94 or 98 touch, it is known to have 6 or 2 parts of 
alloy : the remainder is pure metal. Silver is estimated in the 
same manner ; and without alloy, or nearly so, is called si/cee, 
which bears a premium according to its purity. It is cast into 
ingots, (by the CMnese called shoes, from their shape,) stamp- 
ed with the mark of the office that issued them, and the date 
oftheir emission. Itis used to pay government taxes and^duties, 
4ind the salaries of officers. The ingots weigh from ^ to 100 
taels, and bears a value accordingly. Sycee silver is the only 
approach among the Chinese to a silver currency. Gold ingots 
are made, weighing ten taels each, and are worth between 
$22 and $23 each ; but neither gold ingots nor doubloons, nor 
arry other gold coin, are used as money among the Chinese. 



Digitized by 



Google 



290 

2. COUSIERCIAL WEIGjaTS. 

The only weights in use among the Chinese, other than ma^ 
Hey, are the pecul (tan,) cattj/ (kin,) and tael (leang.) The 
proportion these bear to each other and to English weights^ 
can be seen by the following table. 



PecuL 


Catties. 


Taels. 


Lbs. avr. 


1 Cvrt. 1 Lbs. troy. 


1 


1 100 


1600 


133i 


|1,0,21J| 162,0,8.1. 


1 


16 


1 1* 


1 1 



Usage has established a difference between the tacl of com-' . 
mercial weights, which, at the rate of 133^ pounds to the pecul 
weighs 583J grains troy, and the tael of money weight, of 
which the old standard is 579.84 grains troy. By the abo^e 
table it appears that one ton is equal to 16 peculs and 80 cat^ 
ties : one cwt. is the same as 84 catties, and one pound avoir-- 
dupois equals f of a catty. The Portuguese at Macao have a 
pecul for weighing cotton and valuable articles ; a second for 
coarse goods ; and again a different one for rice. But the 
Chinese among themselves know no diifference either m the 
weight of a pecul for different articles, or in the tael, whether 
used for money or goods. 

3. Measure«. 

The principal measures in use among the Chinese af e three^ 
namely, long ^measure, land measure, and dry measure ; each 
of these we notice separately. 

Long Measure. The principal measure of length is the covid 
(chih) which is divided into X,en punts (tsun,) The covid varies 
considerably, according as it is used for measuring cloths, dis^ 
tances or vessels. That determined upon by the mathematical 
tribunal is 13,125 English inches; that used by tradesmen at 
Canton is about 14,625 inches ; that employed by engineers- 
for public works is 12*7 inches ; while the one by which dis-- 
tances are usually rated is 12^1 inches nearly. The U or mile 
is also an uncertain measure, varying nrore than the covid or 
foot. Its common measure is 316^ fathoms, or 1897^ English 
feet, and it is the usual term in which length is estimated. — 
The Chinese reckon 192^ le for a degree of latitude and 
longitude ; but the Jesuits divided the degree into 250 hr 
each le .being 1826 English feet, or the 10th part of a 
French league, which is the established measure at present. 
A le, according to this measurement is a little more than ona" 
third of an English mile.' • 



Digitized by 



Google 



291 

Land Measure. This also has varied coiinderablj, but is at 
present established hj authority. Bj this rule, 1200 covids 
make an acre or mmo^ which contains about (5G00 square feet. 

Dry Measure. Rice or paddy is the only article measured 
in vessels the dimensions of which have been fixed by law or 
usage ; but as even rice and paddy are usually weighed wh€n 
«old in large quantities, the vessels for measuring these tsom** 
modities are but little used. 

To perform th«ir calcfifkitiotis, the Chinese have a kind of 
aritlimetical board or abacus called swan-^an or ^counting board, 
OH which, by constant practice, they will perform calculations 
in numbers with surprising facility. It consists of an oblong 
frame of "wood, "^havifig a bar running lefngthwtse, about two- 
thirds its width from one side. Through this bar at right an- 
gles, are inserted a number of parallel wires having moveable 
balls on them, &ve on one side and two on the other of the 
bar. The principle on which computations are made is this : 
that any ball ia the larger compartment, lieing placed ngainst 
the bar and called unity, decreases or increases by tenths^ 
hundredths, <&c.; and the, corresponding balls in the smaller 
divi:don by fifths, fiftieths, ^c; if <me in the smaller ^compart- 
ment is placed against the middle bar, the opposite unit or in- 
teger, which may be any one of the digits, is multiplied by 
five. 

3t 



Digitized by 



Google 



A DESCRIPTION 



C^ TRK PRINCIPAT* t9CFQKT8 AJNO EXPORTS OP CANTON< 



AdfAti'Aokki This is ft species of sea^weed, of which the 
Chinese make the ffum used in the manufacture of their trans-' 
parent lanterns. Itt is incomparahle as a paste ; and is not 
liable to be eaten by insects. It is extensively erti ployed itt 
making silks and paper ; and when boiled forms a sweet, glu*' 
tinoiis C6i1[l|^6und which is used in sweetmeats. It is brought 
from New Holland, New Guinea and other adjacent islands ; 
between 400 and 500 peculs are imported annually by the 
Chinese at the prime cost of $]^ to $2 per pecul. Its cheap-* 
ness and admirable qualities as a paste, render it worthy the 
attention of other countries. 

Alum. This salt is exported by the Chinese in considerable 
quantities to the Indian archipelago. It is probably found in 
the same geological positions in this, as in other countries, 
namely in a slate, known as cUum shale. The supply seems to 
be abundant from the quantities brought to market. It is com- 
monly much adulterated with other substances, as gypsum, 
lime, ^c; the taste is not so sharp as that of European alui^ ; 
but the pieces are large and transparent. Great quantities of 
alum are employed by tlie Chinese in purifying the water of 
their rivers, which they use for culinary purposes. The duty 
on the article when exported is 5 taels per pecul, and its value 
in market is from $2 to $3 per pecul. 

Amber. This fossil is found on the shores of several islands 
of the Indian archipelago, and in some small quantities on the 
coast of China and Tung-king (Tonquin.) A considerable 
part of the amber in the markets of the east comes from the 
eastern coast of Africa; and as far as investigation has gone 



Digitized by 



Google 



2^ 

it 18 found ia greater or less quantities on al} ejiteiided Hues of 
sea-coast, having been brought from the shores ot Europe, 
.America, Africa, and all the . islands of the eastern ptiri pf 
Asia. Its value was formerly very great in those countries of 
the east where it was used for ornaments and incense ; but oth- 
er substances, cheaper and more odoriferous* have superseded 
it. In choosing it, those pieces should be selected whiph are 
hard, transparent, and of a lively yellowish-brown color ; and 
it should attract light substances after being rubbed on cloth. 
If there are insects in it, the value is greatly increased, but if 
the pieces are opaque and foul, they ought to be rejected.*^ 
The price is from $8 to $14 per catty according to the quality 
and size of the pieces* False amber is also sold in Canton at 
prices almost as great as those which the genuine article 
bears. 

Ambergris. This has often been confounded with amber, 
which it resembles somewhat in appearance, and it is used for 
nearly the same purposes. The origin of the two, however, 
differs widely ; amber being a vegetable fossil, and ambergris 
a substance found in the intestines of the Physeter macrocepha- 
lus and spermaceti whale. It is probably generated in the an- 
imal when it is diseased, though whether it be the effect or 
cause is not ascertained. If no fceces are voided from the an^ 
inial, when it is first harpooned, the sailors generally expect 
to find ambergris ; 362 ounces have been taken from the body 
of a single whale. Kcempfer asserts that the Japanese collect 
it in this manner. Most of it, however, is picked up after 
strong winds, on the shore of th« numerous islands, of the Indi- 
an and Pacific oceans. The Dutch formerly purchased much 
of this article ; they gave the kingofTidore 11,000 rix dollars 
for one mass weighing 182 lbs., and for which the du&e of 
Tuscany offered 50,000. The French East India C<?mpany 
once had a mass weighing 2251bs. estimated at $52,(X)0. The 
shores of Africa afford ambergris in considerable quantities 
and in large pieces. Good ambergris is of on ash color, 
marked with blackish and yellowish spots, soft, and tenacious 
like wax, and when melted entirely disappears. Tlie Chinese 
test its goodness by throwing some of it scraped very fine into 
boiling hot tea, where, if pure, it will diffuse itself equally 
through the fluid. It has but little taste or smell when cold ; 
but when handled it emits a fragrant odor. It swims on wa- 
ter. The pure white, or that which is apparently smooth and 
uniform in quality, should be rejected as it is commonly fac- 
titious. 



Digitized by 



Google 



294 

Attdtfutt. Hie seeds of the Amomum vervm have a tttnitg 
penetrating smell, and an aromatic, pungent taste. The tree 
growls in China and the East Indies. The fruit is shaped like 
a grape, afid contains three cells, each of which has a numher 
of blackish seeds. The pods are of little value, as are the 
seeds also when wrinkled and small. When good, the pods ate 
heavy, of a light gfey color and filled with grains. Their uses 
are similar to those of star aniseeds. 

Aniseed stars. These are the fruit of a small tree, Iliici- 
um anisatum^ which gn>ws in China, Japan, and the Philipines. 
They are priced for their aromatic taste, and for the volatile 
oil obtained from them. The name of star n applied to them 
on account of the manner in which they grow ; the pods being 
in small clusters joined together at one end, and diverging in 
the form of H star. The husks have a more aromatic flavor 
than the seedti, but they are not as sweet. In China, their most 
common use is to season sweet dishes ; in Japan, they are ap^ 
plied to quite a different purpose, being placed on the tombs of 
friends and presented as oiTerrngs in the tem]>Ies. They are 
exported at $11 or $12 per pecul ; and the oil which is ex- 
tracted from thenr, at $2 per catty ; both for medical uses. 

Arrack. This spirituous liquor is distilled from different 
substances in the several countries where it is manufactured ; 
on which account that made at different places is of^en found 
to vary much in strength and taste ; the three principal kinds 
are made in Batavia, Goa, and Colombo. That from the for- 
mer place is the strongest, and is di^itilled from a mixture of 
62 parts of molassed, 3 of toddy or palm wrne, a liquor distilled 
from the juice of the cocoa-nut tree, and 35 of rice. The pro- 
cess of making it is as folhiws ; the rice is first boiled, and after 
"Cooriog, a quantity of yeast is added and the whole pressed into 
baskets, in which condition it is placed over tubs and lefl for 
eight days : during this time, a liquor flows abundantly from 
the ricc5. 'This liquor is distilled and then mixed with the mo- 
lasses and toddy, which is all lefl to ferment for a week in Inrge 
vats; nAerthefermcntation is over, the arrack is distilled one, 
two or three times, according to the strength required. That 
made at Java is chiefly for home consumption, but is exported 
to China and India, where it is sold at 40 cents a gallou for 
the best, and 27 or :?0 cts for the poorest. 

The arrack produced at Goa is sweeter than that which 
comes from Java, being made entirely from toddy, by repeated 
distillation. It is preferred by the Hindoos to the Batavian on 
that account, though it is an inferior spirit, containing oiAj 
one seventh of pure alcohol. That made at Colombo is the 
poorest and but little of it is exported. 



Digitized by 



Google 



^6 

A««f AtETinA. This is the tonctete juice of ihe Toots bf the 
Fertda assfifatida^ a tFee wliich grows in Persia. To obtaiti 
it, th6 roots, after the earth is taken awny from them, are coy- 
ered with leaves to defend them from the sun for forty days ; 
tliey are then cut off transversely, and the thick milky juice 
«xtides and thickens on the wound ; this when hard is scraped 
t)iF and another transveri^e section made* This operation is 
repeated until the root be errtirely exhausted of juice.— 
The gum is nauseous and bitter, and as it ^rows old loses its 
^efficacy. The masses are composed of grains, of a variegated 
-color ; the best color is a pale red, having the grains nearly 
white ; the odor ^should be penetrating, and when the piece is 
broken, the fracture ought to bear a marbled appearance. 
The vessels employed to carry this drug are so scented with 
the odor, that they spoil most other goods. Considerable 
quantities of it are brought to this market ; and it ranks high in 
the materia mcdica of the Chinese* physician* Its value is 
from $4 to $5 per pecul. 

Bamboo. The uses of this plant are very numerous ; it is 
«m|)loyed for purposes of building and clothing, for food, 
paper, boats, masts, sails, ropes, medicines, sweetmeats, lamp- 
wicks, beds, fcjfdder, &c. All these uses are made of it how- 
ever, only where it is indigenous. It is exported in considera- 
ble quantities, and is then used for canes and umbrella- 
sticks, d&c. 

Bf.eowax. This article has been introduced by foreigners 
from the Indian archipelago and Europe, and it has gradually 
superseded the product of the tallow-tree, SliUingia sebifenu 
In the islands where the bees are found, the natives collect the 
wax from the nests in tlie forests, disregarding the honey, 
which is little in quantity and worthless. The islands of Timur 
and Tinrurlant afford bees^vax in sufficient quantity to form an 
important article of export ; tlie Portuguese tliere, send away 
20,000 peculs annually to China and India, at a prime cost of 
$5 per pecal. The Chinese use it to form cases or envelopes 
for the tallow of the stilHngia,' in the manufacture of the can- 
dles used in their temples. The wax when so employed is 
'Colored with yermilion. 

Betel nut. The leaf of the betel pepper. Piper hetUy and 
the nut of the areca palm, Arcca catechu, together constitute 
this article, which is improperly called betel nvtj and which is 
used as a masticatory so universally throughout the east. But 
as an article. of commerce it is always sold separately, under 
the name of * betel nut,' so called because always used with the 
leaf of the betel pepper^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



2196; 

TBe habit of ekewi^ this compound bus extended from Hje 
idattdsf where the plnnt is found, to the continent of Asia, and 
it is now used from the Red. sea to the Pacific. The areca 
nut is the fruit of a slender palm, not above six inches in diam-- 
eter and aboiU thirty feet h^gb. The tree produees fxuit from 
the age of five to lwent)^-five years. The nuts resemble a nut-^^ 
meg in shape, color a^d internal structure^ but are a little 
krger aad harder. The curnual produee of a singrle tree is av-^ 
era«^ed at foiirteeo pounds ; and the little care requisite in pro- 
ducing it, allows the cultivator to sell k at the rate of about 
half a dollar a pecuL In the Deccan, the expense of rearing: 
the palm is much greater, and the crop more precarious. The 
betel pepper is the vine from which the leaf is obtained, and 
for which alone it is cultivated^ The flavor of the leaf is very 
peculiar, being between a herbaceous and an aromatic taste 
and is a little pungent. This vine requires a rich soil where 
there is abundance of water. The tree on which it is support- 
ed affects the quality and quantity of the produce. 

The preparation of the betel nut for use is very simple. The 
nut is cut into slices, and wrapped in the raw leaves together 
with a quantity of quick-lime, enough to give it a flavor. AU 
classes of people, male and female, are in the habit of chewing 
it. ** It sweetens the breath," so say those who use it, '^ rectifies 
and strengthens the stomach and preserves the teeth ;" it also 
gives the teeth, lips and gums a dark-red color, which is esteem- 
ed a mark of beauty in proportion to its darkness. Much more 
can be said in favor of the use of it, than of tobaceo ; its nar- 
cotic properties are not so great, and the taste is more pleasant. 
Persons of rank carry it prepared for use in splendid cases 
suspended from their girdles. Poor people are contented with 
eases of any kindf provided they contain the substance itself. 
A present of one of these cases is esteemed as a mark of high 
favor and friendship, and is valued accordingly. Among some 
of the inhabitants of the Indian archipelago, to refuse, on meet* 
ing a friend, to accept the betel nut, is regarded as an oflence, 
and satisfaction is demanded. So interwoven into their ideas,, 
has the practice become, that figures of beaaty are taken from 
it, and a face is not accounted beautiful, unless the mouth be 
stained of a dirty red round the outside of the lips. 

The nuts brought from the coast of Malabar are not so good 
as those from the Indian islands, and they are injurious to the 
health and destroy the teeth of those who chew them. The7 
are of two sorts, the hoiled and the raw ; the one is the nut 
alone, the other the nut cut into slices and boiled with a small 
quantity of cutch and then dried* Another method of curing^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



897 

'due nutB is to «plit and dry them hastily ^rer a fire, at 1» ilff 
then slowlf without spliMing. The betel nut ie seldom earthed 
to Europe ov America, though the leaf mi^^hik be employed in 
^dyeiageottonS) as it is cheap and used fov that purpose ia India* 
Most of that imported into China comes from Java, Malao» 
«a and Penang. It varies from $3 to $3 per pecul. It is pre* 
pared fornse in the same manner as in,theislAnds,.ei:cept that 
the Chinese 'color the lime with a red mixture. 

Benzoin ^^hi Bbn^amin. Thi£^ resin is the concrete juice of ' 
a small tree, Stfrm> benxxntij which grows on the plains of Bor- 
neo and Sumatra, in a rtch^ moist soil. Its geographical lim^ 
its are the same as the camphor tree, being found only in Bor- 
neo Proper and the territory of the Bottacks in Sumatra ; but 
«nlike that tree, it is cultivated. When the plants are seven 
jears old, an incision is made in the bark, from whence the 
gum exudes, and is oarefally scraped olT. The trees produce 
the best liensotn in three yeans ; this first gathering is called 
^ead; that produced during the next eight or ten «ea80tis, and 
which is inferior in quality, is known by the name -of bellif ; at 
the end of the last named period, the tree is supposed to be 
worn out, and is cut down and spht ^ pieces, and all the gum 
19 scraped off from the fragments of wood ; this last is denom- 
inated /ai^, and is full of sticks and dirt. These varieties bear 
a price proportionate to their goodness-: the first quality, vary- 
ing at the emporia, from $50 to $100 per pecul; the second 
from $25 to $46 ; and the worst from $8 to $*20 per pecul. — 
The gum is brought from the intl^rior in large cakes, which 
among the natives are standards of value, as metals are in 
other countries. These cakes require to be sotftened by boiling 
before they are packed, and care should be taken to free them 
from external impurities. Good benzoin is full of clear, light 
colored spots, and when broken appears marbled ; it is almost 
tasteless, but when rubbed or heated gives off an extremely 
agreeable odor. The heeid only should be selected for Europe; 
the other kinds are imported to China and India and used in 
temples. This is the frankincense of the east, but different 
from the Arabian, which is olibanum. It has been used for in- 
^cense in the ceremonies of the Roman Catholic, the Moham- 
medan, the Hindoo, the Budhistic, and probably also, of the 
Isrea^tish worship. From remote ages, almost all nations 
have sought for this substance. The Arabians prize it more 
than they do their best olibanum : the Javanese chiefs smoke 
it with their tobacco ; and rich Chinese often .^migate their 
ifouses with its grateful odor^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



298 

BeZoAit. This name wae first applied to a concretion found 
in the stomachs of a goat in Persia, but latterly has been used 
for similar substances found in various other animaisi as the 
horse, boar, camel, ^c. That produced by the goat was for- 
merly much prized as a medicine, sometimes selling for ten 
times its weight in gold ; but since its constituents have been 
ascertained, it has ceased to be sought afterr Different animals 
produce bezoar, the substance of which differs often in the 
same kind of animal^ as well as in dissimilar species. The 
famed oriental bezoar is formed of bile and resin ; other kinds 
are found to be made of hair, others of wood^ and some prin- 
cipally of magnesia and phosphorus. The true bezoar from 
Persia is counterfeited so well by pipe-clay and c^x-gall that 
even those have been deceived who procure the genuine from 
the animal. The genuine throws off only a small scale when 
a hot needle is thrust into it ; wheii put in hot water it remains 
unchanged ; when rubbed on chalk the trace should be yellow, 
but gre^n on quick-lime. That found in the camel is highly 
esteemed as a yellow pigment by the Hindoos. The cow be- 
zoar is valued in this market at from $20 to $25 a catty, and 
is used by the Chinese solely as a medicine. All hczoars are 
caused by diseases of the animals which produce them, and 
are formed by continual accretions to a centre nodule. 

Biciio DB MAR or 62cAe-de-ot€r. This dug, ( Holothmon ?) a» 
its name imports, is a product of the sea, and resembles that 
often seen in damp places on land. It forms the most import-^ 
ant article of commerce between the islands of the Indian ar- 
chipelago and China, excepting perhaps pepper. It is found 
on all the islands from New Holland to Sumatra, and also on 
most of those in the pacific. It is produced in the greatest 
abundance on small coral islands, especially those to the south 
and east of the Sooloo group. Among the islanders it is known 
by the name of tripang ; the Chinese at Canton call it hoy-shum 
(hae-shin.) It is an ill looking animal, and has but few power» 
of locomotion in common with other gasteropudoR* It is some-^ 
times two feet long ; but its common length is from four to ten 
inches, and its diameter two. Its tentaculse ar^ short, and 
when the animal is captured are folded up under its body. It 
is taken with the hand by natives, who often dive for it : and 
after it has been cleansed, dried and smoked, it is fit for the 
markets. For a long time the Chinese were the sole carriers 
of the article : but recently foreigners have engaged in the 
trade, and found it profitable. In the markets it appears hard 
and rigid, and has a dirty brown color. The Chinese use it 
by itself, or as an ingredient in other dishes, and in large quan^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



299 

titles. The varieties into wiitch thej divide itave about thirtjt^ 
varying in' price from $80 down to #1J per pecuL About 
7000 peculs come annually from Macassar, and much move 
than that from Manila. 

Birds' nests. These, which owe their celebrity only to the 
whimsical luxury of the Chinese, are brought principally from 
Java and Sumatra ; though they are found on most of the 
rocky islets of the Indian archipelago. The nest is the habi- 
tation of a small swallow, named (from the circumstance of 
having an edible house) Hirundo esculenta. They are compos* 
ed of a mucilaginous substance, but as yet have never been 
analyzed sufficiently accurately to show the constituents ; 
externally, they resemble ill concocted, fibrous isinglass, and 
are of a white color, inclining to red ; their thickness is little 
more than that of a silver spoon, and the weight from a quai:* 
ter to half an ounce. When dry, they are brittle and 
wrinkled ; the size is near that of a goose egg. Those that 
, are dry, white, and clean are the most valuable. They are 
packed in bundles with split rattans run through them to pre^^ 
serve the shape. Those procured after the young are fledged, 
and denominated ybo^, are not saleable in China. 

The quality of the nests varies according to the situation 
and extent of the caves, and the time at which they are taken. 
If procured before the young are fledged, the nests are of the 
best kind ; if they contain eggs only, they are still valuable ; 
but if the young are in the nests or have left them, the whole 
are then nearly worthless, being dark-colored, streaked with 
blood and intermixed with feathers and dirt. The nests are 
procurable twice every year; the best are found in deep, 
damp caves, which if not injured will continue to produce 
indefinitely. It was once thought that the caves near the sea- 
coast were the most productive ; but some of the most profit- 
able yet found, are situated fifty .miles in the interior. This 
fact seems to be against the opinion that the nests are com- 
posed of the spawn of fish or of bicho de mar. 

The method of procuring these nests resembles somewhat 
that of catching birds practised on the Orkney isles. Some 
of the caves are so precipitous, that no one, but those accus- 
tomed to the employment from their youth, can obtain the 
nests, " being only approachable " says Crawfurd " by a per- 
pendicular descent of many hundred feet by ladders of bam- 
boo and rattan, over a sea rolling violently against the rocks. 
When the mouth of the cave is attained, the perilous task of 
taking the nests must often be performed by torchTlight, by 
penetrating into recesses of the rock« where the slightest slip 
3d 



Digitized by 



Google 



300 

would be instantly fatal to the adventurers, who see nothing 
below them but the turbulent surf making its way into the 
chasms of the rock." Such is the price paid to gratify luxury. 

After they are obtained, they are separated from feathers 
and dirt, are carefully dried and packed, and are then fit for 
the market. The Chinese, who are the only people that 
purchase them for their own use, bring them in junks to this 
market, where they command extravagant prices ; tl»e best or 
white kind Often being worth $4000 per pecul, which is nearly 
twice their weight in silver. The middling kind is worth from 
81200 to $1800, and the worst or those procured after fle<lg- 
ing, $150 or $200 per pecul. The most part of the best kind 
is sent to Peking for the use of the court. It appears, there- 
fore, that this curious dish is only an article of expensive 
luxury among the Chinese ; the Japanese do not use it at all, 
and how the former people acquired the habit of using it is 
only less singular than their persevering in it. They consider 
the birds' nests as a great stimulant and tonic, but their best 
quality, perhaps, is their being perfectly harmless. The 
labor bestowed to render them fit for the table is enormous ; 
every feather, stick or impurity of any kind is carefully 
removed ; and then, after undergoing many washings and 
preparations, it is made into a soft, delicious jelly. The sale 
of birds' nests is a monopoly with all the governments in 
whose dominions they are found. About 243,000 peculs, at a 
value of $1,263,570, are annually brought to Canton. These 
come from the islands of Java, Sumatra, Macassar, and those 
of the Sooloo group. Java alone sends about 27,000 lbs., 
mostly of the first quality, estimated at $60,000. 

Brass leaf. This article is manufactured by the Chinese 
for the Indian markets. It is worth from $45 to $50 a box. 

Camphor. This well known gum is brought from Sumatra 
and Borneo. In those islands, the tree is confined to a small 
extent of country. In Sumatra, the best gum is obtained in 
the district of Baroos, and hence all similarly good, brought 
from those two islands is called baroos camphor. The tree, 
Dryohalanops camphora, is found nowhere else in the world, 
and there only extends three degrees north of the equator. 
To collect it the natives go into the forests, cut down the trees 
and split them open, and scrape the gum from the fragments ; 
it is there found in small pieces or as a thick gum, ready for 
use. It is said that not a tenth of the trees yield any gum or 
oil; and as they are not cultivated, camphor is becoming gra- 
dually more and more scarce. Before killing the trees it 
cannot be ascertained whether they are productive or not. It 



Digitized by 



Google 



SOI 

i^ divided into three sorts \ the hest is iii lumps, aj^parbntly 
^rystalized in the fissures of the tree ; the second is somewhat 
brownish with but few sticks in it ; while the last and worst is 
the refuse scrapings. In packing it, particular care should be 
taken that the boxes are sound, else its volatility \vill cnuse it 
to decrease materially. Good camphor is strong and pen-* 
ctrating, of a bitterish aromatic taste, and when bitten ina- 
parts a cooling sensation to the mouth. All that is produc- 
ed in Sumatra anjd Borneo, about 800 peculs annually, is 
brought to China; the high price, near $18 a pound, paid for 
it by the Chinese, induces the sellers to bring it to this market. 
The proportion between the prices of Baroos and Japan cam-^ 
phor is 18 to 1, though no perceptible difference can be seen 
between them^ 

Nearly all the camphor carried to Europe and America, is 
obtained from the Laurus cumphwa^ a tree which grows in 
China, Japan, and Formosa. The tree, including the roots, is 
cut into small pieces, and boiled ; the sublimed gum is received 
into inverted straw cones. It is then made into greyisii cakes 
of a crumbling consistency, and brought to market ; that from 
Japan is esteemed the best, though that from Formosa is good* 
The Dutch in seven years imported into Europe from Japan 
alone, 310,520 lbs. Its price varies from $20 to $30 per 
pecul, while the Baroos is $1000 to $2000.' The wood of the 
Laurus makes a very good material for trunks, boxes, drawers^ 
dLc, as the scent preserves it for a long time from insects. 
The wood that ha^ been boiled is worth but little, being porous 
and scentless. 

Capoor ctJTCHERY. This is the root of a plant which grows 
in China ; it is about half an inch in diameter, and is cut into 
small pieces and dried for exportation ; has internally a whit* 
ish color % but externally it is rough and of n reddish color t 
it has a pungent and bitterish taste, and a slight aromatic 
smell. It is exported to Bombay and from thence to Persia 
and Arabia ; it is said to be used for medical purposes and 
also to preserve clothes from ins^cts^ The price is about $6 
per pecul. 

Cardamoms. There are several varieties of these, produced 
by various plants in different countries^ The lesser and 
greater are, however, the principal distinctions, made in this 
article. The less cardamoms are olitained from a small shrub, 
JElettaria cardanwmnm^ which grows on the coast of Malabar. 
They are the capsules of the plant, and merely require dryinjf 
to be ready for sale. They have a sweet aromatic flavor ; and 
th« seeds when chewed impart a grateful pungency to the 



Digitized by 



Google 



302 

ttoatli. The capsules hove a bri^t jellow color, a ptifig'efiii 
rnnell, and when good are plump and broken with difficultj. 
They should be well dried. In the mountaiae where the car- 
daimom grows, the natives fell and burn the trees to cause 
others to grow ; wherever the ashes fall, it is said that this 
seed will spring up ; those that are cultivated are of an infe^ 
rior quality. The greater cardamoms are the fruit of the 
Amomum cardamomum, a tree which grows in China, Ceylon, 
Java, and othet places. The seeds are of a triangular shape 
and of a black color ; and longer and larger than those of the 
oth^r kind. They are inferior in pungency and flavor to the 
le89 and only used when the other cannot be obtained. Both 
are employed for colinary purposes among the Chinese, by 
whom alone they are imported. The less cardamoms are car^ 
ried to Europe for medicinal and other uses. 

Cassia. This^ is of three kinds ; cassia lignea which is the 
bdrk of the tree, cassia buds, and cassia fistula or pods; the 
latter of these is usually known by the name of senna. Cew- 
$ia lignea is the substance commonly called cassia, and is 
exported from China to all parts of the world. It is the 
decorticated bark of the Laurus cassia, a large tree which 
grows in Japan and China in great quantities ; the tree is also 
found in the northerly islands of the Indian archipelago. The 
bark is stripped off by running a knife longitudinally along 
the branch, on both sides, and then gradually loosening it ; 
after it is taken off, it is suffered to lie for twenty-four hours, 
during which time it undergoes a kind of fermentation, and 
the epidermis is easily scraped off. The bark soon dries into 
the quilled shape in which it domes to market. Thin pieces, 
having an agreeable taste, a brownish red color and a toler' 
ably smooth surface are the best kind ; that which is small 
and broken^ is of an inferior quality. The cassia brought 
from Ceylon and Malabar is inferior to the Chinese, more 
liable to foul packing, thicker and darker colored and les» 
aromatic. The Chinese cassia is sewed up in mats, usually 
two or more rolls in each mat, and a pound in a roll ; it i» 
easily distinguished from cinnamon, which it resembles, for it 
is smaller quilled, breaks shorter, and is less pungent. The 
trees do not however grow in the same countries, and there- 
fore the liability to mistake will happen only in distant markets* 
CasMaJistula is the plant. that produces the cassia pods ; this 
grows in China, and the East Indies, but that from Egypt and 
South America has superseded it. Cassia buds are not obtain^ 
ed from the same tree as the cassia lignea, but are the fleshy 
receptacks^ of the seeds of the cinnamoo tree. They bear 



Digitized by 



Google 



30$ 

^tne vesemblaiice to a clove, and when fresh, possesB a fin^ 
cinnamon flavor. Those that are p]ump and freBh, and freei 
from »talk« and dirt are considered the best. It is probable^ 
however, that much of ibis article is procured from the ca«sia 
tree, since it is found in this country, where the true cinnamon 
tree is not known. If the buds are packed in the same bun* 
dies with the bark, the flavor of both are improved. The 
relative value of cassia bark and buds is as 8 to 6 ; thi« varies 
however according to the quantity in tnarket. 

Cassia oil is obtained from the leaves of the cassia tree by 
distilkition ; and is used as a medicine, under the name of 
<fleum malabaihri. It is easily tested by putting it on the hand, 
where it will evaporate slowly,, and any foreign subiftanoe in it 
will thus be detected. The leaves are exported under the 
name of fQlia maiabathn. There is hardly a product of the 
•east that is more useful than the cassia tree. The wood, the 
bark, the leaves, the buds, and the oil, are all in request for 
various purposes in carpentry, medicine and cookery. The 
price of cassia varies from $8 to $10 per pecul ; the buds are 
>generally a little advance of that, and the oil is from $1^ to 
$2 per^atty. 

China root. This is the root of the Smilax Chinch a climb- 
ing plant. The roots ai^ jointed, 1l nobbed, thick, of a brown 
color, and break short ; when cut,, the surface is snaooth, close, 
•and glossy ; but if old and wormy, dust flies from it when 
broken. The market price varies from $3^ to $4 per pecuL 
It is used by the Chinese extensively as a medicine, and is 
•exported to India for the same purpose. 

China ware, or Pwcelain, Yety little of this ware is now 
•exported. When the productioiTS of the east we^re first car* 
ried round the cape of Good Hope, the porcelain of China 
bore an enormous price, and the profits of the first shipments 
'were great. But the process of manufacturing it having been 
ascertained, the European nations began to make it, and soon 
rivalled the Chinese. China ware is sold in sets, consisting of 
a table set of 270 pieces at from 12 to 75 taels, a breakfast set 
of 20 pieces at three taels, a long tea set of 101 pieces at 11 
to 13 taels, and a short tea set of 49 pieces from 5 to 6 taels. 
Flower pots, vases, jars, fruit baskets, table ornaments &c» 
are also made of porcelain to any pattern by the Chinese. 

Cloves. These are the unopened flowers of a large tree, 
Caryophyttus aromaiicus, which grows in the Molucca islands, 
and is cultivated to a very limited extent in Sumatra and 
Mauritius. The tree resembles the pear tree in shape ; the 
l>ark is smooth and adheres closely to the wood ; the leavea 



Digitized by 



Google 



504 

are reddish on the upper and ^een on the tindef side ; crnd 
the whole plant, like the cinnamon tree, has a strong aromatic 
odor. When an exotic; the tree does not begin t^ prodtice till 

9 or 10 years of age, but in its native soil, is usually produc- 
tive at 5 or 6. The buds appear in the beginning of the rainy 
season, about the first of May, and during the four following 
months are perfected : they are green at first, then yellow, 
and finally, when ripe, change to a blood'-red color. Soon 
after this, the flowers open and in three weeks the seeds are 
fully ripe. They are gathered very carefully by the hand and 
by crooked sticks, in order that the trees may not be injured^ 
Sir T. Herbert gives the following fanciful description of the 
buds of the clove. ♦* It blossoms early, but becomes exceed- 
ingly inconstant in complexion, from a virgin white varying 
into other colors ; for in the morn, it shows a pale green, in 
the meridian, a distempered red, and sets in blackness. The 
cloves manifest themselves at the extremity of the braiwhes, 
and in their growing evaporate such sense-ravishing odors, as 
if a compendium of nature's sweetest gums were there extract- 
ed and united." They are cured by placing them on hurdles 
over a slow fire for a few days, and afterwards in the sun, 
until they are thoroughly dried. The produce varies in differ- 
ent years ; the average quantity for an orchard is from 6 to 

10 lbs. from each tree j son^ trees have produced 150 lbs. in 
one season. The ordinary age is 70 years ill Amboyna, and 
in their native isles about 90. In commerce, there are four 
varieties of the clove ; the common, the female, the royal, and 
the wild or rice clove. The two latter are smaller and more 
scarce than the other kind."^ The best cloves are large, heavy, 
have a hot taMe, and an oily feel. Those which have had the 
essential oil extracted, are shrivelled and usually want the 
knob at the top. — The clove trade is in the hands of the Dutch, 
and has been a monopoly ever since they obtained supremacy 
in the Moluccas : the cultivation of the tree is restricted to 
the single island of Amboyna. Cloves acre now 56 per cent, 
dearer than when first brought round the cape of Good Hope, 
and are sold to the consumer at an advance of 1258 per cent, 
on first cost of production ! The price for Molucca cloves in 
this market is from $28 to $30 per pecul ; for those from 
Mauritius, $20 to $24 a pecul. 

Mother cloves are a larger and inferior description, of late 
years imported from the straits of Malacca. The price fluc^ 
tuates greatly according to the supply ; from $10 to $12 per 
pecul, however, is the average. We believe it is used for 
scents.^ 



Digitized 



by Google 



306 

Oil op Cloves. This is procured by distillation, and is 
exported for various uses in the arts. If it is suspected to be 
adulterated by any other oil, it can be proved by dropping 
into it spirit of wine, when the two will separate ; or by sett- 
ing it on fire, when the smell of any other will be detected. 
The color when pure is of a reddish-brown,, which gradually 
becomes darker by age. , 

Cochineal. This insect is brought to China from England 
and Mexico, and is used for dyeing silk goods, crapes, &c. 
The insect itself is about one-third of an inch in length, and 
has been materially improved by culture from what it was in 
its wild state ; it lives solely on the leaves of the Cactus cochi- 
nilifer, a species of prickly pear. Attempts have been made 
to raise it in India, Java and Spain, but with little success. 
The climate and situation of China and Japan being similar 
to Mexico, it is probable that the cultivation of the plant and 
domestication of the insect would be successful in these coun- 
tries. In selecting cochineal, care should be taken that the 
black color has not been occasioned by art ; this deception 
may be discovered by the bad smell of the article. The 
insects are divided into the wild and the domesticated, and are 
collected thrice in a year. A watery infusion of cochineal 
dyes scarlet ; an alcholic infusion produces a deep crimson ; 
while an alkaline, gives a deep purple color. It is occasionally 
imported to China from Mexico via Manila, and is called 
ungarbled to distinguish it from that brought from England, 
which bears tlie name of garbled. Garbling is the term given 
to the process of repacking it free from nil impurities. Gar- 
bled cochineal is valued at $280 or $300 per pecul, and 
ungarhled at from $180 to $200. 

Copper. This metal is found in Persia, Sumatra, Borneo 
and Japan. It formed an export to England from Persia for- 
merly, but is now sent to the India presidencies. In the 
island of Borneo, copper has been lately discovered ; and it 
has been known a long time in Sumatra and Timur. The 
utensils made of this metal in those islands, always contain 
some iron ; and the bars or cakes into which it is cast when 
sold for unalloyed copper, require much labor to make them 
pure and malleable ; the ore is so rich as to produce halfwits 
weijjht of pure copper. The copper found in Japan contains 
gold in alloy; it occurs in the market in small bars, six inches 
long, flat on one side- and, convex on the other, weighing 4 or 
5 oz. each ; this copper is the most valuable of any found in 
Asia. South American copper is brought to this coast, but 
not latterly to the market in Canton ; as it fetches a higher 
price at Lintin for remittance to India. The price so obtained 



Digitized by 



Google 



h frbtn f I9^to"$^ per pecul. There* is a natural alloy of 
several metals fDond in the interior of China, known un- 
der the name of urhite o&pper, which is used by the natives 
in great quantities* The constituents are not knbwn, but 
eopper and iron are probably the chief. It is used for dish 
covers, which when new and polished look almost as well as- 
silver. 

Coral is brought from all the islands of the Indian archipe^^ 
Ingo, and is here wrocrght into many ornaments. It seUs fronfr 
$40 to $60 per pecul according to the color, density, and size 
of the fragments. When made into buttons, it is used among; 
the Chinese as insignia of office. 

Cotton. Of this import we need only enumerate the differ- 
ent kinds, The raw cotton is brought mostly fi'om Bombay " 
and Bengal in English ships ; it sells from 9 to 13 taels per 
pecul. Except sheetings, which are from Anterica, cotton 
piece goods come principally from^ England, the chief articles 
of which are cambrics, muslins, chintzes and long<-cloths. In 
selecting these goods for this market, especially chintzes, those 
should be chosen which are well covered with large, gay flow- 
ers and leaves ; a green ground is preferred. No formal 
figures, nor any Chinese representations are suitable; Good, 
unbleached long-cloths are the most suitable ; cambrics are 
not in much demand. Cotton yam comes from England and 
India ; that from numbers 2^ to 45 is the most saleable. The- 
sale of cotton goods of all descr^tions is annually increasing 
The Chinese tacitly acknowledge their superiority, by slowly 
adopting them in the place of their own goods. 

CuBEBs. These are the fruit of the Piper cuhtha^ a vine 
growing in China, Java and Nepaul, and resemble pepper- 
corns so closely, that externally they are only distinguished 
from them by a process on that side by which they were- 
attached to the stalk. Cnbebs have a greyish-brown cplor 
with a wrinkled pericarp encjo^ng a single seed, a;nd a warm, 
pungent taste, with a pleasant, aromatic smell. The heavy, 
plump and large fruit is the best ; if not ripe, the seed is soft 
and the covering' much wrinkled. Cubebs are valued in this- . 
market from $18 to $20 per pecul ; 18,500 lbs. were imported 
into England in 1830 frdm the east ; but the Dutch carry on 
the largest trade in this article. 

Cudbear is a powder used in dyeing violet or crimson ; dt 
is procured from the Lichin tartaricus, a plant found in Ice- 
land. * Its colors are not durable, when it is employed alone^ 
and it is therefore used as a body to other more expensive 
dyes^ as indigo,^ cochineaU &c., making them more lively. It 



Digitized by 



Google 



S07 

18 used but little by the Chinese, and the demand in this mar- 
ket is not great. 

CuTCH, or Terra Japtmica. This for a long time was re- . 
garded as an earth, and supposed to be brought from Japan ; 
but it is now ascertained to be a gummy resin, >yhi€h is 
extracted from the Actuia catechu, a tr«e growing in Persia 
near the gidf of Cutch, It is imported from Bombay and 
Bengal ; that brought from the former place is friable, and of 
a red-brown color, and more hard and firm than that from 
Bengal. The cakes resemble those of chocolate, but when 
broken they have a streaked appearance. Good cutch has a 
i)right uniform color, a sweetish, astringent taste, melts in the 
mouth, and is free from any grittiness. But it varies consider- 
ably even when good ; some kinds being ponderous and com- 
pact, others very light and friable ; some more and others less 
astringent; which differences seem to result from the manner 
and the seasons in which it is obtained. It is also found In 
Pegu, Siam, and Singapore, from whence it is brought to 
Canton. ^ The value varies from $4 to $5 per pecul. 

Dammer, or Damar. This is a resin flowing spontaneously 
from several species of pine in the Malay peninsula. It is 
found in large, hard lumps both under the trees and on their 
trunks. It is mixed with a softer kind wliich makes it less 
' brittle ; and is then used for closing seams in boats, and other 
wooden vessels. 

Dragon's blood. This resinous gum has been long known ; 
it received its present name from the ancient Greeks, who 
used it extensively. It was also a favorite substance 'with the 
alchimists in making their mixtures. It is the concrete juice 
of the Calamus rotang, a Inrge rattan which grows in Borneo 
and Sumatra. It is found in the market either in oval drops 
or in large and impure masses, composed of several tears. 
That which is good is of a bright crimson when powdered, 
and if held up to the light ib masses is a little transparent. 
The tears are usually the firmest, and the most resinous and 
pure. If it is black when made fine, or very friable in the 
lump, it is inferior. It is oflen adulterated with other gums ; 
but that which is genuine melts readily and burns wholly 
' away ; is scarcely soluble in waier, but fluent in nlcohol. Its 
uses are various in painting, medicine, varnishing and other 
arts. The best is procured at Banjermassin in Borneo ; and 
is brought to this market in reeds ; its price varies from $80 
to $100 a pecul. The Chinese hold dragon's blood in much 
estimation and are the principal consumers of it in the east. 



Digitized by 



Google 



908 

Ebony. This is the heart wood of the Diaspyrus ebenus^ a 
tree growing in Mauritius nml other islands of the Indian 
ocean. The hest wood is of a jet black, the texture conapact, 
free from cracks and not worm-eaten. The outside wood 
should be ail taken off. There are kinds of wood resembling 
ebunv in external appearance, which are often substituted for 
it. The, price of Mauritius ebony is about $6 a pecul, and of 
Ceylon and India about $2^ per pecul. 

Elephants' teeth. These are obtained in South Africa, 
Siam, Burmah, ^'C. They should be chosen without flaws, 
solid, straight and white; for if cracked or broken at the 
point or decayed inside, they are less valuable. The largest 
and best weigh from 5 to 8 to a pecul, and decrease in size to 
25 in a pecul. The cuttings and fragments are also of value 
sufficient to make them an article of trade. Elephants' teeth 
when manufactured are called ivory. The number of articles 
which the Chinese make of it, and the demand for them on 
account of their exquisite workmanship, render its consump- 
tion very great ; and the quantity is gradually decreasing. 
The circular balls which the Chinese make of ivory, as well 
as their miniature boats, are neat specimens of carved work. 
From a quantity of ivory not weighing over three pimnds they 
will make a toy worth a hundred dollars. The largest teeth 
are valued at $90 a pecul and the cuttings at $70. Burmah 
and Siam afford the greatest part of those which are brought 
to China. 

Fish-maws. These are the stomachs of fishes, and are 
used as an article of luxury among the Chinese. They are 
of a cartilaginous nature ; and when properly dried are fit for 
the market. If they become damp, they will decay and are 
then worthless. They are brought in junks from the Indian 
islands ; the price is from $50 to $70 per pecul. 

Flints, which are uncut, are imported from Europe at 60 
cents and sometimes one dollar per pecuL 

Gambier. This in the inspissated juice of a trailing plant, 
Funis uncatusy which grows in the more western and poorer 
islands of the Indian archipelago. It was once called Terra 
Japonica and often confounded with that substance. The 
plant is cultivated in dry situations ; the seedlings are trans- 
planted when eight or nine inches high ; and at the end of the 
first year the leaves are ready to boil, in order to extract the 
juice. It is brought to market in square cakes, the best of 
which have a white, clear appearance, but the inferior are 
brownish. The plants grow eight or ten feet high, and yield 
for twenty years* Gambier in considerable quantities i& im« 



Digitized by 



Google 



909 

porteil.to China from Java and other isiaiidfl« Th6 ti-ade is in 
the hands bf the Chinese, who pay at the emporia $1 or $3 
per peeul. One of its principal uses among the islanders is 
as a masticatory with the betel nut. The taste is first bitter^ 
but when it has remained in the mouth some timey agreeably 
sweet. It is used in China for tanning leather^ which it ten*' 
ders porous and rotten. 

Galangal. This root is obtained from two difibrent p1ants> 
the greater from the Kampfeiia gtdangtiy' thesniaHer from the. 
Maranta gaianga. The greater is a tough, woody root, with 
.a thin bark and full of knobby circles on the outside. It is 
bitterish^ less aromatic and less valuable than the smaljer* 
This latter is a root of reddish brown outside, and pale red 
within. The roots are rarely over two inches in length, ex*" 
tremely firra^ thoitgh light,* The best is full and plump, has a 
bright color, a hot, acrid, peppery taste, and an aromatic 
smell. The smaller, which should always be obtained if possi^^ 
ble, sells for $3^ to $4 per pecuL It is used principally in 
cookery. 

Gamb<9Ibe. This is so named from the country Camboja^ 
which produces the tree, Stalagmitis gambogivides i it is also 
found in Ceylon, (where it distills spontaneously,) China and 
Siam, in which latter countiy the tree is wounded to obtain the 
gum-resin. The juice is inspissated in the sun, and mode into 
rolls which have a brownish-yellow color and a smooth surface. 
If when rubbed upon the wet nail, the color be a bright lemon* 
end no grittiness be felt, it is good; when burned, the fiame is 
white, and the residuum a greyish ash. The large, gritty and 
dark colored pieces are of an inferior quality. Gamboge is 
used as a beautiful pigment and as a medicine ; and is car/ied 
in considerable quantities from. China and India to the west* 
It varies from $70 to $75 a pecul. 

Ginger, prbservbd. This is a sweetmeat made of the 
tender roots of the ginger plant. Zingiber officinalis, and v^hen 
good has a bright appearance, a 'dark yellow color, nnd is 
somewhat transparent. If the roots are old, the conserve will 
be stringy, tough and tasteless. Considerable quantities of 
preserved ginger arc carried to Hamburg and Singapore ; to 
the latter place for re-exportation to ihe continent of Europe. 

Ginseng. This is the dried root of tiie Panax quinquefolia. 
It is obtained in Tartary, and alsb in America, from which 
latter country it is exported to Chian. It is generally consider- 
ed by the Chinese physicians as a panacea. All the ginseng 
growing in Tartary is the property of the emperor, and he 
sells a quantity yearly to his faithlul subjects, who. have the 



Digitized by 



Google 



310 

priyilege to purchase it nt its weight in gold ! Enormotif 
qaantities are consumed bj the Chinese who consider no me-* 
diciiic good, if this be rtot a constituent. The roots are about 
the size and length of a man's little finger, and when chewed 
have a mucilaginous sweetness ; and if good, will snap when 
broken. They should be sound, firm and free from worm 
holes. The Chinese consider that which comes from Tartar^ 
to be the best, even when they can see no difference. When 
first brought from An>erica, the profits were 500 to 600 per 
cent; but it has declined so much of* late, as hardly to be 
worth the first cost. Ginseng is clarified by being boiled and 
skinned, which operation renders the root almost transparent* 
Clarified ginseng varies ui price from $60 to $65 a pecul ; the 
crude, from $35 to $40 a pecul. 

Glue. This- is manufactured by the Clunese for their own 
use, and has lately become an article of export to India and 
beyond the cape of Good Hope. It is inferior to the Irish 
glue in tenacity and purity ; but is fit for all kinds of carpen- 
ter work. It sells at $8 to $10 per pecul. 

Gold. This metnl is brought to China from Borneo, and 
generally in the shape of dust, but sometimes in impure 
masses ; and is here cast into bars, called shoes. These are 
not used as coin, but merely as bullion.. Great eare is neces' 
sary in buying gold in order to prevent deception ; for the 
Chinese often adulterate it with other metals ; by coating the 
shoe with a thick crust of gold and making the inside of silver 
or of copper ; by introducing lumps of other metals into the 
shoe, dec. The purity of the gold is ascertained by means of 
the touchstone, which gives a different colored meark, when the 
gold is of unequalled purity. This is called a touch, and the 
color shows the proportion of pure gold. Needles for compa* 
risen are also made of different proportions of alloy, by which 
the stoiie is rubbed at the same time with the gold. Gold i» 
also tested by nitric acid which will act upon the alloy, but 
does not upon the gold. In Borneo and some of the other 
islands, acid is not allowed to» be used. To express the fine- 
ness of gold, it is divided into 100 parts called touches ; if the 
gold is said to be 96 touch, it has four parts of alloy. The 
("hinese are so expert in the use of the touchstone, that they 
can detect the alloy when it is only one part in two hundred. 
They are not allowed to test their gold in any other way ; it 
therefore becomes a matter of some importance to be able to» 
ascertain the purity of the metal by the tbuchstone. The 
touches have eaeh a separate name, and usually the shoes are 
shaped differently to distinguish them. The range erf the 



Digitized by 



Google 



311 

\6VLc\i is between 90 and 100. Gold leaf is nrade by tlie VHv^ 
nese in great quantities, and is used ibr ornaments, &.C., in 
their tem|>le8. It is also ex[)Orted to India. 

Hartai^l, or orpiment. This is an oxyd of arsenic and is 
used as -a yellow paint. It is found in China^ Hungary and 
Turkey. When good, it has lenron yellow with a shade of 
green, and a foliaceous, shattery texture ; its lamina are a ]it«> 
tie flexible; when burned, it throws off much sulphureous 
smoke. The market price is from ^8 to $11 per pecul. 

Horns and Bones of various animals are brought to China 
in junks from the adjacent countries and islands, and form an 
important article of import with the native vessels. The horns 
are made into handles, buttons, and other useful articles ; and 
the bones are burned into linye^ In a single year^ 502 peculs 
bave been brought to Canton. 

India ink. " This is the only ink used by the Chinese. It is 
made of lamp-black and glue, size or gum., and formed into 
cakes or sticks, which are often perfumed and gilded. Good 
ink is of a shining black, and free from all grittiness, which 
last particular can be ascertained by rubbing it on the wet 
nail. It was once supposed that India ink was tnade of the 
black fluid found in the cuttle fish, after being inspissated and 
purified. 

Iron in bars, rods and scraps has lately become an article 
of importance in this market. Bar iron from 1 to 3 inches 
wide, and rod of J inch and less, are the common sizes im- 
ported. Bar is worth from $1.20 to $1.40 per pecul; rod 
from $2.50 to $3 ; and scrap about $1.50 per p€M3ul. 

Lacquered ware. This ware was formerly exported in 
considerable quantities, but owing to the liabihty Uo injury and 
the little demand for it in foreign markets, the exportation lias 
dwindled to a mere trifle. The articles now sent 16 England 
and the United States consist of those which have always been 
in request, as fans, waiters, boxes, tea<-boords, &c. The pat- 
terns worked on them affect their sale, and the least mark 
spoils the varnish. The best kind, of ware cames from Japan, 
but it is rather diflicult to be obtained. The varnish with 
which this ware is covered has not been successfully imitated 
in Europe. 

Lead. Much of this metal is imported in the form of pig 
and sheet lead. The market price varies from $4 to $5 per 
pecul. Lead, comparatively speaking, is very Fcarce in Asia 
and the Indian islands. Most of that which is used comes 
from Eutope and America. Perhaps the low state of civili- 
zation in the countries of Asiia, has left undiscovered many 



Digitized by 



Google 



310 

treasures in the bofiom of the earthy which may be brought to 
light in afVer times, when the stales inhabiting this continent 
shall have other objects of attention besides war aiui conquests 
Lead has not yet been found m the islands of the Indian 
ocean ; but New Holland, New Guinea and Borneo yet remain: 
unexplored. A considerable part of that imported is made 
into paints by ozydatioa, and exported again as red and white 
lend. The read-lead sells for aboi^L $11 per pecul, and the 
white at $10. The lining of tea-chests consumes a proportion 
of the Irad brought to this country. The mode of making 
the sheet is very simple and expeditious. Two smooth stones 
of marUe are placed near the melted lead, and the. workman, 
holding the upper one by the side^ with the opposite edge 
resting on the lower stone, pours the liquid metal on the under 
one and then drops that he held in his hand ; the sheets are 
made into the requisite form by soldering* The art of drop- 
ping the upper stone in such a manner as to make the sheet 
of a uniform thickness is the only difficult part of the opera^ 
tion. 

Mace. This substance is the reticulated middle bark of the 
covering of the nutmeg, Myristica moschata. Mace has a 
lively reddish-yellow color, approaching to saffron, and a plea- 
sant, aromatic smell, with a pungent, bitterish taste. Good 
mace is tough, fresh, and oily. It is packed in bales, and care 
is requisite that it be not too dry or too wet, as both alike 
injure it. Mace has alt the properties of the nutmeg in a less 
degree except that it is more bitter. There is a kind of mace 
found in Malabar, which externally so much resembles the true, 
that the sight alone cannot distinguish between them. That 
from this coast has a resinous taste and is but slightly aromatic. 
Whether the tree, that produces this last, has also the nutmeg 
we do not know, hut it is probably aH inferior species of the 
same tree. 

Mats. These are made by the Chinese very beautifully, 
and the demand for them has increased the importation of 
rattans within the last few. years. They are durable, and 
when worked with fanciful designs are handsome. Floor mats- 
are also made of msh and bamboo for a cheaper article, but 
the rattan are the bcstl When shipped, care should be taken 
that they are perfectly dry, or they will mildew and become^ 
rotten. Table mats are put up in sets of six each, of different 
sizes. - 

Mother op pearl siieu.s. . These are imported to and ex- 
ported from this port. The Persian gulf, the coasts of India^ 
and the iolaads of the Indian archipelago, produce them m 



Digitized by 



Google 



,313 

tbe ^reaY)est abund^nee, -Tliej VaryiUfittze, and are sometinaed 
a foot in diameter and . proportianally thick. Thw Tahie 
<lependH upon the r :tran8parency and lustre of the naker or 
inside coat ; those shells, that arerotigh or have yellcrw spots 
in them are of an inferior quality. The shei4, Mfamargariti* 
y^ra^ is thick and rough .on the eutside% J t is found in fresh 
water, but when in that situation is worthless. The* Chinese 
manufacture pearl shells. into a. great number of ti;ink«ts and 
toys, as beads, seals, knife-handles, spoons^ boxes^^c; they 
also inlay it into lacquered ware to represent flowers, trees, 
'&^., when the play . of colors is very rich. The shells are 
brought in the rough state by junks aod foreign vessels, and 
sell from $15 to $12 per pecul. When exported) the price is 
at a small advance to cover the Chinese duty. 

Mi;sK. The geauine musk is much prized, and is rare and 
costly ;. on which account it is often and much adulterated. It 
is found on a species of antelope, Mesckun mosckifera, inhabit- 
ing Thibet, Siberia and China. It is probable that musk is 
obtained from several kinds of deer in the central parts of 
Asia. .In this market, musk is found in the bags about as 
large as a walnut, in which it grows on the animal. Good 
musk is of a dark, purplish color, dry and light, and generally 
in cbncrete,- smooth, unctuous gi'ains ; its taste is bitter, and 
its smell strong, and disagreeable. The bags are often coun- 
terfeited by those of skin ; but these have a paler color than 
the true, and the hair is. uneven. The degree of purity and 
strength of this drug can be ascertained by macerating it for 
'a few days in spirits of wine, to which it imparts a strong 
scent. Musk is adulterated with many substances and every 
bag should l>e opened. When good musk is rubbed on paper, 
the trace is of a bright yellow color, and free from any gritti- 
ness. The price varies from $65 to $80 a catty, according to 
the quality. It is used for perfumery and medicine. The 
musk-ox, ibund in North America also produces this substance 
of an inferior quality. That which comes from Russia is very 
inferior to the Chinese, and is probably obtained from a differ- 
ent animal. 

Musk si<;£d. These are the fruit of Hibiscus abelmoschus, 
which grows in China and other countries. The Arabians use 
them to give flavor to their coflee, 'Vhe seeds are flat, kidney- 
shaped, about the size of a large pin head, and have a con- 
siderable odor of musk, with a slightly aromatic, bitterish 
taste. The black and musty seeds are not: good ; a greyish 
color is the natural one. They are now brought to Europe 
from Sotttli Ameriea and the West I»die& 



Digitized by 



Google 



514 

Mtrrh. This ceiebrated gum is brought from Arabia and 
Abyssinia, and is used by the Chinese for incense and per-^ 
fumes. It exudes spontaiieuuslj from a tree of the genu» 
Acncitty or is obtained by incision. It occurs in irregular 
grains of difierent sizes up to that of a horse l>ean. The 
grains or tears are resinous, greasy, and easy to be broken, of 
a reddish-brown color, with an acrid, warm and bitter taste. 
The pieces ought to be clear, light, and unctuous,, but it ha» 
usually other gums mixed with it. The price varies from $4 
to $18 per pecul in the Canton market. 

Nankeens. This is a kind of cotton cloth, so named from 
Nanking, the city where the reddish threads were originally 
made. They are divided in company's nankeens and the nar- 
row ; the former are the finest and most esteemed. Nankeens 
are also mamifactured in Canton and other purt^ of the em- 
pire, and in the East Indies. Those made in China, strll 
maintain their superiority in color and texture over the English 
manufacture. The price varies from $60 to $90 per hundred 
pieces. They are exported to Europe and An»eriea in consi- 
derable quantities, and are well adapted for summer clothing^ 
in warm latitudes. 

Nutmegs. These are the fruit of a hirge tree, Myristica 
moschata, which grows in the Bandn isles ; it is ^fty feet in 
height, and well branched. In its general appearance it re- 
sembles the dove tree ; the bark is smooth and ash colored, 
the leaves green above and grey beneath, and if rubbed in the 
hand leave a gratefully aromatic odor. The sap has the pro- 
perty of staining doth indelibly. The tree bears' buds, flow- 
ers and fruit at the same time. The flower is not unlike the 
lily of the valley. The fruit in size and appearance resem- 
bles the nectarine ; it is marked with a furrow, like the peach, 
and as it ripens has the same delicate blush. The following' 
description by sir Thomas Herbert is somewhat fanciful, and 
at the sanw time true. ^ The nutmeg, like trees most excel- 
lent, is not very lofty in height, scarce rising a» high as the 
cherry ; by some it is resembled to the peach, but varies in 
form of leaf and grain, and affects more compass. The nut 
is clothed with a defensive hnsk, like these of a baser quality, 
and resembles the thick rind of a walnut, but at full rtpenes^s 
discovers her naked purity, and the mace chastely entwines 
(with a veriTvilion Mushy) her endeared fruit ai>d sister, which 
hath n third coat, and both of them breathe out most pleasing- 
smells. The mace in a few days, (hke choice beauties,) by ' 
the sun^s flames becomes tawny ; yet in that complexion best 
pleates thu rustic gatherer." The plant bears thre« crops ia 



Digitized by 



Google 



3)5 

^ year, Imt the fruit requires nine monAs to liecom^ perflMth 
The nutmeg has three coverings^ whicb are all of different 
textures. The first is the outside coat, which is about half an 
inch thick, and when ripe cracks and opens of itself; the 
second is the reticulated inace which appears through the fisf> 
«ure8 of the first, and has a bright scarlet color ; the third is a 
bard, black shell, which encloses the nutmegs Good trees will 
produce from ten to twelve pounds of nuts andtnace annually \ 
but the average of an orchard is 65 ok. avotrdupois,v or about 
two peculs to an acre^ Nutmegs of a lightish*gray color, a 
strong, fragrant smelU an aromatic taste, large, oily, and 
round, and of a firm texture are the best. The holes made 
by insects in eating into the kernel, afe often neatly filled up^ 
which can be ascertained by the inferior weight. They ara 
packed in layers of dry chunam> In commerce, nutmegs are 
divided into royal and queen, the former are of an oblong, and 
the latter of a round shape. The trade in this article, like 
that of cloves, is a monopoly in the hands of the Dutch^ 
They have entered into treaty with the petty rajtths of the 
Molucca iskinds to destroy all the trees in their dominions, for 
which they pay them a small annuity. In the Banda isles, to 
which the cultivation is restricted, the Dutch are obliged to 
import slaves to tend the trees. Any person who engages in 
the spice trade illicitly, is liable to tbe severest penalties. Yet 
it is computed that 60,000 lbs. of nutmegs and 15,000 lbs. of 
mace are clandestinely exported ev^ry year. The [trices paid 
by governmtmt for the cultivation are fixed, and during a 
eourse of year8> they have been obliged to raise the compen- 
eation, til! at present, they pay^e times as much for the nut» 
megs as when the trade was first opened. 1 his strange and 
unnatural mode of operation has forced the raising of the nut« 
meg tree at Bencoolen in Sumatra, but at a great disadvan- > 
tage. In the China market, nutmegs sell from $120 to $140 
a pecul. Considerable quantities are brought in junks, but the 
greatest part in foreign vessels. 

Oil of Nutmbgs. Nutmegs produce both an essential and 
a volatile oil ; the former of which is known under the name 
of Banda soap. It should be fi*ee from impurities, and of a 
pleasant, aromatic smell. The volatile oil is not known in 
commerce. The nutmegs from which the oil has been extract* 
ed are sometimes offered for sale, but they are of no value. 

Olibanvm. This is the frankincense of the ancients, and is 
Used in China, as in other countries, for incense in temples and 
perfumery in houses. The Greeks, Romans, Persians, Israe- 
lites, Hindoos and Budhists have used this substance in the 
40 



Digitized by 



Google 



S16 

▼ftrioifs ceremonies of their relicrious worship. Olibannfn i§ 
the gum that exudes spontaneously from tlie Juniperus lifcia, a 
lar^e tree which grows in Arabia and India. The drops have 
a pale reddish color, a strong and somewhat unpleasant smeli ; 
a pungent and bitter taste, and when chewed adhere to the 
teeth and gi?e the saliva a milkj color. If laid on a hot iron, 
the gum takes fire and boms with a pleasant fragrance, leav-' 
ing a black residuum. In market, otibanuni is seen in tears of 
a pink color, brittle and adhesive ; the boxes each contain one 
ewt. Garbled nlibanum is valued at $6 per pecul and the un-* 
garbled at $2 or $3 per pecul in the Canton market. 

Opium. This is the concrete juice of the Papaver samnife" 
rum, a species of poppy cultivated in Iiidia and Turkey. The 
cultivation of it is a strict government monopoly in British 
India ; in Malwa and other native states it is free, but subject 
to heavy duties in its transit to the coast for exportation. That 
raised in Patna and Benares is superior to the Malwa, and 
both are preferred by the Chinese to the Turkey opium. 
Good opium is moderately firm in texture, capable of receiv- 
ing an impression from the finger; of a dark yellow color 
when held in the light, but nearly black in the mass, with a 
strong smell, and free from grittiness. That produced in di^ 
fererit countries, however, varies considerably, and experience 
alone can determine the best article. The value increases for 
a short time by age ; but this soon ceases to be the case, and 
Turkey opium in particular, deteriorates unless carefully pre* 
served from the air. Opium is adulterated with leaves, dirt, 
and other substnnees ; if very soifl it is not usually good. The 
great consumption of this drug among the Chinese, has made 
the opium trade a very important branch of commerce. About 
fourteen millions of dollars worth have been annually sold to 
them for a few years past, and the demand is increasing. 
The trade is carried on by means of ships stationed at Lin- 
tin ; here the opium is stored, and the owner gives his orders 
£j»r its delivery to the buyer, who always pays the mtmey before 
receiving the drug. The trade has ever been (nominally at 
least,) an object of dislike to the Chinese authorities, and 
many ineffectual eJicts have been issued against it. The 
opium brought from India varies from $600 to $700 a chest, 
and the Turkey from $620 to $680 a pecul. The price of the 
commodity fluctuates, however, according to the extent of im- 
portation. 

P£PPER. This spice is the fruit of the Piper nigrum, a har- 
dy vine found in Sumatra, Malabar and Malacca. The culti- 
vation of it is very- simple and easy. Soil on primitive rock» 



Digitized by 



Google 



31? 

prodiices the best pepper. The fruit is collected semiannnaUy \ 
the vine bears when three jears old, and continues to do so 
till twenty, and lives to the age of thirty years. As soon as 
the fruit has changed from a green to a red color, it is picked 
end put into tubs, and afterwards separated from the stalks, 
and when dried thoroughly, it is then ready for market. 
Pepper is known in commerce under two names, the white 
and black. White pepper grows from the same seed as the 
black, and is deprived of its skin by being immersed in water 
and rubbed between the hands. It is but little used ; the dif- 
ference of price not being sufficient to pay for the extra labor. 
Good black pepper has a very pungent smell, an, extremely 
acrid and hot taste. That which has large grains and smooth 
akin, is the best. The pepper brouglit from Penang and Su- 
matra, is superior to that which comes from Java and Borneo. 
The consumption of pepper in £un|pe has long been very 
great. Ships of all nations have engaged in this traffic, and 
the pepper trade is now larser than that in all the other spices, 
and «oleIy because it is ajree trade. A large proportion of 
that brought to China is from Malacca. The price varies from 
$6 to $8 a pecul. 

PuTCHucK. This is a medicine brought from India and 
Persia, and appears to be the roots of a plant which grows in 
those countries. The color and smell are similar to that of 
rhubarb, and when chewed, it becomes mucilaginous in the 
mouth. The price varies from $12 to $14 per pecul. 

Quicksilver is brought to China in considerable quantities 
from Europe, and occasionally from America. The most part 
of it is converted into vermilion by oxydation, and in that state 
is used for painting on porcelain. Vermilion also forms an 
article of export to India and Europe. Quicksilver is fre- 
'quently adulterated with lead or tin ; the fraud can be detect- 
ed by boiling it to evaporation, when the other metals will 
remain ; if the quantity of extraneous metal is great, the 
<}uicksilver will feel greasy, and also cleave to the skin, while 
the pure runs off. This metal ranges between $60 and $70 a 
pecul, and is one of the most variable commodities in the 
market. 

Rattans are the branches of the Calamus rotang, the same 
plant which produces the dragon's blood. 'J'hey are found in 
most of the islands of the Indian archipelago, but in the 
greiUest perfection in tlie district of Banjermassingin Borneo. 
The young shoots are the most valuable for their strength and 
pliability. After being stripped of the epidermis, the rattans 
are doubled and tied up in bundles coataluing a hundred each. 



Digitized by 



Google 



318 

As thef TBquire no cahivation, the natires are enabled to sell 
them at a Tery cheap rate. They are brought to Canton in 
junks, and sell from $2^ to $4^ per pecul. Foreign vessels 
also bring them as dunnage or on freight. The Chinese use 
them for cordage, chairs, mats, beds, &c. Rattan ropeSf 
bamboo timbers, and palm-leaf boards make a common house 
for the poor in China. 

Rhubarb* This drag is the dried roots of the Rheum pcd^ 
matum, a plant which grows in Tartary and China. From 
these countries it is carried to St. Petersburg and Smyrna* 
The rhubarb from Russia, which is the best, owes its reputa-* 
tion for goodness to tlie care taken in curing and assorting it. 
The Chinese dig the roots early in the spring, before the leavea 
appear, cut them into long flat pieces ; dry them for two or 
three days in the shade ; and then string them on cords in cool 

Sjaces, and dry them thoroughly. Rhubarb is often spoiled 
y moisture in drying, when it becomes light and spongy. It 
is liable also to be eaten by worms. Good rhubarb is of a firm 
texture, when cat has a lively, mottled appearance, and is per* 
fectly dry. The taste is bitter, acrid and unpleasant, and the 
smell somewhat aromatic. If when chewed, it becomes muci* 
laginous, it is not good ; it also imparts to the spittle a deep 
safiTrou tinge. If black or green when broken, it ought to be 
rejected. Rhubarb varies in its prices ;" from $38 to $40 per 
pecul far those roots cured without splitting; $65 to $70 a 
pecul for the cut. The rhubarb found in this market has 
always been inferior to that brought from Russia and Turkey.. 

Rice. This is the great staple commodity among the Chi- 
nese, and the importation of it is encouraged by all possi- 
ble means. Formosa, Lu^onia, Cochinchina, and the Indian 
islands supply China with great quantities. To induce foreign 
shipping to bring it to this market, the government has permit- 
ed all ships laden solely with cargoes of rice to pass free of the 
cumsha and measurement duties exacted at Canton. The 
price given for a cargo of foreign rice, varies from $lf to 
$2J, rising in seasons of scarcity as at present, to $2f , and for 
very good, $3 per pecul. 

Rose maloes. This is a substance of the consistence of 
tar ; it is brought from Persia and India to China ;. and when 
good has a pearly appearance. The price is about $30 per 
pecul. 

Saltpetre is brought from India, where it is obtained by 
lixiviating the soil. It is also found in Sumatra in caves and 
other protected places, and is an article of exportation from 
the Indian archipelago. The quantity brought to this market 



Digitized by 



Google 



S19 

tis'tniBll, an the €hifnete make neariy enough for iheiT tmn 
•consumption. The price is from $8 to $1)0 per pecul. 

Sandal wood. I'feis is the heart wood of a small tree, Sania^ 
4um alburn^ which grows in India, and many of the islands of 
the Indian and PaKnfic oceans. The tree resembles myrtle in 
«ize and appearance ; the flowers are red •and the berries black 
and juicy. The color varies fronB a light red to a dark yellow; 
the deepest color is the best. The best "Vf ood is near the roots. 
In choosing sandal wood, the largest pieces, and those of a 
^rm texture, hard, free from knots or cracks, of a sweet smell 
should' be selected. The white outside wood is taken off by 
white ants, who eat it away when tlie billet is buried in the 
ground, -and do not injure the heart wood. The best sandal wood 
«omes from the Malabar coast, and sells for $10 or #12 a pecul ; 
that brought from Thnur is worth $6 or $9, while that found 
in the Sandwich islands, being BiUaU and knotty^ is valued from 
$1 to $6. The chips also form another sort^ The Chinese 
%ise sandal wood rn the form of a fine powder to make incense 
«ticks to burn in their houses and temples. An oil is extracted 
from sandal wood which is highly valued for its aromatic qual- 
ities. It has the consistence of castor oil, a yellow color, and 
« highly fragrant odor ; it «inks in WBter. 

Sapan woo». This is the wood of the Casalpina saptm, a 
tree which grows in India, Lu9onia ahd Burmah. The tree 
is of the same genus as the Brazil wood, and has the same prop- 
erties in an inferior degree, and on that account is not import- 
ed to Europe. It is cuhivated for its red d^e, which is best 
Itnown to the Indian islander. It is vsed in cabinet work for 
inlaying to a limited extent. Its value is about $2 per pecul 
in the Canton maiket, where large <iuantities «re brought, 
chiefly from Manila. 

Sea shells. The shores of the islands of the Indian ocean 
afford a great variety of beautiful and rare sheik, such as the 
cabbage shell, the nautilus, the trumpet sheil, the ducal mantle, 
^c. The greatest part of all the genera known can be found 
in great abundance in this market, and purchased at reasona- 
ble prices. Beside shells, as objects of natural history, insects 
-are also procurable at Canton, well preserved ; they are mostly 
hard-winged insects as beetles ; butterflies ^nd other classes 
«re also gathered, especially those which are gnj. Precious 
«tones are seen in small quantities, but rather inferior; cornel- 
ians and agates are the most common. Other minerals, es- 
pecially limestones, are often seen cut into fantastic shapes ; but 
these specimens being always lacquered, are spoiled for natu- 
ral olgdfcts. Birds or fishes are seldom seen preserved* 



Digitized by 



Google 



320 

Sea weed* Several* species of JFueus are broaght to Cantoii' 
in junks, and used as an article of food among the poorer 
classes. Thej are eaten both raw and cooked. 

Shark's fins. The fins of the shark are sought for from the 
Indian ocean to the Sandwich islands to supply thb market. 
The chief supply is from Bombay and the Persian gulf. They 
are fat, cartilaginous, and when cooked, esteemed by the Chi- 
nese as a stimulant and a tonic. They should be well dried 
and kept from any moisture. About 500 pieces are contained 
in a pecul. The price is from $20 to $45 per pecul. 

Silk/ The importance- of this article demands for it a full 
«and minute deseiiption, which we shall defer for a future 
paper. 

Skinm were formerly one* of the most profitable articles that 
could be brought to the Chinese market, but their high price 
and the introduction of woollen goods has materially lessened 
their importation. Seal and otter are the most in request, the 
latter selling as high as $40 a skin. Beaver, fox, and rabbit 
skins are in demand, but the supply is limited. Many skioff 
are brought to Peking from Siberia by the Russians. 

Smalts. This is an impure oxyd of cobalt united with pot- 
ash. Ill the mass it is not much used, but when ground fine is 
employed in colorin<r glass and porcelain. The powder is of 
a fine azure blue, and known under the name of powder blue. 
The demand is but limited ; the price is from $50 to $90 per 
pecul. 

Sot. This is a condiment made of a species of be^n which 
grows in China and Japan. To make it, the beans are boiled 
soft, and then an equal quantity of wheat or barky is added ; 
after this has thoroughly fermented, a quantity of salt and three 
times as much water as the beans were at first are added. The 
whole compound is bow le(\ for two of three months and then 
pressed and strained. Good soy has an agreeable taste, and 
if shaken in a tumbler, lines the vessel with a lively yellowish 
brown froth ; the color in the vessel is nearly black. It im^ 
proves by age. « ' 

Spblter. This is the impure zinc, used in the manufacture 
of brass. It is in plates of half an inch thick, of a whitish^due 
color. The Chinese import it but little, the mines found in 
their own country furnishing them with a supply. It sells at 
$4i per pecul. 

Steel. Swedish and Enfflish arc the kinds usually import^ 
ed. The quantity brought is increasing annually ; and proba- 
bly the demand will be greater every year, as the use of it be-- 
comes belter known. From' $4 to $5 per tub is Ihe usual 
market priced- 



Digitized by 



Google 



S21 

STdCKFiSH. These are dried 'fish brought from Germany awd 
England, cured without the use of salt. In a[:^earance, when 
•preserved, thej resemble codfish. The quantity brought is 
4sma]l ; the price is about $5^ per pecul. 

Sugar. This is thematHifactured product of the juice of the 
Saccharum officinale^ or sugar cane. From all the notices that 
can be obtained from ancient history, it irvery probable that 
China was the iirst country in which the 8U«|:ar cane wa? culti- 
vated. Its native country is the southern part of the continent 
of Asia, and its properties have been well known by the in- 
habitants for many ages. Among the Chinese, the cultivation 
of it is carried on to an extent sufficient to supply their own 
wants and also to form an article of export. The varieties of 
of the cane are several, but most of those that are indigenous 
have a reddish juice, which renders the sugar unsaleable. The 
only one cultivated is the same as that which grows in the West 
Indies. The process of mantlfactunng it is simple and hibori- 
ous ; the machinery is coarse and the labor performed mostly 
by human strength. In the Indian islands, the manufacture is 
in the hands of the Chinese, the natives supplying them with 
•the cane. The natives however make a coarse sugar for their 
own use, cnWed jctggery. The sugar exported from China is 
principally in a crystalized state, and therefore^ usually called 
sugar candy. This is carried to India in great quantities, 
and its purity and beauty have been long and justly es- 
teemed. 

Tea, which now constitutes an important branch of 'com- 
merce throughout the world, must be reserved for a future 
number. 

Thrrad. Gold and silver thread is imported into China from 
England and Holland. It is used in the borders of fine goods 
in ornamenting ladies' dresses, and in other similar objects. 
The quantity imported is great: the English sells for from 
$36 to $40 per pecul. 

Tin. This metal is found very abundant and of a pure 
quality in the island of Banca. It is cast into ingots weighing 
from 20 to GO lbs. : the purity of these bar;* is superior to those 
which are made of tin from the mines in Malacca. All that is 
of a superior quality which is brought to China in bars, is call- 
ed* Banca tin,' while the inferior is known as * Straits tin.^ 
The former sells for about $17 and the latter for $14 or $15 a 
pecul. Plate tin is brought from England and America in 
i)oxes, containing from 80 to 120 plates, and sells for about 
♦10 jper box. 



Digitized by 



Google 



9HZ 

Tcnrromr gif bui^ Hue is the envtaeeoiiA coverug of tficr 
Testndo imbricala^ an aaimal found on the shores of most o( 
the Indian isJands* The common name is hawk's hill tortoise. 
The shell is thicker, clearer and more variegated than that o^ 
any other species, and constitutes the sole value of the animal. 
It is heart form, and consists of thirteen inner with twentjT 
five marginal divisions. The middle side-pieces are the thick« 
est, largest and most valuable ; the others are denominated 
hoof. Good tortoise shell is in large plates, free from cracks- 
or carbuncles and almo«t transparent. The small r broken and 
crooked piece» are worthless. The Chinese use large quanti-« 
ties in the manufiicture of combs, boxes, toys, dc^c; the chief 
marts of this article are Canton and Singapore, from whence 
it is sent to Europe and America. The price of the good va-^ 
ries from $1000 to $1 100 per pecul. The very thin kind fron» 
the isJands of the Pacific, is not suited to this marked. 

TuRMEatc^ This is the dried roots of the Curcuma longa^ a 
herbaceous plant cultivated in all the Indian islands, and on- 
the continent for its coloring and aromatic qualities. The root» 
are uneven and knotty : difficult to break or cut ; and have a 
light yellow color externally. The color internally is a bright 
yellow at first, then reddish^ and finally becomes much liker 
that of saffron. It is easily powdered for use, but the dye i» 
very transitory, and no means have yet been found for setting" 
it. It has an aromatic smell resembling ginger, and a warmv 
disagreeable, bitterish taste. The islanders use it more as a 
spice than a dye. In packing it, care should be taken that the 
boxes be secure, as tlie least damp injures it. Turmeric is a 
good test for the presence of free alkalies, and the quantity 
used for this purpose is considerable. Its price varies from $5r 
to C6 a pecul. 

TuTENAGUEy or China Speller. This is an alloy of iron, cop* 
per and zinc. It is harder than zinc, though less so than iron ; 
sonorous, comrpact and has some malleability. The fresh frac-^ 
ture is brilliant, but soon tarnishes. Till superseded by spcl-^ 
ter from Silesia it was exported in large quantities to India ; 
but on account of its high price is now seldom or never ship^ 
ped ; spelter being on the contrary inrtported to compete with 
it in China. For boxes, dishes, household utensils and other 
similar purposes, tutenague is well adapted* The art of mak-^ 
ing it is not known to Europeans. Its export price used to be 
about $14 a pecul. 

VRRMaioN. This is made of quicksilver by oxydation and 
is then exported. It is also used for painting porcelain. The 
price, now about $33 a box, is entirely regulated by that of 
quicksilver. The boxes contain 50 catties each* 



Digitized by 



Google 



825 

Whanoees, or Japan canes. These nre the produce of a 
plant which grows hi Chiiin. They nre well cnlciihiKHl lor 
walking sticks, nnd shaiihl he chosen with care ; those that nre 
bent at the heud, and liave the knots at near and equal distan- 
ces are preferred. They should be tough, pliable and tupcriiig* 
Their value is alout $18 per thousand. 

Woollens. The demand for thcne is annually inorensing. 
The prineipnl goods imported nre broadcloths, hmg ells, cut* 
tings, worleys at d camlets. Woollen yarn is also brought in 
small quantities. 

Note. In the preceding list iieyeral minor and nnimpnrtant articles 
have been omitted The principal authors consulted were Crawford's In- 
dian Archipelago, ]Vlilburiie*s Oriental Commerce, Maccullnrh's Conimrr- 
cial Diclionury. and lloopt- r's Medical Dictionary. Considerable aid was 
also obtained from 'merchants in Canton. 

41 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



INDEX 



TO THE "HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PORTUGUESE 
SETTLEMENTS IN CHINA." 



AbbeM of St. Clare, eletted, 20; Confirmed, ibid. 

Absolutism y acts of, of the pure municipality, and sabri; 49. 

Adil-kban, Ismftet dispossessed of Goa, 123. 

Adiodato an Italian missionary sends a map to Rome, 183 ; is degraded, lS4f 
examined, ibid ; banished, 184. 

Administration of revenue, 58; Receipts, 58 ; Expenditure^ 61 ; ancient- 
modern, see Royal Chest. 

Adran, a French missionary goes from Cochinchina with the son of the* 
presumptive heir to Paris, 128. 

Adventurers settl'? at Macao, 10. ^ 

Albargaria, Lopes Soareso sends an envoy to China, 92. 

Albuquerqe, George gives leave to Perestello to make a voyage to China, 1. 

Aldermen, " Vereadores," members of the Senate, 47 j tlieir duty, ibid. 

Alexander, Dm. bishop of Macao, I\is opinion on the right of the Portuguese 
to the settlement, 13. 

Alexander, VII. ] 'ope declares the ceremonies of China free from super- 
stitions, 189- -190. 

Alexander, VTII. Pope, allows Peter I. king of Portugal to appoint the 
ex-bishops, and fix their jurisdiction, 182. 

Almotac6s, justice s of the peace; their number, 52; to be chosen from- 
among, ibid. 

Alorna, Marquis ile, orders 200 chops to be translated at G oa, 13. 

Aina, an old Pagod, or Chinese temple, 32. 
^ Ama-hgao, the ^ty molbg^ of Macao, 15. 



Digitized by 



Google 



II llrott. 

AmbaMadon to China, Portugoeie. Reasons why Emmannel de Saldafl< 
ha was sent, 95; his detention at Macao and Caiiton, 96; departure 
for PeJiing, ibid ; expenses and result, ibid. 

Reasjins why Alexander Metello de Souza e Meneyes came, 96 ; his 
correspondence with the Tsunjr.tQh, ibid ; his letterto the emperor, 98; 
in a note, his journey, ibid ; his entrance to Peking, 99 ; ceremony of 
audience, 101 ; expenses, 105. 

Reasons why Francis Xavier Pacheco e Sampnyo came, 102; declared 
to be no tributary envoy, 103; his entrance toPekio^r, 103; ceremony 
of audience, 104. 

Amparo, an asylum for Chinese converts, 107 ; immediate cause to a cou' 
ventional pact, 108. 

Andrade, Fernad Peres de, on the coast of China, 2 ; anchored six ships at 
Tam^o, ibid ; trades at that place and at Canton, 6; brought an envoy 
to China, 92. 

Andrade, Siamd de at Tam^o, 6; he provokes the Chinese, ibid ; is block- 
aded and escapes, 7; his conduct excites an unfavorable opinion of 
strangers, 93. 

Anthony, St. a parish church, 17. 

Appeal to Goa, from the ordinary judges, 47; and fiom the chief jus* 
tice, C4. 

Arnrdo, Jo)in Anthony, an envoy from the king of Cochinchina to 
Macao, 127. 

Arriaga, Miguel de, Brum da Silveira, one of the Portuguese authorities 
who signed with the Kuglisb in 1808, a convention for landing a Brit- 
ish force at Macao, 75 ; and that of evacuating Macao, 76; he also 
signed the convention of 1809, for an auxiliary force against the pi- 
rates, 112; assisted at the manning and arming the sliips. 113; he 
prevailed on Chang Paou to surrender his squadron, and those of the 
private chiefs, 114; he renewed the connexion with Siam, 126; was 
deposed at Macao, 71 ; reinstated, 71 ; he dies insolvent. 

1. Asylum for female orphans, 42. 

4. Attuck of the Dutch on Macao, 73. 

2. A8}'lum of St. Mary Magdalen, 42. 

3. Ataide, Gama, Dm. Alvaro do, stops at Malacca, an envoy from Goa to 

China, 94. 

Attack on the christian religion by Literati, Bonzes and buffoons, 168. 

Audience, the ceremonial of a solemn, with the Emperor, 99. 

Auxiliaries of Macao against the £a:jtern Tartars, 109» 

do. do. against pirates, 110; privileges claimed, 145; con- 

vention with China, 112 ; result to China, 114 ; to Macao, 115 ; Expen- 
ses, 116. 



Digitized by 



Google 



BataVia, b tempotary commercial relief from, 134. 

Battalion of the Prince Regent, iu force, 64. 

Barrier, or boundary. Reason why a wall was drawn across the isth- 
mus, 14 ; the door " porta do ceroo," guarded by Chinese sdfliers, ibid ; 
now it opens at day-break, ibid. 

Benedict XIII. Pope, sends two Carmelites to Tung-ching, 196; their so- 
licitation, 196 ; the emperor's answer, 196. 

Benedict XIV. Pope, condemns Mezzabarba's eight permissions, 176. 

Bishopricks, Catliolic in China, 182. 

Bishopricks of Macao, its anciei^t, 151 ; its modern extent, ibid ; its Gover- 
nors, ibid. 

Bishops of Macao, tlieir installation, 63; not allowed to exercise temporal 
powers, 156. 

Bonfire, at night of St. John's day, 156. 

Botelho, Ayres causes 'the destruction of the Portuguese setUement at 
Chin-chew^ 5. 

Broils at Macao, 78 ;. change of goyemment, 71 ; abolished by a force from 
Goa, 73. 

Brotherhood, the of Mercy, 43; its organic institutions, ibid. 

Budhism, why not the universal church, 158. 

Build, to churches, houses, prohibited, 81 ; with permission the old ones 
may be repaired, ibid; forts and quays also, ibid ; ships likewise, 02. 

Buildings, public, 17 ; parish churches, ibid ; collegiate churches, ibid ; 
convents, 18 ; monastery, 19 ; hermitages, ibid; senate-house, ibid. 

Burying ground, 155. 

Cabe^a dos Chinas em Macao, means the procurador of the senate, 29. 

Cabe^a de rua, a petty Chinese police -man, 29. 

Camoens cave, 22. 

Campo do Mandarim, 30. 

Campo, or the field, 32; its cultivation, 32. 

CapiUto da terra, captain of Macao, first chosen by the inj]abitant8,54; this 
captainship became marriage portion to young ladies, 54. 

Capital de gente da guerra, military captain came from Goa, 49. 

Captains general and governors, 53; the place of the deceased, how sup- 
plied, 64. 

Carmelite friars sent to Peking, 196. 

Cases, civil, 79 ; criminal, 80 ; commercial, 82. 

Casiihas, a bay where the Dutch who came to take Macao, landed, 74. 

Catechists, Tartar and Chinese soldiers, and a woman teach the Roman 
Catholic faith, 183. 



Digitized by 



Google 



If I«S1S. 

Cam branea, s leat of a Mandarin^ who ezereised in citU ecaet his Jnris^ 
diction at Macao, 80 ; and acts in criminal cases as coroner, 81. 

Gatal, Dm. John first bishop of Macao, 151 ; institutes a chapter, 199; for- 
bids missionaries to wait on Tonrnan, 193. 

Chang, Paoa (called by the Portuguese Chan-pao-chai,) a powerful pirate 
sorrenders himself, 115. 

Changi Stephen, a Chinese Catholic priest, 184 ; his declsaration, ibid ; 
conclusion drawn by his judges, 115. 

Chang-si-lad, probably the same as Chin-chi-lung, 18. 

Che-foo, a Mahdarin of a town of the first order, protects misflionaLrtes, 166* 

Chest royal manafgement of the, Gl ; claims a great debt, 61 ; a part of it 
is pardoned, 65 ; receipt from the customs, 65 ; indebted again, 66. 

China, relations with politically, 76 ; judicially, 80 ; diplomatically, 113 > 
conventional pact, 130 ; correlative intercourse, 136. 

China, th^ Roman Catholic division of, 18S; relif^ous institutions are gov- 
erned by members of that community, which laid the foundation of 
them, 182. 

Chinchew, a place the Portuguese traded at, 4 ; is destroyed, 5. 

Chin-chi-lung's ambition, 35 ; he finishes his life in a prison, 36. 

Chin-cliin-kong, or Kuesing, or Ko:singa, continues the warfare of Chin- 
chi-lang, his father against the Tartars, 35 > takes Formosa from the 
Dutch, 35. 

Chin-moou's memorial against firee trade, 35. 

Chinese vassals, governed by Mandarins, 29 ; a serious tumult witli the 
Portuguese, 30 ', new Chinese settlers at Macao must have permission 
from the senate, 31 > conjectured population of the Chinese settled at 
Macao and its environs, ibid ; new Chinese christian congregations,! 86. 

Chop, an authentic document, in Chinese, marked with the official seal of 
a Mandarin. 

Christians, Roman Catholic in China, (1810) 188; and in Eastern Asia, 
ibid. 

Churches at Macao, 17-, in all, thirteen, chapels, five. 

do. at Peking, 183; have a guard, 184 ; how they are designated by 
the Chinese, see a note, 183. 

Church, Roman Catholic at Macao, 148. 
do. do. in China, 147. 

Civilization, European, consists principally in, 93 ; Note, 

Claudio, Dm. Juan envoy from Manila, 69; ill-used and expelled from 
Macao, 121. 

Clede, JLa, his opinion of the settlementi at Macao, ]3. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Oement IX. Pope renews the schism tanpng the miyslonarift, 190. 

Clergy, eecular, 151 ; expectant, 151. 

'Common sense, anticipated effects of its right use, ISl . 

Concordate, agreed on among the missionaries, 190 ; broken, 190. 

Congregation, a of Chinese new ckvistians, dispersed, 32. 

Congregationalists, the Portnguese leave Peking, 186. 

Cochinchina, commercially, 127 ; an Envoy from Macao, 169; &cm.Co* 
chinchina, 127; diplomatic mission, 128; its purpose, 128; its 
• result, 129. 

Connexion, politically with Portugal, 68; with Gpa,70; with the Dutch, 
73 ; with the English, 74 ; wkh China, 75. 

Connexion, commercially with China, 82; with Japan, 144; diploraatie 
envoys, 151 ; with Manila, 153 ; witli Timor, 154 ; with Batavia, 155; 
with Goa,155; with Malacca, 156; with Siam, 157; diplomatic mis- 
sion, 158; with Cochinchina, 159; diplomatic conuniasion, 160. 

Constitution of Macao, or mixed government, 37. 

Conventional pact, immediate causes to it, 104. 

Convention for checking the pirates, 112 ; History of the pirate war, 113. 

Colbert's view of missions, 173. 

College, royal at St. Joseph, 39; in fiiU activity, 61. 

College and Seminary, ancient, at 8t Paul's. Its inttitntion and lean 
ing,4a 

Convents, three for men, one for women, 18. 

Council, when con venefl , 63. 

Couto, Diogo de. His silence on the pirate, said to have been vanquished 
by the Portuguese, proiwsthe fallacy of that allegation by later histo- 
rians, 12. 

Custom hpuse. The Portuguefw goyernment has no right to levy dutift 
on any goods but those loaded in ships bona fide Portuguese property 
and duly registered. 

Dayfu-saroa, emperor of^ Japan, unfiriendly to the christians for neaj- 
ons, 117. 

Debt, great to the royal chest, 61 ; pardoned, 65. 

Debt at Canton. Macao owes to its Hoppo, 90. 

Decrees. Wan-kth's banishing the christian priests, 171 ; that of the Tu- 
tors of Kangwhe banish them also, 173 ; Kang-lie decree, that his sub- 
jects shall not embrace the christian religion, 173 ; Kang-he in ftivor 
of Christianity, 175 ; Tung-ching's decree proscribing Christianity, 177; 

X. £ang*he> prohibiting his subjects from navigating the southern seas, 
86 ; this daciee revoked by Yvng^«hiing, 154. ^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



ti iirstt. 

Defence, ancient means of, aetaal, 62. 

Disbursement of public money, 65; 

Dislricts of Macao, parochial, 20. 

Division of Macao, in three parishes, 17. 

Division of China, by Roman Catholic priests, 182. 

Dominican friars, attack the ceremonies of Chin«, 173. 

Donation, a great to John IV. voted; whether remitted or not is doubt- 
ful, 69. 

Donation to the court of Rio de Janeiro, worth, 70. 

Drory , Rear Admiral lands, by convention troops at Macao, 75 ; by another 
he withdraws them, 75. 

Dutch opposed, 32; tlieir attack on Macao defeated, 73. 

Dutch, they blockade Macao ; the result, 74. 

Dutch, tliey assist Kang-he with ships, 35 ; trade to China, ibid. 

Duties, 89 ; paid first in kind at Canton, 90 : then in silver, ibid ; Macao 
indebted to Canton Hoppo, 90 ; Duties regulated, 90 ; no duties to be 
levied by the Senate on foreign ships, 132. 

East Indian trade in the hands of Macao, 120. 
Education, public, 38. 
, Embassy, the Dutch, thwarted by Macao, 33. 
Envoys, Portuguese, 92. 
Euclid, translated in Chinese by Ricci, 169. 
Examination of missionaries, commanded by Kang-he, 175. 
Expeditions, two of the British to Macao, 74. 
Exports, ancient, 82 ; prohibited exports, 130. ' 

Extent, geographical of Macao, 16. 

Falca5, Manoel drives foreign merchant ships into Malocca, 124. 

Faria e Souza, Manoel de. His opinion on the Portuguese settlement st 

Macao, 11. 
FifUi,the king's ; how collected and expended, 60. 
Foo-yuen, Lieutenant governor of one province. 
Forces, the present military, at Macao, 82. 
Foreigners, objection to them, .36 ; beg leave to reside at Macao, opposed., 

ibid ; admitted, ibid ; they are forced to leave Canton, 37 ; advantage 

to Macao, ibid ; foreign trade offered to Macao is rejected, 136. 
Formosa, a Dutch settlement on, 33; Chin-chin-kong took it from the 

Dutch, 35, 
Fortifications. Five forts : Monte, 22 ; Quia, 23 ; Fnujcis, ibid j St Peter, 

ibid; Bomparto, 24; Santiago, ibid. 



Digitized by 



Google 



tVDXX. VU 

¥*ra&ci8 Javier suggests an embassy to China, 116; embarks with the 
envoy, ibid ; dies at San-shan, 7 ; his sepulchral monument, 8. 

Oago, Battezar speaks of a Portuguese fi^ed settlement at Lampacdo, 11. 

Gama, Vasco de reaches the coast of Malabar and Calicut, 1G3. 

"Oama, Sobo de intimates to Tournan to exercise no jurisdiction, contrary 

to the rights of the royal patronage, 192. ' 
Garrison of Macao, 82. 

Gates of the place, St. Anthony, 33 ; St. Lazar, ibid. 
Gerbillan succeeds in preserving peace with Russia, 174. 
Glasspole's, Mr. mistakes, 113. 
Goa conquered, 1. political connexioa, 70; coerces the demagogues of 

Macao, 73 ; commercial intercour^, 123. 
Golovin, Count Theodor Alexi^vich, a Russian ambassador concludes a 

treaty of amity with China, 174. • 
Gomes, Lawrence, vicar general to the bishop of Macao, 193, 
Goods, importation of, prohibited, 130. 
Goods, exportation of, prohibited, ibid. 
Government of Macao, 44 ; pure municipality, 47; its organization, ibid ; 

mixed, 62 ; senate elected, 48 & 63. 
Governor, (see captain general,) he presides in determined cases on the 

Senate, 63; has controlling power, ibid; reports to Goa, ibid; his 

salary, ibid. 
Governor of the bishoprick, distinct from a bishop, 150. 
Governor of the European missionaries at Peking, 182, in a note. 
Gouveya, Dm. Fr. Alexander, bishop of Peking presents through the Gov- 
ernor of the Europeans to the emperor, complaints from Macao, 182. 
Goyer, Peter de, one of the two Dutch envoys sent from Batavia to Shun- 

che, an emperor of China, 33 ; result, 34. 
Goys, Gil de, ah envoy from Goa to Peking, not admitted, 94. 
Guia, a fort, 30 ; signalizes ships, coming to the offing, ibid. 
Green Island, first cultivated by Jesuits, 136; for more than 150 years, 

138; is after the extinction of the society decaying for nearly 50 yean, 

139; -again under culture, 140. 
Ground rent, it amounts to, 140. 

Hanistagem, what that means, 132. 

Harbor, inner, 25. 

Heang-shan, an island conquered, tradition affirms, by the Portuguese, 10; 
on it they owned landed estates, 13; occupied by the Chinese, ibid ; 
the seat of a Mandarin, who exercises jurisdiction at Macao, in civil 
and criminal cases, 80 ; his actual influence with Maseao, 108. 

42 



Digitized by 



Google 



tiii itii/zt^ 

lienry, Cardinal, king of Portugal, 69. 

Hermitages, the Hope, 20 ', Guia, ibid ; Penha, ibid. 

Hidalkan, the same as Adil-khan^ 123. 

Hierarchy of Macao, 150 *, its support, 152. 

Hilario do Sta. Rosa, Dm. Fr. bishop of Macao goes as an envoy of Mscncf 

to Lisbon, 103. 
History of the trade, 82. 
Homicides, at first executed in Canton, 81 ; then at Macao by a dnnese 

executioner, ibid ; actually by a duAstian executioner at Macao, 64. 
Hong, an association of Chinese merchants, 37. ^ 
Hoppo, grand the collector of imperial imports at Macao, residing on 

** Praya pequena," at the inner passage, 86 ; protects foreign ships, ibid > 

measures those of Macao, 89 > by a fixed regulation, ibid. 
Hoppoy a, on " Praya grande," why established, 89; extorts money from 

strangers who land, ibid ; or re-embaik, ibid^ 

Japan, discovered, 115; Roman Catholic mission, 116; decree against the 
missionaries, 117; friars crucified, ibid; missionaries banished, 118; 
commercial intercourse with the Portuguese and Spaniards, 118 ; with ■ 
the Dutch and English, ibid ; the Spaniards expelled, ibid ;■ the Portu- 
guese sent from Decima, ibid ; the trade in Japan free from charges^ 
118 ; the Portuguese import, 1 18 ; export, ibid ; supposed motives for 
excluding foreigners from Japan — diplomatic missions, 120. 

Japanese, shipwrecked are sent in a Macao ship to Japan, 120 ; the Portu^ 
guese forbidden ever to appear again on the coast of Japan, ibid. 

Idale, a prince of Japan sends an envoy to the king of Spain and Por-^ 
tugal, 117. 

Jesuits, the confirmed, 183; are allowed to trade, 187; king JosepH 1. of 
Portugal abolishes in all his dominions the society of Jesus, 138. 

Immunity, church, 156. 

Importations, ancient^ 82. 

Importations, actually prohibited, 130, 

Industry of the inhabitants of Macao, 33, 

Influence of the municipal senate in political matters, 49 ; in the ec(Hiomi' 
cal, 57. 

Innocent X. Pope, proscribes the ceremonies of China as superstitious, 190, 

Innocent XII. Pope, fixes the extent of the three Roman Catholic bishop' 
ricks in China, 182. 

Installation of the governor, 63 ', of the chief justice, ibid ; of the bishop 
ibid. 

Institutions, clutritable, 40. 



Digitized by 



Google 



tnlercoune, correlative, with China, 109. 

John, Duke of Bragan9a, proclaimed at Macao, John IX. king of Portu^, 
67 ; donative to him from Macao, ibid ; his ambassador to Japan, 120. 

John V. king of Portugal, sends an ambassador t6 China, 97. 

Joseph I. king of Portugal, annihilates in his dominions, the order of Jes- 
uits, 138 ; his embassy, to China, 103, 
' IsmailofF, Leoff Vasili6vich, a Russian ambassador, his audience, 99. 

Judges, the ordinary, are members of the Senate, 46 : their duty, ibid. 

Justice, chief, superintends the election of municipal officers, 45 ; his sala- 
ry, 56; the Chinese plead their causes against the christians at his 
tribunal, 64 ; they refuse his summons when they are accused by 
christians, ibid. 

Kang-he. A letter to him from the Senate of Macao, 76 ; a list of presents 
to him, 77 ; he opens the ports of China, to foreign trade, 35 ; limits it 
to Canton, 37; forbids his subjects to trade to the countries south- ward 
of China, 85 ; makes an offer to Macao of all foreign trade. 

Kang-h6, a Chinese pass-port, delivered to Alexander Metello, 97 ; his ob* 
jection to a word in it, 98. 

Kaegler, Ignatius, recalled from Canton to court, 178. 

Kesmpfer, on the profit of the trade with Japan, 118. 

Kea-king's order that the missionaries at Peking shall live together in the 
precinct of one church, 185. 

Keen4ung's edict in favor of shipwrecked foreigners, 110, a note; he 
sanctions the death-warrant of a missionary bishop, 178; considers 
mabometans and christians to be the same sect, 180 ; pardons impris- 
ed missionaries, ibid. 

Keyser, Jacob de, one of the envoys from Batavia to Peking, 33. 

Keen, J. P. sends a Dutch squadron against Macao, 32. 

Lampacdo, an island at which the Portuguese trade, 10 ; and had fixed ha- 
bitations, ibid. 

Lawrence, St. a Parish-church, 17. 

Lazarits French Mission at Peking, the last member ever sent to Canton, 
185. 

Legates. Why they were sent, 187; Ruggiero, a missionary proceeds to 
Rome, and solicits the Pope's protection, ibid ; missionaries disagree 
on the signification of certain Chinese characters, and on the ceremo- 
nies of China. 190; their dispute subsides for a short time by a con, 
cordate they had signed, ibid ; Clement IXth's decree revives the 
pristine animosity, 190 ; Maigrot's opinion confirmed by Clement X£. 
191 ; he sends Tournan to enforce his decree, 191 ; the Legate pHb* 



Digitized by 



Google 



lishes for that purpose a mandate, he is banished from China, l'92f j^ 
and by order of Kang-he detained at Macao, ibid ; Mezzabarba, Clem^ 
ent Xllh's legate lands at Macao, 194 ; he endeavors to obtain Kang- 
he's consent to the bull " ex ilia die," 195; the emperor rejects it, ibid ^ 
Mezzabarba grants eight permissions, ibid ; and returns to Europe,! 89 ^ 
two friars sent by Benedict XIV, wait on Yung-ching, ibid ; their pe- 
tition, 196 ; the emperor's reply, ibid. 

Leite, Fruduoso Gomes, an envoy from Macro to Cocbinchina, 127. 

Liampo, or Lyangpo, in the neighborhood of Ning-po-foo : the Portuguescr . 
had there a great settlement and trade, 2; reduced to a heap of ashe» 
by the Chinese, 3. 

Library, a formed by English gentlemen in the honorable company's ser- 
vice, 37. 

Lieu, Philip an abettor of clandestine transmission of Roman Catliolitf 
priests in China, apprehended, 17&. 

Lintin, an island at which opium skips principally ta-ke their station, 131. 

Loucad, Manoel Cordosa, a purser, spared by the Japanese, and sent back 
to Macao, that he might tell the fate of the ambassadors from Macao to 
Japan, 120. 
. Louvois, Marquis de sends missionaries to China, 173. 

Macao. Its topography, J 6 ; geographical situation, ibid ; strangers settled 
by bribery, 26 ; the settlers c]aim the protection of Portugal, 68', they 
send an envoy to tlie viceroy of the province, 77; they are allowed to 
remain, t7, they were to be removed to another place, 77; Macao on 
the eve of being laid waste, 138 ; the foreign trade twice proffered ta 
Macao, 86. 

Magalhaens, Anthony Kang-he's envoy to John V. 97. 

Mahomet, orMahmud, sultan of Malacca deprived of his sovereignty by 
the Portuguese, 123 ; claims, as vassal of China its protection, 92.. 

Mahometans, accuse the Portuguese, 92. 

Mahometan i^ects, 179 ; dispute between them, ibid ; consequence, ibid. 

Maigrot, Charles imparts new life to the controversy of missionaries in 
China, 175 & 191. 

Malacca, 191 ; its ancient population, ibid ; Afonso Dalbo^uerque drive* 
the sovereign from his capital, ibid ; forces foreign ships to trade at 
Malacca, 124 ; a toll levied on ships passing the strait, ibid ; regulation 
for checking the plunder of public officers, ibid ; Malacca suri^ndeni 
to the Dutch, ioid ; its population at that time, ibid. 

Man-chow Tartars, invited as auxiliaries, 172; conquer China, ibid. 

Mandarin, a civil, established at Macao, 79 ; his jurisdiction, ibid ; at prev- 
ent an assistant Mandarin resides within the city, 108. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Mandarin interference, 108. 

Mandarin house for the temporary accommodation of civil officer from the 
district, 108. 

Manila. The Portuguese of Macao have the whole trade, 115; animosity 
against Spaniards, 160 ; it occasions the loss of the trade with Manila, 
ibid ; Spanish ships from Manila are actually favored, 121. 

Map of the Roman Catholic christians (1810) in China, 188; and Eastern 
Asia, ibid. 

Map of a missionary section of China, sent by Adiodato, causes a persecu- 
tion, 183. 

Mascarenhas, George proceeds from San-shan to Fuh-kSen, 2 ; and Che' 
keang, ibid. 

Mascarenhas, Dm. Francis. During his government, Macao is walled and 
better fortified, 24. 

Martini, Martin proves the ceremonies in China to be free from supersti- 
tion, 190. 

Mathan, an Eunuch favors Ricci and his companion going to Peking, 169. 

Means of defence, 81. 

Measurement of ships, 81 ; how made, ibid. 

Meeting, in council, 82. 

Mello Continho, Martin Alfonso de, the Chinese pick a qdarrel with him, 
when he was steering towards Tamdo, and defeat his squadron, 7. 

Meneyes, Alexander Metello de Souza e a king John Vth's ambassador to 
China, 97 ; his arrival at Macao, ibid : correspondence with the viceroy 
97 ; consultation at Macao with some select members of the place, ibid j 
sends an express to the emperor, 98. 

Meneyes, Dm. Duarto de grants to Macao privileges, liberties, and rank^ ' 
47 ; assigns a revenue to the missionaries in China, 187. 

Meneyes, Anthony Joseph Tellas de involves Macao in difficulties by in" 
suiting the grand Hoppo, 136 ; and by protecting tWo murderers, 105. 

Men-of-war, when they must be measured, 89; 

Merchandise, which ought not to be imported, 130. 
do. " " " exported, ibid. 

Menthen, John a treaty concluded by him connects intimately Portugal to 
Great Britain, 74. 

Mezzabarba, Charles Ambrose, patriarch of Alexandria, Clement Xlth's le- 
gate to China, 114 ; see Legates. 

Minister, the same as Ouvidor general or chief justice, exercises extensive 
powers, 64 ; at his tribunal Chinese plead against christians, 64 ; but 
being accused by a christian, the Chinese refuse to attend to his 
summons, ibid. 



Digitized by 



Google 



301 tlflXXX. 

Misericordia, when instituted, 40 ; its board composed of, ibid ; incooMi 
48 ; outlay, ibid ; charities bestowed on the publio, ibid ; the adminis* 
tration examined by the minister, 43. 

Mission, Roman Catholic in China, 1G3; Jesuits succeed in establishing 
it, 165; they get leave to reside at Shauo-king-foo, 166; are expelled 
and settle with permission at Shaou-chow-foo, 167 ; Ricci founds relig* 
ious institutions at Nan-chang-foo, 168; Soo-chow-foo, 169; Nan<- 
king, ibid ; and Peking, 169; in them and the collateral branches the 
Roman tenets were secretly taught, 170. 

Mission, Roman Catholic its actual state in the bishoprick of Macao, 161. 

Missionaries, required qualifications in, 218 ; that they may be useful, ibid; 
in China they dressed at first as Bonzes, 166; then they adopt- 
ed the dress of the Literati, 168 ; Ricci prescribes rules for teach- 
ing their doctrine, 170 ; these rules were accused of idolatry by Dom- 
inicans and other missionaries, 189 ; rites and ceremonies of China, 
reputed civil, 175 & 189 ; then superstitious, 189 ; how the missiona- 
ries were supported, 187 ; missionaries in Peking leave the court and 
depart, 185. 

Missionaries and Mandarins agree ,« 1 82. 

" " disagree, 183. 

Monastery of St. Clare, instituted by, 22 ; governed, ibid ; its income, ibid* 

Mong-ha, an extensive Chinese village in the Campo, 38. , 

Monte, a fort, 23. 

Monument, sepulchral, of St. Francis Xavier, 12. 

Moro, a Japanese Roman Catholic christian in the Portuguese service, ac- 
cused of being the chief of an intended revolution in Japan, 119. 

Mourning at the death of emperors in China commanded by the Senate, 77. 

Municipal government, 47 ; instituted, ibid ; its charter, 48 ; constitutional 
deed, ibid; examples of use and misuse of power, 65 &80. 

Murder, a Chinese slain by a stranger, 81 ; the culprit secured and exam- 
ined by the Portuguese justice, ibid ; a Mandarin inspects the dead 
body and ascertains the crime, ibid ; the criminal put to death at Can- 
ton, ibid ; latterly at Macao by a christian executioner, 82 ; a Europe- 
an killed by a Chinese, the sentence of death must be sanctioned by 
the emperor. 

Museum, a founded by young English amateurs, of natural history, 38. 

Nangasaki, a port in Japan, where the Portuguese and Spanish vessels used 
to trade, 1 18. 

Narrative, historical of Macao, 12. 

Navarette, Dominic breaks the concordate and attacks anew the ceremo- 
nies of China, 190. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Kavigation prohibited to the Chinese , 86; permitted to Macao, ibid; ships 
arrival reported to Ihe ^and Hoppo and other Mandarins, 86 ; her car- 
go, ibid ; her departure likewise, ibid ; actual shipping of Macao, 129* 

Ning-po, otherwise Liampo, English Lyang-po, where the Portuguese had 
a settlement, 2 ; .they were expelled, why, 5. 

Noronha, Dm. Alfonso de sends an envoy to China, 93. 

Nunnery, or monastery •f St. Clare, 20. 

Nuns bring a fixed portion, 20 ; witli an exception, ibid. 

Officers, subaltern of the Senate, 51. • 

Oitem, or Oiteng, on Lapa or priest's island, where the Jesuits had a set" 
tlement, 140 ; the history of it, 140. 

Opium and slave trade compared, 29 ; imported to China, 131 ; importation 
prohibited, 130 ; attempts to make it a monopoly at Macao, 174 ; quan- 
tity imported to Macao in 1834^ 131. 

Ouvidor, or chief justice, were at first laymen or attornies, they are com- 
plained of, 56 ; their salary, ibid. 

Pact, conventional between the Portuguese and China, 104 ; translated, see 

Appendix, No. viii. 
Pagod, Arna, 16; three in the Campo^ 42. 
Pantoja, Diogo, a Spanish Jesuit went with Ricci to Peking, 169. 
Passage, the inner from Macao to Canton, 83; Togo, by that way a Chinese 

pass is required, ibid. 
Pass-port Sea, from the grand Hoppo at Canton, 88 ; warrants the ship to 

belong to Macao, ibid ; and ensures to her Mandarin assistance, ibid. 
Patan6, a village in the Campo, 30 & 32. 
Patronage, the king of Portugal's examined, 148. 

Paul St. a collegiate church, ancient seminary and college of the Jesuits, 40* 
Paul, or Sice, a Chinese neophite amends the translation of Euclid by 

Ricci, 168 ) he causes the.decree of Wan-leih against the christians to 

be repealed , 171. 
Paul III, pope, confirms the society of Jesus, 163; employs the members 

as missionaries in China, 164. ^| 

Pautoo, a list of the candidates for the triennial government of Macao, 46. 
Pe-hou, an island among the Siseadores or Pong-hou, occupied by the 

Dutch, 32; fortified by Chinese prisoners, 33; the fort raised, ibid. 
Penella, Matthias, the judge of Macao proceeds with the interpreter, a Jes- 
uit, to Shaou-king-foo, 78 ; with rich presents, 79; obtains leave from 

the viceroy for the inhabitants of Macao to remain, ibid. 
Pereira, Diogo leaves Goa, as envoy for China, 93 ; is detained at Malacca, 

ibid; becomes governor of Macao, ibid. 



J 



Digitized by 



Google 



&▼ IVDBS. 

Fereir&y Laneerate de cansea the min of liampo, 4. 

Pereira, Joseph a Jesuit, through his intercession Macao ships were allowed 
to sail to the southward of China, 86. 

Peres, Thome An envoy from Groa to China, 99 ; suffers death, 93. 

Peres telio, Raphael goes with permission from Malacca in ajankto China» 
1 ; his success, 2. 

Pirates surrender, 114. 

Population, 17. 

Prerogatives of senatorial rank, 63 } their progenj, ibid. 

Presents, a list of, to Kang-he, 77. 

Presents to high Mandarins who visit Macao, 108. 

Privileges claimed by the Portuguese, 110. 

Processions, the most celebrated at Macao, 154. 

Procurator. The title he takes in writing to the Mandarins, 29 ; how de- • 
signaled by the Chinese, ibid ; he ought to send Chinese culprits to 
tlie Mandarins of the district, ibid ; he lends his asssistance to foreign- 
ers in settling their disputes with the Chinese, 37; he announces the 
arrival and departure of Macao ships to, 86; assists at the measure- 
ment of ships, 87; he procures a sea-pass for Macao ships,- 87; he is a 
member of the Senate, 48 ; and the organ of communication with the 
Mandarins, ibid. 

Propaganda fide, the missionariies of leave Peking, 185; their property sold 
and the proceeds remitted, 185. 

Receipts and expenditure of public money, 65. 

Recreations, the Chinese at Macao, objected to, 156. 

Regulations for a mixed government, 63. 

Regulations fur measurement, 88 ; for duties, 90. 

Rent-ground. Its origin, 75 ; has been various, ibid ; its actual amount, 
ibid. 

Residents, foreign are allowed to hire hoxses, 37. 

Respondentia, money gAnted, 61 ; principal paid after the ship's safe ar- 
rival, 66; and premium, ibid. 

Restoration of the house of Bragan^a to the throne of Portugal, 68. 

Revenue, deficient by increased expenses and mismanagement, 65 ; collect- 
ed by the treasurer, 65 ; see royal chest. 

Reyerszoon, Kornelis commands a Dutch expedition against Macao, 165; 
the Portuguese narrative of the affair, ibid. 

Ricci, Mathew a man of erudition came from India to Macao, 165 ; changes 
the garb of a Bonze for that of the Literati, 168; establishes at differ- 
ent places Roman Catholic churches, (see missionaries 221 and subs.) 



Digitized by 



Google 



he is made tiuperior of all the missionaries in China, 168 ; he settles at 
Peking, 169; publishes a tract under the title '< Divine Law," and ex- 
pired in Peking, 177 ; he was not allowed publicly to teach or preach 
the tenets of his sect, 170. 

Rodrigrues, John, a Portuguese Jesuit comes from Peking to negotiate with 
Macao an auxiliary force against the Eastern Tartars, 169 ', he had his 
tomb on Oiteng, 141. 

Ruggiero, Miguel the first Jesuit who taught Christianity in China, 165 ; 
serves as interpreter to an envoy of Macao, who waited on the vice- 
roy at Shaou-king-foo, 79 & 195 ; he bribes the viceroy and obtains 
permission for missionaries to remain in the provincial capital, 166 ; 
Vertignano sends him to Rome, that he may explain to his holiness 
the state of China, 189. * 

Rosa, St. de Lima, an asylum for female orphans, with a chapel, 42. 

Rosa, Anthony Vicente goes from Cochinchina with an envoy to Groa, 138 ; 
comes back to Macao Wearing the garb of a Mandarin, 129. 

Saldanha, Emanuel de, an ambassador from Goa to China : his arrival at 
Macao, 95 ; he consults with a select body of the municipality, ibid ; 
presents brought for the court of Peking and Mandarins, 96. 

Sampayo, Francis Xavier Facheco e, ambassador from Joseph I. to China, 
103 ; declared tor be no tribute bearer, ibid ; his presents to the Emper- 
or, ibid. 

San-shan, by corruption St. John, 6 ; foreigners trade at that island, ibid ; 
sepulchral monmnent of St. Francis Xavier on that island, 9. 

Sanchez, Father Alonso, firom Manila manages the union of Macao with 
Spain, 69. 

Sandomel, Count de, governor-general of Portuguese India, places at the 
head of the Senate a governor and captain general, 55; his orders are 
opposed, ibid ; he commands that the imperial proposition of making 
Macao the emporium of foreign trade, should be rejected, 106 ; obser- 
vations on this order, 130. 

Santiago, or Bar-fort with a chapel, dedicated to Santiago, 24. 

Sanz, Peter Martyr, a titular bishop, capitally punished for having taught 

Christianity, 178. ^'^ / 

Shal, John Adam mediates with Kang-he in favor of Macao, 85. * 

Schedel, Frederic from Formosa to negotiate at Canton free trade with the 
Dutch, 33 ; why he did not succeed, ibid. 

Scott, Francis an Englishman, his melancholy fate, 81. 

Ships, Macao, precluded from Canton, 83; Macao ships condemned, 85 ; 

43 



Digitized by 



Google 



how many they were in the latter end of the 17th century, 105 ; how 
many in 1834, 129. 

Schools, kind's, 38. 

Ship-building, 90. 

Sebastian I. king of Portugal sends an envoy to China, 99. 

Secretary to the Senate ought to be a man of parts, 61. 

Senate-house, inscription over the outer door, 23. 

Senate, a collected body of elected citizens constituting a municipality, 45; 
twenty-one persons are by electors chosen for the triennial service, 
ibid; two ordinary judges, 46 ; three aldermen, one procurator, and a 
treasurer, for every year, ibid ; the Senate in conjunction with the 
govemcM: and the chief justice, administer the revenue, 65 ; in their 
presence, the Senate take from the treasurer his accounts, ibid ; in all 
cases concerning public money, peace and harmony with the Chinese 
and foreigners, the governor presides, 65 ; in all properly munieipal 
cases one of the aldermen, takes alternately the presidency, 63 ; mat- 
ters under consideration are decided by the plurality of votes, with a 
few exceptions, 64 ; documents registered in the Secretary's office, in 
the Senate-house, 63 ; the day when a governor, a chief justice or a 
bishop shall lawfully be invested in their respective functions is pub- 
lished by the Senate, ibid; the Senate can levy no duties on any other 
than Macao ships, 133. 

Settlements, temporary, 1 ; fixed, 12 ; suburban, 134. 

Siam, a kingdom, 224; Macao indebted to Siam, 126; debt paid, ibid; 
diplomatic transactions, 125 ; a Portuguese counsel appointed, 126; 
does no business, 127. 

Slaves, anciently many were imported, 29 ; actually few, ibid. 

So-san, prince concludes a treaty of peace with Russia, 174 ; makes Kang- 
he sanction a decree in favor of Christianity, 175. 

Succor against the Eastern Tartars, 109. 

Summons from a viceroy, 78 ; he receives bribes and suffers the Portuguese 
to remain at Macao, 79. 

Summons, the Chinese refuse to attend on those of the chief justice, 132. 

Syndicantes, or magistrates coming from Goa, accuses of partiality, 56. 

§hun-che, the first sovereign of the present dynasty. 

Tamio on San-fehan,a port foreigners traded at, 6. 

Ta-tsing,the present dynasty of China, is so denominated. 

Tayco-sama, an emperor of Japan, 116; prohibits Christianity ,117 ; irnds 

capuchin friars to death, iUd ; he expires, ibid ; he fkvoia fbieign trade 
. 118 ; regulates the imposts on trade, ibid ; a treaty of commerce with 

Manila, 118. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Teizeira, Gon^alo oarries presenti from Macao to Peking, 75. 

Teizeira, Diogo de Finho, causes scandalous disorders at Macao, 50. 

Timor, an island producing sandal-wood, 123. 

Topography oTthe peninsula, 15. 

Tournan, Charles Thomas MaiUard de, cardinal, Clement Xlth's legate to 
China, 191 ; is sent from Peking an exile to Macao, 192 ; acting against 
the royal patronage he is imprisoned, 193 ; at Macao where he dies, 
193. 

Trade, free to China, 83 ; suspended, 86. 

Trade of Macao. History of its trade, 8S; Macao ships resort to Canton, 
)82; Macao merchants disagree with the Chinese, 63; Macao riiips 
precluded from Canton, ibid ; by the order of an emperor finally ex- 
cluded, 83 ; permission to navigate to the southward of China, 85 ; ad- 
vantages which Macao still possess, see actual state of the trade at Ma- 
cao, 129; ships, that (1834) belonged to the place, 129. 

Tribute, probably changes into ground-rent, 75. 

Tribunal, the supreme << a Ralacad " of Goa, 46 ; composed of, ibid. 

Tsin-kong, its meaning, 98 ; changed to Ly, ibid ; a'note. 

Tso-tang, a Mandarin assistant, the natural judge of the Chinese at Macao, 
108 ; organ of communication with the higher Mandarins, ibid ', he 
permits ship owners to repair old ships, 92. 

Tsung-ttlh, a or viceroy of Kwang-tung and Kwang-se, summoned the 
Portuguese authorities at Macao before his tribunal, 79 ; grants to the 
inhabitants permission to remain on condition, ibid. 

Typa, the outer harbor ; its relation to Macao, 24. 

Valignano, Alexander visitor of India and Japan, devises a plan for intro- 
ducing cfatristiaiiky in China, 165 , and also for buying land fys the 

« support of missionaries, 187 ^ he sends Ruggiero to Rome| 187. 

Vassalage, demonstoation of, 77. 

Verbiest, Ferdinanda German Jesuit, 172; obtains of Kang-be leaye for 
banished mitoionaries to return to their ohurohes, 173. 

Yioaxages, Roman Catholic, in China, 168. 

Vicars, apostolic, govern Chinese christians, 182 ; appointed by, ibid ; con- 
firmed by, ibid. ^ y 

Wall, the north-eastern, 23 ; the south western, 24. , >-. 

Wan-leih, receives Ricci and favors him, 169 ; orders a memorial, relative 

to the newly introduced christian sect to be examined, 170. 
War, m«n of, when measured, 89. 
Widdel, John opposed by Macao in his pursuit to open trade with China, 84. 



Digitized by 



Google 



XWm , IVDBX 

Wybrand Tan Warwick, attempts to open a trade for the Dutch with 
China, 32 ; Macao prevents it, ibid. 

Ynen, a dynasty in China, descending from the family of Cljing-khis-khan 
163. 

Ynng-ching limits the shipping of Macao, 86 ; offers to Macao the empo- 
rium of foreign trade, ibid ', his answer to papal carmelites, 196. 

Zay, Peter transports missionaries to diflferent parts of China, 179 ; on the 

eve of being apprehended he escapes, 179. 
Zelandia, a castle, built by the Dutch on Formosa, 33. 
Zemudio, Dm. Juan de, an envoy from Manila to Canton, 22. 



THE END. 



ERRATA. 

Page 1 21 lines from top, for << parenthesis," read <' parentheses." 

" 8 37 « «« '* « "cubics," « "cubits." 

<i 8 39 " « " « "will," « "will." 

" 14 7 " « « " "Tratodos," " "Tratados." 

" 77 24 " " " " "treade," " "treacle." 

" 82 32 " " « " "sticks,'' " "ingots." 

" 106 12 « " " " "pieces," " "ingots." 

« 132 34 " " " « "SoOdoUaw," « " 2«k) dollari." 



SJ' 



Digitized by 



Google Lti 



Digitized by 



Google 



.^iwn V r.' • II 



RETURN TO the circulation desl< of any 
University of California Library 

or to the 

PP NORTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

^^ BIdg. 400, Richmond Field Station 

TC University of California 

1Z Richmond, CA 94804-4698 



AU 
Ror 
BO( 



ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS 

• 2-month loans may be renewed by calling 
(510)642-6753 

• 1-year loans may be recharged by bringing 
books to NRLF 

• Renewals and recharges may be made 
4 days prior to due date 





DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 


^ um^i^m 




(APftO4 2005 


— APR i 3 2008 












DD20 12M 1-05 



FORM NO. DD6 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY 
BERKELEY CA 94720-6000 



Digitized by 



Goo 



YC 42324 



•iil!S»l»** 



^000«^3'^ft0'l 



X 



^> 



;\ 



r 




Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



