■tHntsvfiEnHBB 


i  v 


1 


3Sp  gutijorttp. 
HAYTIAN  PAPERS. 


COLLECTION 

OF  THE  VERY 

INTERESTING  PROCLAMATIONS, 

AND   OTHER 

OFFICIAL  DOCUMENTS; 

TOGETHER   WITH 

SOME  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  RISE,  PROGRESS,  AND 
PRESENT  STATE 

OF 

THE  KINGDOM  OF  HAYTL 


WITH  A  PREFACE 

BY 

PRINCE    SANDERS,    ESQ. 

AGENT    FOR    THE    HAYTIAN    GOVERNMENT. 


LONDON : 

PRINTED    FOR    W.    REED,    LAW    BOOKSELLER, 
NO.   17,   FLEET  STREET. 

1816. 


CONTENTS. 


Editor's  Address    i 

Extracts  from  the  Registers  of  the  Deliberations  of  the 

Consuls  of  the  Republic     .  . . . , 1 

Narrative  of  the  Accession  of  their  Royal  Majesties  to  the 

Throne  of  Hayti,  &c 55 

State  of  Hayti.     Proclamation,   &c Qg 

Constitutional  Law,  &c 124 

Manifesto  of  the  King 154 

Reflections  of  the  Editor 1Q2 

Royal  Gazette  of  Hayti igs 

Proclamation 200 

Reflections  on  the  Abolition  of  the  Slave  Trade 2 15 


TO  THE  PUBLIC. 


f. 


A 


I  am  induced  to  lay  the  following  Transla- 
tions of  Haytian  State  Papers,  in  conjunction 
with  some  extracts  from  their  ordinary  Pub- 
lications, before  the  British  people  generally, 
in  order  to  give  them  some  more  correct  infor- 
mation with  respect  to  the  enlightened  sys- 
tems of  policy,  the  pacific  spirit,  the  altogether 
domestic  views,  and  liberal  principles  of  the 
Government;  and  also  to  more  obviously 
evince  the  ameliorated  and  much  improved 
condition  of  all  classes  of  society  in  that  new 
and  truly  interesting  Empire  (with  which  I 
have  the  honour  to  be  connected)  than  I  am 
inclined  to  think  have  hitherto  been  fully 
known  or  understood  in  this  country. 

For  I  am  deeply  penetrated  with  the  con- 
viction, that  it  is  only  necessary  that  the  ac- 
tual  character  and   feelings  of  the    Ilaytians 

b 


mm  rmTramrnr-m,, 


n 


jp: 


should  be  made  apparent,  to  most  assuredly 
and  most  satisfactorily  allay  all  those  appre- 
hensions of  their  interference  with  the  in- 
ternal regulations  of  neighbouring  powers, 
which  the  enemies  to  the  Abolition  of  the  Slave 
Trade,  and  the  foes  to  all  attempts  at  the  im- 
provement and  elevation  of  the  African  race, 
would,  by  their  misrepresentations  and  false 
statements,  endeavour  to  excite  in  the  minds 
of  this  nation  of  genuine  philanthropists. 
But  to  the  immortal  honour  of  noble  and  gene- 
rous Englishmen  be  it  said,  their  hearts  are  in 
general  attuned  to  the  exercise  of  more  hu- 
mane, and  more  rationally  illumined  views  and 
sentiments.  O  happy  England!  to  thee  most 
appropriately  belong  the  exalted  appellations 
of  protectress  of  the  Christian  world ;  the 
strong  hold  of  rational  freedom ;  the  li- 
beratress  as  well  as  the  genuine  asylum  for 
oppressed  humanity,  and  the  promulgatress  of 
civilization,  knowledge,  and  piety  to  every  re- 
gion of  the  globe.  In  thee  we  see  a  practical 
exemplification  of  those  principles  of  benevo- 
lence and  kind  affection  which  encompass  the 
human  character  with  an  imperishable  lustre  of 
glory  and  honour. 


Ill 


Having  understood  that  it  nas  often  been 
insinuated   by    those    few   individuals,    whose 
habitual  labour  is  the  perversion,  (and  as  far 
as  they  are  able,)  the  absolute  destruction  of 
every   object  which  has   a  tendency   to  show 
that   the  Blacks   possess,   to  any   considerable 
extent,    that   portion   of    natural    intelligence 
which  the  beneficent  Father  of  all  ordinarily 
imparts    to   His   children;   I   say,   being   con- 
vinced, that  for  these  inglorious  and  malevolent 
purposes,    such   persons   have  endeavoured  to 
impress  the  public   with  the  idea,   that  those 
official    documents    which    have    occasionally 
appeared  in  this  country,  are  not  written  by 
black  Haytians  themselves ;  but  that  they  are 
either  written    by    Europeans   in   this    coun- 
try, or  by  some  who,  they  say,  are  employed 
for  that  purpose  in  the  public  offices  at  Hayti ; 
and,    for  the    entire   refutation   of  this   gross 
misrepresentation,  I  upon  my  honour  declare, 
that  there  is  not  a  single  white  European  at 
present  employed   in    writing    at   any  of  the 
public  offices ;  and    that  all  the  public  docu- 
ments are  written  by  those  of  the  King's  Se- 
cretaries whose  names  they  bear,  and  that  they 
are  all  black  men,  or  men  of  colour. 


IV 


It  is  my  humble,  though  sincere  opinion, 
that  no  one  can  visit  Hayti  at  this  period,  and 
have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  decency  of 
manners,  the  apparent  cheerfulness,  the  hap- 
piness and  industry  which  prevail  among  all 
grades  of  the  community,  without  being  struck 
with  the  astonishing  accuracy  with  which  it  has 
pleased  God  to  bring  to  pass  a  state  of  society 
there,  the  very  idea  of  the  establishment  of  which 
in  that  country  Mr.  Bryan  Edwards  observed,  in 
his  History  of  St.  Domingo,  "  is  so  pleasing  to 
the  imagination,  that  every  humane  and  re- 
flecting mind  must  wish  it  may  be  realized." 

Says  Mr.  Edwards,  "  I  might  here  expatiate 
upon  the  wonderful  dispensations  of  Divine 
Providence  in  raising  up  enslaved  Africans  to 
avenge  the  wrongs  of  the  injured  Aborigines  ; 
I  might  also  indulge  the  fond  but  fallacious  idea, 
that,  as  the  negroes  of  St  Domingo  have  been 
eye-witnesses  of  the  benefits  of  civilized  life 
among  the  whites;  have  seen  in  what  manner 
and  to  what  extent  social  order,  sober  indus- 
try, and  submission  to  the  laws,  contribute  to 
individual  and  general  prosperity  (advantages 
which  were  denied  to  them  in  their  native 
country),    some  superior  spirits  may  hereafter 


rise  up  among  them,  by  whose  encouragement 
and  example  they  may  be  taught,  in  due  time, 
to  discard  the  ferocious  and  sordid  manners 
and  pursuits  of  savage  life;  to  correct  their 
vices,  and  be  led  progressively  on  to  civiliza- 
tion and  gentleness,  to  the  knowledge  of 
truth,  and  the  practice  of  virtue! 

"  This  picture  (then  continues  he)  is  so 
pleasing  to  the  imagination,  that  every  humane 
and  reflecting  mind  must  wish  it  may  be  real- 
ized ;  but  I  am  afraid  it  is  the  mere  creation  of 
the  fancy,  the  fabric  of  a  vision  !" 

If  it  had  pleased  God  to  spare  Mr.  Edwards 
to  this  time,  and  he  had  been  permitted  to  re- 
visit Hayti  in  its  present  improved  state,  I  am 
inclined  to  think  he  would  be  ready  to  exclaim, 
"  I  now  behold  here  a  scene  of  things,  the  mo- 
mentary anticipation  of  the  possibility  of  the 
existence  of  which  among  these  people,  a  few 
years  since,  seemed  to  me  like  the  "  mere 
creation  of  the  fancy,"  and  the  "  fabric  of  a 

vision." 

■ 
They  are  now  blest  with  a  Sovereign,  whose 

sincere  desire,  and  firmly  settled  purpose,  most 

obviously  appears   to  be  the  elevation  of  the 


l -kArTflSLM^IlJ 


VI 


characters,  and  the  improvement  of  the  hearts 
and  lives,  of  all  the  various  classes  of  society. 
It  especially  appears  to  be  his  object  to  ame- 
liorate the  condition  and  improve  the  character 
of  the  humblest  class,  namely,  that  of  the 
plantation  labourers.  For  the  full  confirmation 
of  the  truth  of  this  fact,  the  following  extracts 
from  the  laws  relating  to  the  agricultural  inte- 
rest, and  management  in  all  its  relative  de- 
partments and  bearings,  will  be  most  satis- 
factory to  every  reflecting  and  unprejudiced 
mind. 

P.  SANDERS. 


■EnxwEEBnamru 


CODE    HENRI 


LAW   RESPECTING  THE   CULTURE. 

Titre  1,  Chap.  1. 

The  proprietors  and  farmers  of  land  are 
bound  to  treat  their  respective  labourers  with 
true  paternal  solicitude  ;  an  obligation  which 
it  is  greatly  for  their  own  interest  to  fulfil  in  its 
utmost  extent. 

2  Chap.  16  par.  Page  5. 

The  law  exacts  from  the  labourers  in  return 
a  reciprocal  attention  to  the  welfare  and  in- 
terest of  the  landlord  and  farmer. 

Titre  4,  Pa.  56. 

In  lieu  of  wages,  the  labourers  in  plantations 
shall  be  allowed  a  full  fourth  of  the  gross  pro- 
duct, free  from  all  duties  and  expenses  to  the 
time  of  removal. 


• 


■aaKranraatt^JS^jLri^T^-k.11 


vnt 


Page  1,  Art.  I.  It  is  the  King's  express  order, 
that  on  every  complaint  of  the  cultivators 
against  their  landlords  and  farmers,  the  lieu- 
tenant commanding  in  the  parish  shall  imme- 
diately attend  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case; 
and  on  proof  of  the  grievance,  report  to  the 
the  general  of  the  district,  who  shall  thereupon 
transmit  the  same  to  the  privy  council,  who 
shall  decide  on  the  case,  and  pronounce  sen- 
tence of  punishment  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  offence. 

On  refusal  of  this  parish  officer  to  enter  into 
the  business,  the  plaintiff  is  authorised  to  ad- 
dress the  commandant ;  in  default  of  whose  in- 
terference he  may  address  the  general  of  divi- 
sion ;  and,  if  need  be,  the  privy  council  direct. 

III.  No  landlord  or  farmer  has  authority  to 
reject  any  cultivator  from  his  habitation  on  pre- 
text of  illness  or  infirmity. 

IV.  An  hospital  shall  be  built  on  every 
plantation  wherein  the  sick  labourers  shall  be 
attended  by  professional  assistance,  and  sup- 
plied with  medicines  at  the  expense  of  the 
landlord  or  farmer,  who  is  to  secure  the  per- 
sonal attendance  twice  in  each  week. 


#' 


IX 


Another  hospital  shall  he  provided  for  such 
as  are  afflicted  with  contagious  disorders. 

Independent  of  the  professional  visitor,  each 
hospital  shall  be  provided  with  a  midwife  and  a 
female  nurse. 

V.  The  medical  visitors  are  bound  to  act 
in  conformity  with  all  the  King's  ordinances  re- 
specting the  exercise  of  their  profession. 

VI.  Landlords  and  proprietors  are  bound  to 
maintain  and  support  the  aged  and  infirm  cul- 
tivators, and  to  furnish  medicine  and  attend- 
ance. 

VII.  Landlords  and  farmers  are  most  ex- 
pressly prohibited  from  forcing  their  cultivators 
to  quit  their  dwellings  for  the  purpose  of  work- 
ing at  another  plantation,  or  in  any  other 
branch  of  cultivation  than  that  in  which  they 
have  been  accustomed  to  labour,  without  the 
privy  council's  permission  ;  to  be  obtained  only 
on  proof  of  the  lands  proposed  to  be  abandoned 
being  no  longer  susceptible  of  production. 

VIII.  Resident  planters  convicted  of  having 
suborned  or  connived  at  the  desertion  of  a 
soldier,   or  his    absence    without    a    furlough, 


1 


»-«»-,      m,  MM  n, ^  iLg^, 


are  punishable  according  to  art.  12.  sect.  2.  of 
the  military  code. 

IX.  Farmers  are  obliged  to  furnish  tools 
and  implements  of  cultivation,  for  which  the 
managers  shall  be  responsible. 

X.  Provision  grounds  shall  be  allotted  upon 
every  plantation  in  presence  of  the  public  au- 
thorities, and  proportionally  among  the  respec- 
tive labouring  families,  according  to  the  quality 
and  extent  of  the  land  applicable  to  such  pur- 
pose. 

XI.  In  case  of  fire,  the  labourers  on  con- 
tiguous plantations  are  enjoined  to  assist  in  ex- 
tinguishing it,  and  the  neighbouring  farmers  to 
contribute  in  every  way  to  that  effect, 

XII.  No  landlord  or  cultivator  shall  carry 
fire  among  the  cane-pieces,  nor  plant  any  fresh 
wood  upon  his  boundaries  without  due  notice 
to  his  neighbour,  and  observation  of  the  dis- 
tances proper,  to  prevent  accidents  by  fire. 

XIII.  Farmers  have  the  right  of  pasturing 
their  saddle  and  carriage  horses  :  but  the  atten- 
dants of  these  animals  shall  have  no  right  to 
share  in  the  crop. 


XI 


XIV.  The  keep  of  too  many  animals  upon 
cultivated  land  being  found  prejudicial  to  cul- 
tivation and  good  husbandry,  their  number 
shall  be  limited,  and  the  surplus  number  turned 
into  the  common  field. 

XV.  A  limited  number  of  attendants  on 
the  plantation  cattle  shall  share  in  the  fourth 
part  of  the  produce  allotted  to  the  agriculturists 
and  assistants  in  the  manufacture. 


Chap.  II 

Art.  XVII.  The  law  punishes  the  lazy  and 
vagabond,  among  whom  are  comprehended 
labourers  of  both  sexes  who  shall  quit  the  ha- 
bitations in  which  they  have  domiciled,  in 
order  to  reside  in  towns  or  other  places  where 
they  are  forbidden  to  settle:  penalty,  Art.  114. 
Titre  8. 

XVIII.  Marriage  being  the  source  of  moral 
conduct,  it  shall  be  especially  encouraged  and 
protected;  and  the  laborious  peasantry  who  shall 
bring  up  the  greatest  number  of  legitimate 
children  in  a  reputable  manner,  shall  be  distin- 
guished and  encouraged  by  government  it- 
self. 


Xll 


XIX.  Mendicity  and  female  licentiousness 
are  severely  reprobated ;  all  beggars  on  the 
highway,  prostitutes,  and  stragglers  shall  be  ar- 
rested, and  such  as  have  no  legal  settlement 
placed  by  the  proper  authorities,  in  their  dis- 
cretion, to  labour  for  their  livelihood.  His 
Majesty's  governors  and  lieutenants  are  strictly 
ordered  to  enforce  these  regulations,  and  the 
good  and  faithful  subjects  invited  to  denounce 
the  delinquents. 

XX.  Every  conductor  or  manager  who  shall 
be  convicted  of  neglecting  the  cultivation  con- 
fided to  his  care,  or  of  converting  to  his  own 
benefit  the  property  of  his  employer,  by  di- 
verting the  workmen  to  fish  or  chase,  employ 
them  hi  building  for  his  own  benefit,  or  who 
shall  have  mistreated  the  labourers,  or  misused 
his  own  authority,  shall  be  liable  to  the  penal- 
ties in  Art.  115.  T.  111. 

XXI.  The   misconduct   of  managers    and 

o 

conductors  with  respect  to  others,  in  which  the 
proprietors  and  farmers  appear  neither  to  have 
participated  nor  to  have  derived  any  advan- 
tage, shall  in  no  case  attach  to  the  latter,  nor 
to  prejudice  the  interest  of  absentees:  but  if 


Xlll 


the  case  be  otnerwise,  they  shall  be  respon- 
sible according  to  the  nature  of  the  transac- 
tion. 

XXII.  The  following  hours  of  labour  are 
irrevocably  established. 

Work  shall  commence  with  the  day-Iio-ht, 
and  be  continued  uninterruptedly  till  eio-ht 
o'clock  :-^-one  hour  is  allotted  to  the  labourer 
for  breakfast  on  the  spot  where  employed;  at 
nine  work  recommences  until  noon,  when  two 
hours  repose  are  granted  them  :  at  two  exactly 
they  recommence  work,  and  shall  not  leave  off 
before  night-fall. 

XXIII.  Women  pregnant,  or  with  children 
at  nurse,  are  exempt  from  field  labour. 

XXIV.  Prayers  shall  be  read  to  the  labourers 
every  night,  and  the  landlord,  farmer,  or  ma- 
nager, shall  invite  the  people  to  attend  on  the 
Sabbath  and  on  fast  days  to  public  prayers  in 
their  parish. 

XXV.  Proprietors,  farmers,  and  managers  of 
plantations  are  compelled  to  see  the  provision- 
ground  well  kept  by  the  respective  labourers 
to  whom  they  have  been  granted :  if  the  latter 
neglect  this  duty,  they  shall  be  employed  in  it 


XIV 

during  their  hours  of  respite  from  plantation- 
work. 

XXVI.  No  labourer,  without  permission  of 
the  lieutenant  of  the  King,  shall  absent  himself 
from  the  plantation  on  working  days,  unless 
this  be  obtained  through  the  overseer  or  con- 
ductor. 

XXVII.  On  the  appearance  of  disorder  or 
seditious  movement  on  a  plantation,  the  proprie- 
tor, farmer,  or  superintendant,  shall  apply  to  his 
neighbours  for  assistance  in  arresting  the 
guilt}-;  after  which  notice  shall  be  dispatched 
to  the  commandant  of  the  police,  who  is  bound 
to  repair  to  the  spot  and  secure  the  disturbers 
of  the  public  peace,  imprison,  and  report  to  the 
proper  authorities,  on  pain  of  becoming  per- 
sonally liable  for  all  consequences. 


I  would  here  beg  leave  to  observe,  that 
while  reading  the  foregoing  laws,  in  order  to 
have  a  fair  understanding  of  the  grounds  upon 
which  the  military  aspect  of  them  is  to  be 
justly  founded  and  approved,  is,  that  at  the 
period  when  they  were  framed  the  whole  popu- 


JTKOEIBHHBWW^M" 


XV 


ft 


lation  were  soldiers  ;  and  all  the  most  improved 
and  intelligent  men  were  placed  in  the  highest 
civil  and  military  offices:  in  this  state  of  things, 
a  government  bearing  some  degree  of  con- 
sonance to  the  condition,  character,  wants, 
and  employment  of  the  whole  people,  was 
absolutely  necessary. 

P.  S. 


Extracts  from  the  Registers  of  the  Delibe- 
rations of  the  Consuls  of  the  Republic, 


N°  I. 


Paris,  17th  Brumaire, 
in  the  10th  year  of  the  French  Republic, 
one  and  indivisible. 


Proclamation  of  the  First  Corisul  to  the  In- 
habitants of  St.  Domingo. 

Whatever  be  your  origin  or  your  co- 
lour, you  are  all  Frenchmen,  you  are  all 
free  and  all  equal  before  God,  and  before 
the  Republic. 

France,  as  well  as  St.  Domingo,  has 
been  the  prey  of  factions,  dismembered 
by  civil  and  by  foreign  wars;  but  all  is 

B 


2 

changed.  All  nations  have  embraced  the 
French,  and  sworn  to  them  peace  and 
amity.  Frenchmen,  too,  have  embraced 
one  another,  and  have  sworn  unanimously 
to  live  as  friends  and  brothers;  come  you, 
likewise,  to  throw  yourselves  into  the  arms 
of  France,  and  rejoice  to  see  once  more 
your  friends  and  brothers  of  Europe. 

The  government  sends  you  the  Cap- 
tain-General Leclerc;  he  takes  with  him 
a  numerous  force  for  your  protection 
against  your  enemies,  and  against  the  ene- 
mies of  the  Republic.  Should  any  one 
whisper  in  your  ear,  "  These  forces  are 
destined  to  despoil  you  of  your  liberty  ;"  an- 
swer, "  It  is  the  Republic  that  has  given 
us  liberty ;  the  Republic  mill  never  suffer 
it  to  be  ravished  from  us." 

Rally  around  die  Captain-General,  he 
brings  you  back  peace  and  plenty.  Rally 
all  around  him  :  whoso  dares  to  separate 
himself  from  the  Captain-General  shall  be 
accounted  a  traitor  to  his  country,   and 


the  wrath  of  the  Republic  shall  devour 
him  as  fire  devours  your  parched  sugar 
canes. 

Given  at  Paris,  at  the  Palace  of  Go- 
vernment, the  17th  Brumaire,  in  the  10th 
year  of  the  French  Republic. 

(Signed)  BONAPARTE. 

By  the  First  Consul, 

(Signed)      H.  B.  Maret,  Secretary  of 

State. 

(A  True  Copy.) 
(Signed)     Leclerc,  Captain-General. 

(A  True  Copy.) 

(Signed)     The   General,    Chief  of  the 

Etat  Major  of  the  Army, 

Dugua. 


LIBERTY 


N°  II 


AND 


EQUALITY. 


ARMY  OF  ST.  DOMINGO. 

Head  Quarters  on  Board  the  Ocean, 
13  th  Pluviose,  10th  year  of  the  Republic. 

The  General  in  Chief  of  the  Army  of  St. 
Domingo,  Captain-General  of  the  Colony, 
to  the  General  of  Brigade,  CHRIS- 
TOPHE,  Commandant  at  the  Cape. 

I  learn  with  indignation,  Citizen 
General,  that  you  refuse  to  receive  the 
French  squadron,  and  the  French  army 
that  I  command,  under  the  pretext  that 
you  have  received  no  orders  from  the 
Governor-General. 

France  has  concluded  a  peace  with 
England,  and  its  government  sends  to  St. 


Domingo  forces  capable  of  subduing  the 
rebels;  at  least  if  any  are  to  be  found  at 
St.  Domingo.  As  to  you,  General,  I  con- 
fess it  will  grieve  me  to  account  you 
among  them. 

I  give  you  notice,  that  if  you  have  not 
in  the  course  of  this  day  surrendered  the 
Forts  Picolet  and  Belair,  with  all  the  bat- 
teries on  the  coast,  to-morrow,  at  day- 
break, fifteen  thousand  troops  shall  be  dis- 
embarked. 

Four  thousand  men  are,  at  this  moment, 
landing  at  Fort  Libert6  ;  eight  thousand 
more  at  Port  Republican. 

Herewith  you  will  receive  my  Procla- 
mation, which  expresses  the  intentions  of 
the  French  Government ;  but,  recollect, 
whatever  individual  esteem  your  conduct 
in  the  colony  may  have  inspired  me  with, 
I  hold  you  responsible  for  what  may 
happen. 

I  salute  you. 

(Signed)         Leclerc. 


N°  III. 

Head-Quarters  at  the  Cape, 
13th  Pluviose,  year  10. 

Henry  Christophe,  General  of  Brigade, 
Commandant  of  the  Arrondissement  of 
the  Cape,  to  the  General  in  Chief,  Le- 
clerc. 


Your  Aid-de-Camp,  General,  has  de- 
livered to  me  your  letter  of  this  day;  I 
have  the  honour  to  inform  you  that  I 
could  not  deliver  up  the  forts  and  post  con- 
fided to  my  command,  without  previous 
orders  from  the  Governor-General,  Tous- 
saint  Louverture,  my  immediate  chief, 
from  whom  I  hold  the  powers  with  which 
I  am  invested.  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  I 
have  to  do  with  Frenchmen,  and  that 
you  are  the  chief  of  the  armament  called 


ft 


the  expedition;  but  I  wait  the  orders  of 
the  Governor,  to  whom  I  have  dispatched 
one  of  my  Aid-de-Camps,  to  apprize  him 
of  your  arrival,  and  that  of  the  French 
army,    and   cannot   permit   you   to   land 
until  1  have  received  his  answer.     If  you 
put  in  force  your  threats  of  hostility,  I 
shall  make  the  resistance  which  becomes 
a  general  officer;  and,   should  the  chance 
of  war  be  yours,  you  shall  not  enter  Cape 
Town  till  it  be  reduced   to  ashes,    nay, 
even  in  the  ruins  will  I  renew  the  combat. 
You  say  that  the  French  Government 
has  sent  to  St.  Domingo  forces  capable  of 
subduing  the  rebels,  if  any  such  be  found; 
it  is  your  coming,  and  the  hostile  inten- 
tions you  manifest,  that  alone  could  create 
them  among  a  peaceable  people,  in  per- 
fect   submission    to    France.     The   very 
mention  of  rebellion  is  an  argument  for 
our  resistance. 

As  to  the  troops  which  you  say  are 
this  moment  landing,   I  consider  them  as 


8 

so  many  pieces  of  cards  which  the  least 
breath  of  wind  will  dissipate. 

How  can  you  hold  me  responsible  for 
the  event  ?  You  are  not  my  Chief;  I  know 
you  not,  and  can  therefore  make  no  ac- 
count of  you  till  you  are  recognised  by 
Governor  Toussaint. 

For  the  loss  of  your  esteem,  General, 
I  assure  you  that  I  desire  not  to  earn  it  at 
the  price  that  you  set  upon  it,  since  to 
purchase  it  I  must  be  guilty  of  a  breach 
of  duty. 

I  have  the  honour  to  salute  you. 
(Signed)         H.  Christophe. 


N°   IV. 


Head  Quarters  at  the  Cape,  29th  Germinal, 
Year  10  of  the  French  Republic. 

The  General  in  Chief  to  General  Christophe. 

You  may  give  credit,  Citizen  General, 
to  all  that  Citizen  Vilton  has  written  to 
you  on  behalf  of  General  Hardy ;  I  will 
keep  the  promises  which  have  been  made 
you  ;  but,  if  it  is  your  intention  to  submit 
to  the  Republic,  think  on  the  essential 
service  you  could  render  her  by  furnish- 
ing the  means  to  secure  the  person  of  Ge- 
neral Toussaint. 


I 


■ 


(Signed) 


Leclerc 


10 


N°  V. 

Head  Quarters,  Robillard,   Grand-Bo.ucan> 
2d  Floreal,  Year  10. 

The  General  of  Brigade,  Henry  Christophe, 
to  General  Leclerc. 

I  have  received  yours  of  the  29th  of 
last  month.  With  earnest  desire  to  give 
credit  to  what  Citizen  Vilton  has  written 
me,  T  wait  only  for  a  proof  which  must 
convince  me  of  the  intention  to  procure 
the  liberty  and  equality  of  the  population 
of  this  colony.  The  laws  which  consecrate 
the  principles,  and  which  the  mother 
country,  without  doubt,  has  enacted,  will 
carry  to  my  heart  this  conviction;  and  I 
protest,  that  on  obtaining  this  desired 
proof,  by  being  made  acquainted  with 
these  laws,  1  shall  submit  immediately. 

You  propose  to  me,  Citizen  General, 
to  furnish  you  with  the  means  of  securing 


11 

the  person  of  General  Toussaint  Louver- 
ture.  It  would  be  perfidy  and  treason  in 
me  to  do  so,  and  a  proposition  so  degrad- 
ing to  me,  is,  in  my  opinion,  a  mark  of 
your  invincible  repugnance  to  believe  me 
susceptible  of  the  smallest  sentiment  of 
delicacy  and  honour.  He  is  my  com- 
mander, and  my  friend.  Is  friendship, 
Citizen  General,  compatible  with  such 
monstrous  baseness  ? 

The  laws  which  I  have  just  mentioned, 
have  been  promised  us,  by  the  mother 
country,  by  the  proclamation  that  her 
Consuls  have  addressed  to  us  when  they 
communicated  the  constitution  of  the  8th 
year.  Fulfil,  Citizen  General,  fulfil  this 
maternal  promise,  by  unfolding  to  our 
view  the  code  which  contains  it,  and  you 
will  soon  behold  all  her  children  rushing 
into  the  arms  of  that  beneficent  mother, 
and  amongst  them  General  Toussaint  Lou- 
verture,  who,  thus  undeceived,  like  the 
rest,  will  hasten  to  correct  his  error.     It  is 


JSI 


n 

only  when  this  error  shall  have  been  so 
dispelled,  that,  if  he  persist  in  spite  of  evi- 
dence, he  can  fairly  be  regarded  as  cri- 
minal, and  be  the  first  object  of  the  ana- 
thema you  have  launched  against  him, 
and  the  measure  you  propose  to  me  to 
execute. 

Consider,  Citizen  General,  the  happy 
effects  that  will  result  from  the  mere  pub- 
lication of  these  laws  to  a  people  crushed, 
of  old,  beneath  the  weight  of  burden,  and 
lacerated  by  the  scourges  of  a  barbarous 
slavery,  in  whom  the  apprehension  of 
similar  enormities  is,  doubtless,  excusable: 
a  people,  in  short,  who  have  tasted  the 
sweets  of  liberty  and  equality,  and  covet 
no  happiness  beyond  the  assurance  of 
never  more  having  to  dread  the  fetters  they 
have  broken.  The  exposure  of  these  laws 
before  their  eyes,  will  stop  the  effusion  of 
French  blood  by  the  hands  of  Frenchmen  ; 
will  restore  to  the  Republic  children  who 
may  yet  do  her   service;  and,   after  the 


13 

horrors  of  civil  war,  bring  back  tranquil- 
lity, peace,  and  prosperity,  to  the  bosom 
of  this  unhappy  colony.  The  object  is, 
without  question,  worthy  of  the  greatness 
of  the  mother  country :  its  attainment, 
Citizen  General,  would  cover  you  with 
glory,  with  the  blessings  of  a  people  who 
will  take  pleasure  in  forgetting  the  evils 
that  they  have  suffered  by  the  delay  of 
this  promulgation.  Reflect,  that  to  refuse 
them  a  participation  of  these  laws,  so  ne- 
cessary for  the  salvation  of  these  countries, 
would  be  to  perpetuate  those  evils,  and 
must  lead  to  absolute  destruction.  In  the 
name  of  my  country,  in  the  name  of  the 
mother  country,  I  call  for  these  salutary 
laws.  Produce  them,  and  St.  Domingo  is 
saved. 

I  have  the  honour  to  salute  you. 

(Signed)         H.  Christophe. 


■ 

v  ■ 


m 


N°  VI. 

ARMY  OF  THE  EXPEDITION. 

Head  Quarters  at  the  Cape,  the  4th  Floreal, 
Year  10  of  the  French  Republic. 

The  General  in  Chief  to  General  Chrhtophe. 

I  have  just  received  your  letter, 
General :  the  uneasiness  you  testify  to  me 
is  of  a  nature  easy  to  be  removed.  You 
demand  of  me  the  code  which  gives  as- 
surance of  liberty  to  the  Negroes  ;  that 
code  is  not  completed  :  I  am  engaged 
upon  it  at  this  moment.  The  wisdom  of 
the  First  Consul  did  not  allow  him  to  make 
a  code  for  the  government  of  a  country 
with  which  he  was  unacquainted,  and  of 
which  the  accounts  he  has  received  are 
contradictory  ;  but  I  declare  to  you  in  the 
presence  of  the  colony  ;  I  protest  before 
the  Supreme  Being,  whose  assistance  is 


15 

never  invoked  in  vain,  that  the  bases  of 
this  code  are,  liberty  and  equality;  that  the 
Negroes  shall  be  free  ;  and  that  the  system 
of  cultivation  shall  be  founded  upon  the 
basis  of  that  of  General  Toussaint,  which 
may  perhaps  be  even  ameliorated  in  their 
favour.  If  this  declaration  is  insufficient, 
it  will  be  to  me  a  convincing  proof,  that 
you  have  no  wish  to  submit  to  the  Re- 
public. If  it  be  sufficient,  present  yourself 
to-morrow  at  the  village  of  Cape  Heights  ; 
I  shall  be  there,  and  I  declare  to  you,  that 
if,  after  an  hour's  explanation,  we  do  not 
come  to  a  proper  understanding,  you  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  return  to  your  troops,  upon 
the  word  of  honour  of  the  General  in 
Chief. 

What  I  have  said  to  you  on  the  subject 
of  General  Toussaint,  arose  from  my  not 
supposing  him  to  be  actuated  by  such 
loyal  views  as  yourself.  I  shall  take 
pleasure  in  finding  myself  deceived ;  the 
answer  you  have  made,  on  this  head,  gave 


16 

me  great  satisfaction,  and  confirms  me  in 
the  opinion  I  have  always  had  of  your 

loyalty. 

If  you  come,  and  we  understand  each 
other,  the  war  will  have  lasted  so  much 
shorter  time  in  the  colony.  If  not,  calcu- 
late my  means  and  your  chances  of  suc- 
cessful resistance. 


I  salute  you. 
(Signed) 


Leclerc 


Let  me  know  the  result  of  your  ar- 
rangements, for  I  intend  to  absent  myself 
from  the  Cape  for  some  moments. 


(Signed) 


Leclerc 


rir 


■~M 


17 


N°  VII. 


LIBERTY 


AND 


EQUALITY. 


Head  Quarters,  Cardineau,  Grande  Riviere, 
5  Floreal,  Year  10. 

The  General  of  Brigade,  Henry  Christ  ophe, 
to  General  Leclerc. 


I  this  moment  received  your  letter  of 
yesterday  :  its  contents  revive  in  my  mind 
the  hope  of  seeing  tranquillity,  peace,  and 
prosperity,  returned  to  this  too-long  agi- 
tated colony,  under  the  auspices  of  liberty 
and  equality.  I  accept  your  offer  of  an 
interview ;  to-morrow,  at  eleven  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  I  shall  present  myself  at 
Cape  Heights,  to  confer  with  you.  The 
word  of  a  French  General  is,  in  my  esti- 
mation, too  sacred  and  inviolable  to  be 
denied  belief. 


18 

I  am  flattered  with  the  opinion  yon 
entertain  of  my  loyalty  ;  but  regret  that 
you  still  persist  in  thinking  General  Tous- 
saint  uninspired  by  that  estimable  feeling  ; 
give  me  leave  to  say,  that  you  are  deceived 
with  regard  to  him.  I  have  no  apprehen- 
sions of  finding  myself  deceived,  when  I 
assure  you,  that  the  confirmation  of  civi- 
lized liberty  and  equality  will  make  him 
throw  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  Re- 
public. 

It  is  hopeless  to  enter  upon  any  calcu- 
lation of  our  respective  means  ;  the  resolu- 
tion to  be  a  man,  and  a  free  man,  is  the 
unit  of  my  arithmetic  ;  and  the  certainty 
of  seeing  this  title  insured  to  my  fellow- 
citizens,  will  soon  resolve  our  divided 
forces  into  one  and  the  same  body,  into 
one  and  the  same  family,  united  by  the 
sincerest  fraternity. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

(Signed)         H.  Christofhe. 


-._. 


19 


N°   VIII. 


-, 


Head  Quarters  at  the  Cape, 
8th  Floreal,  Year  10. 

The  General  in  Chief  to  the  General  of  Bri- 
gade, Christophe,  commandant  of  the 
Cordon  of  the  North. 

I  approve,  Citizen  General,  of  the 
motives  which  prevent  your  presence  at 
the  Cape  to-day.  I  am  the  more  gratified 
by  your  effecting  this  operation  in  person, 
"because  the  execution  of  your  orders  ex- 
perienced some  difficulties  at  Limbe. 

The  commandant,  Lafleur,  who  occu- 
pies the  great  cut  of  Limbe,  would  not 
consent  to  surrender  his  post  without  hav- 
ing seen  you.  It  appears  that  the  same 
thing  has  taken  place  on  the  side  of  the 
landing-place  of  Limbe.     General  Salme 


1 


i 


20 

had  sent  troops  to  occupy  these  posts; 
on  the  refusal  to  surrender  them,  the 
troops  retired.  Some  mounted  dragoons 
of  the  country,  and  some  of  the  rustic 
militia,  came  to  his  camp  to  buy  provi- 
sions. General  Salme  caused  them  to  be 
disarmed  and  sent  back.  I  have  given 
orders  for  their  arms  to  be  restored. 

As  soon  as  you  have  completed  the 
arrangements  on  the  side  of  Grande 
Riviere,  proceed  to  the  crossway  of 
Limbe,  where  you  will  find  General 
Salme,  who  commands  the  arrondissement 
de  Plaisance,  and  all  the  country  that  lies 
beyond  the  Riviere  Sal6e.  Take  mea- 
sures, in  consulting  with  him,  so  that  he 
may  forthwith  occupy  the  military  posts 
at  present  in  charge  of  your  troops,  and 
give  orders  that  the  rustic  militia  retire 
immediately  to  their  habitations. — Put  in 
requisition  every  possible  means  of  con- 
veyance, in  order  to  facilitate  the  provi- 


21 


sioning  of    the  troops  cantoned    in    the 


mountains. 


I  salute  you. 


(Signed)         Leclerc. 


#** 


As  soon  as  you  have  concluded  the 
business  at  Limbe,  you  will  come  and 
join  me. 

(Signed)         Leclerc. 


N°   IX. 


LIBERTY 


AND 


Head  Quarters  of  the  Cape,  30th  Germinal, 
Year  10  of  the  French  Republic. 

The  General  of  Division  Hardy,  command- 
ing the  division  of  the  North  at  St.  Do- 
mingo, to  General  Christophe,  command- 
ing the  Cordon  of  the  North. 


EQUALITY. 


Captain  Vilton,  in  command  at 
the  Petit  Anse,  has  communicated  to  me, 
Citizen  General,  the  letter  which  you 
have  written  to  him,  and  I  imparted  it 
immediately  to  the  general  in  chief,  Le- 
clerc. 

By  the  details  into  which  you  have 
entered  with  Citizen  Vilton,  it  is  easy  to 
discover,  General,  that  you  have  been 
the  victim  of  the  treacherous  insinuations 
of  an  infinity  of  beings  who,   during  the 


23 


course  of  the  revolution  in  France,  have 
set  all  parties  on  fire  together ;  have  every 
where  excited  trouble  and  discord  ;  and 
who,  after  having  brought  upon  themselves 
their  own  expulsion,  have  taken  refuge 
in  this  colony,  where  they  have  distorted 
every  fact  and  circumstance,  disseminated 
the  most  atrocious  falsehoods  and  calum- 
nies, and  sought,  in  fresh  troubles,  an 
existence  that  they  could  no  longer  find  in 
Europe. 

These  crafty  men  have  inspired  you 
with  distrust  of  the  French  government 
and  its  delegates.  The  conduct  of  the 
government  and  its  good  faith  are  well 
known  to  the  whole  world.  Our  own 
behaviour,  since  our  arrival  in  St.  Do- 
mingo, our  proceedings  towards  the 
peaceable  inhabitants,  and  in  the  in- 
stances of  Generals  Clervaux,  Paul  Lou- 
ver ture,  Maurepas,  Laplume,  and  their 
companions  in  arms,  may  give  you  a  just 
measure  of  all  that  malevolence  and   in- 


24 

trigue  have  invented  to  slander  the  purity 
of  our  intentions. 

Twelve  years,  General,  have  we  been 
fighting  for  liberty ;  can  you  believe  that, 
after  such  great  sacrifices,  we  would  so 
degrade  ourselves  in  our  own  eyes  as  to 
incur  a  blemish  which  would  efface  our 
glory  and  destroy  our  work?  Return, 
General,  to  more  reasonable  sentiments, 
and  assure  yourself,  that  your  principles 
are  ours  also. 

The  reputation  you  enjoy  in  this 
country  led  us  not  to  presume,  that  the 
French,  your  brothers,  would  encounter 
any  resistance  in  you  to  the  will  of  the 
government. 

Nevertheless,  General,  all  hope  of  ob- 
taining from  this  same  government  obli- 
vion of  the  past  is  not  entirely  lost  to  you. 
I  address  you  with  the  frankness  of  a  sol- 
dier, unacquainted  with  shifts  and  eva- 
sions.— Correct  your  errors;  your  return 
to   true    principles    may    accelerate   the 


25 

reparation  of  evils  which  have  afflicted 
this  beautiful  spot.  It  is  unworthy  of  you 
to  serve  as  a  stepping-stone  to  an  usurper, 
to  a  rebel.  The  mother  country  throws 
wide  her  arms  to  all  her  children  led 
astray,  and  invites  them  to  take  refuge  in 
her  bosom. 

If  you  have  a  serious  intention  of  re- 
cognizing the  laws  of  the  republic,  and  of 
submitting  to  the  orders  of  her  govern- 
ment, you  will  not  hesitate,  General,  to 
come  and  join  us  with  your  troops.  Hi- 
therto we  have  fought  you  as  enemies  ;  to- 
morrow, if  you  will,  we  will  embrace  you 
as  brothers. 

Write  me  your  proposals,  or  inform 
me  at  what  hour  you  will  be  at  Vaudreuil, 
to  make  them  verbally.  You  will  find  me 
there.  If  we  do  not  come  to  an  under- 
standing, I  give  you  my  word  of  honour, 
after  the  conference,  you  shall  be  at  liberty 
to  return  to  your  head  quarters. 

I  have  the  honour  to  salute  you. 

(Signed)         Hardy. 


N°    X. 

Head  Quarters,  Robillard,  Grand  Boucarr, 
2d  Floreal,  Year  10. 

The  General  of  Brigade,  Henry  Christophe, 
to  the  General  of  Division,  Hardy. 

Your  letter  of  the  30th  Germinal 
has  reached  me.  You  are  wrong  in  be- 
lieving me  the  victim  of  the  machinations 
of  perfidious  intriguers.  Nature,  without 
having  endued  me  with  all  the  subtlety  of 
a  penetrating  and  clear-sighted  genius,  has 
furnished  me  with  sense  enough  to  guard 
me  from  the  insinuations  of  wicked  men. 
With  an  ardent  love  of  peace  and  tran- 
quillity, I  have  always  kept  at  a  distance 
from  me  violent  and  turbulent  men,  whose 
empoisoned  breath  engenders  confusion 
and  discord ;  but  I  have  not  been  exempt 


m 

from  the  suspicions  that  so  many  publi- 
cations have  roused  in  my  mind,  and 
which  so  many  others  have  confirmed. 
Some  originated  in  foreign  countries, 
others  in  the  heart  of  France.  All  an- 
nounced, with  a  menacing  tone,  the  mis- 
fortunes which  now  afflict  us.  How  hap- 
pens it,  that  the  desires  of  the  wicked, 
and  the  predictions  of  the  evil-minded, 
appear  so  much  in  unison  with  the  reso- 
lutions of  the  mother  country  ? 

When  we  were  thus  threatened  with 
the  return  of  slavery,  after  having  broken 
its  fetters,  was  any  thing  more  natural  than 
the  dread  of  its  return  ;  than  the  suspicion, 
ihe  restlessness,  even  the  mistrust  of  a 
people  so  often  deceived ;  so  constantly 
the  mark  for  the  declared  hatred  of  the 
enemies  of  its  liberty,  who  were  jealous 
of  the  equality  admitted  in  their  favour  ? 
Could  we  be  otherwise,  when  every  thing 
concurred  to  justify  our  fears? 

General,    we   too   have   twelve   years 


28 

combated  for  liberty,  for  the  same  rights, 
which,  like  yourselves,  we  bought  at  the 
price  of  our  blood  ;  and  I  have  ever  re- 
volted at  the  belief  that  the  French,  after 
having    made   such    sacrifices   to    obtain 
them,  would  one  day  come  to  tear  them 
from  a  people  who  glory  in  being  a  part 
of  the   great  nation,  and  in  enjoying  in 
common  with  her  the  advantages  derived 
from  the  revolution.  That  revolution,  and 
the  benefits  it  has  diffused,  are  worthy  of 
the  glory  of  the  Republic ;  and  when  you 
assure  me,  that  she  will  not  destroy  her 
work,  why  refuse  to  this  branch  of  her  fa- 
mily what  must  infallibly  consolidate  and 
immortalize  for  her  the  sublime  edifice ! 
The  code  of  laws,  promised  to  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  colonies  by  the  proclama- 
tion of  the   consuls  Avhich   accompanied 
their  communication  of  the  constitution 
of  the  year  8,   can  alone   convey   to  my 
mind  the  pledge  of  the  consolidation  of 
our  rights.     This,  Citizen  General,  is  the 


29 

only  weapon  capable  of  subduing  the 
apprehensions  of  a  justly  suspicious  peo- 
ple !  This  a  convincing  proof,  which 
alone  can  restore  in  my  mind  these  senti- 
ments to  which  you  would  recall  me,  and 
assure  me  that  our  mutual  principles  are 
the  same  ! 

The  candour  with  which  you  address 
me  is  worthy,  in  all  respects,  of  a  soldier 
like  yourself;  I  express  myself  with  equal 
frankness  ;  and  if  General  Leclerc,  instead 
of  proposing  to  me  an  act  of  treason  and 
infamy,  which  would  degrade  me  in  my 
own  eyes,  had  spoken  to  me  as  you  have 
done,  a  language  consistent  with  senti- 
ments of  honour  and  delicacy,  such  as  he 
might  fairly  have  presumed  in  me,  I 
should  have  at  least  consented  to  the 
interview  which  you  invite,  not  only  at 
Vaudreuil,  but  at  Le  Petit  Anse,  or  even 
at  the  Cape.  But,  be  it  as  it  may,  I  augur 
too  favourably  of  your  frankness  and 
your  word   of  honour,  not  to  consent  to 


that    interview ;    not   at    the   place    you 
point  out,  but  at  one  which  may  be  near 
the  centre  of  our  respective  lines.    I  there- 
fore propose  the  house  of  Montalibor  for 
this  purpose.    If  that  is  agreeable  to  you, 
appoint  the  day  and  hour  when  you  will 
meet  me  there,  and  I  promise  to  be  pre- 
sent.    But,  General,  furnish  yourself  with 
the  code  of  laws  which  are  to  govern  this 
country,  which  confirm  liberty  and  equa- 
lity to  the   people  who   will    water   and 
fertilize  it  with  their  sweat,  and  our  inter- 
view will  be  crowned  with    the  happiest 
success,  and  I  rejoice  to  owe  to  you  the 
information   which  can  alone  dispel    our 
error.     Doubt  not,  General,  that  General 
Toussaint  Louverture  himself,  whom  Ge- 
neral Leclerc  considers  but  as  a  criminal, 
will  then   not  hesitate  to  throw  himself, 
with  the  whole  nation,  into  the  arms  of  the 
Republic,  and,  reunited  under  the  auspices 
of  these    beneficent    laws,    this   grateful 
people  will  offer  him  again,   as  a  proof  of 


31 

their  devotion,  the  exertions  that  they  have 
once  before  directed  to  render  this  portion 
of  the  French  Empire  productive. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 
(Signed)         H.  Christophe. 


N°  XI. 


Petit  Anse,  26th  Germinal,  year  10. 

Vilton,  Commandant  of  the  Petit  Anse* 
to  Citizen  Henry  Christophe,  General 
of  Brigade,  at  his  Head-Quarters. 

My  Dear  Comrade, 

I  give  way  to  the  sentiments  that 
my  ancient  friendship  inspires   for  you  ; 

*  The  two  letters  subjoined  under  the  signature  of 
Sieur  Vilton,  were  fabricated  by  the  Sieur  Anquetil, 
who  wrote  them  with  his   own  hand  at  the  house  of 


32 

I  have  heard  with  the  deepest  regret  your 
refusal  to  submit  to  the  will  of  the  French 
general  whom  the  First  Consul  has  dis- 
patched   to    St.    Domingo,    to    complete, 
support,  and  consolidate   the  order  that 
you  had  so  effectually  established  at  the 
Cape  Town,  the  dependance  of  the  north, 
where  you  acquired  the  regard  and  affec- 
tion of  all  the  colonists.    You  repeatedly 
told  me,  my  dear  Comrade,    that   your 
Greatest  pleasure   would    be    to    see   the 
French  arrive,  and  resign  into  their  hands . 
the  authority  with  which  you  were  invest- 
ed ;    by  what    fatality   can   you    so   sud- 
denly have  changed  your  good  intentions  ? 
By  this   step   you  have   renounced   per- 
sonal happiness,  the  security  of  your  for- 
tune, and  the  splendid  establishment  you 
could   have  secured  to  your  amiable  fa- 


ttie  Sieur  Blin  de  Villeneuve,  one  of  the  great  planters 
of  the  northern  district,  grandfather  to  the  Sieur  Vilton, 
who  had  no  hand  in  them  but  the  signature,  to  which 
he  was  forced  by  the  French  government. 


\ 


33 

mily  ;    you  have  plunged  them,  as  well  as 
yourself,  into  the  most  frightful  misery. 
Your  intentions  have  always,  to  me,  ap- 
peared so  pure,  and  your  devotion  to  the 
French  nation  left  me  nothing  to  doubt  on 
the    conduct   you    purposed    to    pursue; 
when,  in  an  instant,  upon  the  appearance 
of  the  French  squadron  you  were  no  longer 
the  same  man.     All  the  world,  and  your 
friends  in  particular,  were  persuaded  that 
you   had   been    ill-advised,    and  perhaps 
overruled    by   some    black   chiefs    which 
were    about    you.     So    many    handsome 
things  have  been  said  of  you  to  M.  Le- 
clerc,  the  general  in  chief,  that  he  is  tho- 
roughly convinced  that  it  is  owing  to  evil 
counsels  that  you  took  the  resolution  to 
resist ;  that  he  is  ready  to  pardon  you  if 
you  will  reduce  to   obedience  the  troops 
that   you   command,    and    surrender    the 
post    that    you    occupy.      This  is  a  fine 
opening,  my  dear  Comrade,  for  yourself, 
as  well  as  the  brave  officers  and   soldiers 

D 


34 

under  your  command  ;  they   will    be  all 
treated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  French 
army,  and  you  will  secure  for  yourself  and 
family  every  happiness  that  you  can  de- 
sire;   especially  if  you  should  desire  to 
quit  the  colony,  which  is  the  best  course 
you  can  take  to  save  yourself  from  being 
exposed    to  the  hatred  of    the  rebels   to 
the  orders  of  France,  who  shall  refuse  to 
follow  your  example;  you  will  be  certain 
of  a   liberal   fortune,  and  may  enjoy  it 
peaceably,  under  the  protection  of  France, 
in  the  country  of  your  choice.     My  dear 
Comrade,  my  tender  friendship  for   you 
and  your  family  induces  me  to  write  this. 
I  shall  partake  of  your  happiness  if  I  can 
contribute  to  effect  it.    It  lies  with  you  to 
give  me  this  gratification  by  following  the 
advice  of  your  old  friend.     Pteply  to  me, 
and  let  me  know  your  intentions,   that  I 
may  bring  them  to  bear  in  the  way  most 
agreeable  to  yourself. 

Every  one  here,  and  in  all  parts  of 


in** 


35 

the  colony,  has  witnessed  the  frankness 
and  good  faith  of  the  French  generals, 
and  I  have  no  reserve  in  repeating  to  you 
the  assurance  that  you  may  place  entire 
confidence  in  them;  they  will  open  to  you 
every  facility,  assist  you  with  every  means 
in  their  power,  and  furnish  you  the  con- 
venience of  carrying  along  with  you  every 
thing  you  possess,  and  enjoying  it  peace- 
ably wherever  you  choose.  Trust  me  then, 
my  dear  Comrade;  quit  this  wandering 
and  vagabond  life,  which  would  disho- 
nour you  if  you  continue  to  follow  it,  and 
regain  the  esteem  of  all  good  citizens,  by 
being  yourself  again,  and  abandoning  the 
cause  of  an  ambitious  man,  who  will  be 
your  ruin  in  the  end.  Pay  no  regard  to 
your  outlawry ;  the  General  in  Chief,  Le- 
clerc,  has  said  that  it  should  not  have 
taken  place  had  he  known  you  sooner, 
and  that  the  Proclamation  should  be  an- 
nulled as  soon  as  he  learns  that  you  have 


v 


36 

acknowledged  your  error,  and  abandoned 
the  cause  of  rebellion. 

Health  and  Friendship. 

(Signed)         Vilton. 


N°    XII. 


Head  Quarters,  Hamlet  of  Dondon, 
20th  Germinal,  year  10. 

The  General  of  Brigade,  Henry  Christophe, 
to  the  Commandant  Villon. 


I  love  to  give  credit  to  the  expres- 
sions of  your  long  standing  friendship  for 
me,  which  has  inspired  you  with  the  idea 
of  addressing  to  me  your  letter  of  the  26th 
of  this  month.  The  sentiments  of  friend- 
ship I  have  avowed  to  you  remain  unal- 
terable; you  know  me  too  well  to  doubt  it. 


n     I    !■■■  ~mr»*^***jM 


37 

Should  I  ever  have  refused  to  submit 
to  the  orders  of  the  French  general  sent  to 
this  island  by  the  First  Consul  of  the  Re- 
public, if  every  thing  had  not  conspired 
to  convince  me  that  the  meditated  conso- 
lidation of  the  good  order  which  reigned 
in  this  colony,  was  nothing  less  than  the 
destruction  of  our  liberty,  and  the  rights 
resulting  from  equality?  It  is  true,  as  you 
say,  I  have  declared  my  greatest  desire 
was  to  see  the  French  arrive,  and  to  de- 
posit in  their  hands  the  share  of  authority 
with  which  I  was  invested,  and  enjoy  as 
a  simple  citizen  the  benefits  of  liberty 
and  equality  in  the  bosom  of  my  familjr, 
in  the  midst  of  my  fellow-citizens,  pro- 
vided that  they  too  partook,  with  myself, 
of  these  sacred  rights.  A  Frenchman, 
loving  and  respecting  France,  I  joyfully 
entertained  this  hope,  a  hope  that  my 
confidence  in  the  government  of  the  mo- 
ther country  fostered  and  confirmed  from 
day  to  day.    I  have  never  changed  my  in- 


38 

clinations  in  this  respect ;  but  by  what 
fatality  is  it  that  this  hope  has  been  de- 
ceived, that  all  has  concurred  to  prove 
that  the  principles  previously  adopted  in 
our  favour  have  been  changed  ?  St.  Do- 
mingo, wholly  French,  enjoyed,  as  you 
know,  the  profoundest  tranquillity  ;  there 
were  no  rebels  to  be  found  :  by  what 
fatal  blindness,  then,  did  it  happen,  that 
France  has  come  with  all  the  terrors  of 
war  and  the  artillery  of  destruction  ?  Not 
to  subdue  the  rebels  (for  rebels  there  were 
none),  but  to  create  them  amongst  a  peace- 
able people,  and  furnish  a  pretext  to  de- 
stroy or  enslave  them. 

You  say  I  have  renounced  my  happi- 
ness. Alas!  what  happiness,  what  fortune, 
what  splendid  establishment,  of  myself  and 
my  family,  could  ever  have  offered  me 
consolation  for  the  grief  of  seeing  my  fel- 
lows reduced  to  the  last  degree  of  misfor- 
tune beneath  the  burthen  of  slavery?  My 
intentions  have  always  been  pure,  and  you 


lima 


39 

were,  more  than  any  body,  acquainted 
with  my  devotion  to  the  French  nation. 
My  intentions,  my  sentiments,  have  never 
varied ;  I  have  always  been  the  same 
man.  Bat,  placed  as  I  was,  by  my  fellow 
citizens,  as  a  sentinel  at  the  post  where  it 
was  my  duty  to  watch  over  the  preserva- 
tion of  liberty,  more  dear  to  them  than 
their  existence,  how  could  I  do  otherwise 
than  alarm  them  at  the  approach  of  the 
blow  aimed  at  its  annihilation  ? 

How  many  letters,  pouring  in  upon 
us  in  shiploads  from  France  and  foreign 
countries,  written  in  a  menacing  tone,  by 
colonists  to  other  colonists,  who  preached 
forth  their  contents  with  undisguised  and 
seditious  vehemence,  announced  to  me,  in 
the  most  explicit  terms,  the  fate  reserved 
for  the  people  of  this  colony  and  its  de- 
fenders ! 

You  know  it.  I  have  communicated 
to  several.     Did  I  not,  from  motives  of 


40 


prudence,  conceal  them  from  the  governor, 
for  fear  of  agitating  him ;    and  did   not 
my  confidence  in  the  government  of  the 
Republic  so  master  my  common  sense  as  to 
make  me,  to  the  last  moment,  consider  these 
letters  as  the  mere  expressions  of  the  hatred 
of  some  wretches,    who  sought,    in   pure 
despite,  again   to   embroil    this  country? 
Yet   has   not  the  event,  notwithstanding 
my  credulity,  fully  justified  all  their  an- 
nunciations?   The  world,   above   all,   my 
friends    most   especially,    deceive   them- 
selves if  they  believe  that  I  have  allowed 
myself  to  be  led  away  by  any  chiefs  that 
are   about   me.     At   my  age   I   have   no 
need  of  counsel ;    it   is   my  duty  that  is 
my  counsellor  upon  all  occasions.     You 
ought  to  know  me  better,  and  to  be  aware, 
that  I  never  took   advice  of  my  friends, 
not  even  of  you,    whom   I   distinguished 
amongst  them.  Friends,  alas !  I  thouoht  I 
could  count  many ;  but  now, like  Diogenes, 


■i  ■— 


41 

with  a  lantern  in  my  hand,  at  noon  day, 
I  search  in  vain  for  one  upon  whom  I  can 
rely. 

It  is  without  doubt  very  flattering  to 
have  so  much  good  said  of  me  to  M.  Le- 
clerc,  the  general  in  chief;  but  he  is  wrong 
in  persuading  himself  that  my  present  con- 
duct is  the  result  of  evil  counsel.     What  I 
have  said  to  you  on  that  head    is  a  com- 
plete answer   to    that   opinion.     I  never 
had  any  intention  of  resisting  him;  and 
so  I  wrote  word  when  he  first  appeared 
before  the  Cape;    I  testified  to  him  how 
much  regret  I  should  feel  if  compelled  to 
oppose  reluctant  resistance  before  receiv- 
ing the  orders  of  the  chief  who  had  placed 
me  at  this  post,  and  who  had  intrusted* 
me  with  a  charge  I  could  resign  into  no 
other  hands.      I  sent  to  him  Citizen  Gra- 
nier,  commander  of  a  battalion  of  the  na- 
tional guard,  as  the   bearer  of  my  letter, 
and  charged  him  to  express  verbally   the 
necessity  I  was  under  of  waiting  the  orders 


42 

I  expected  from  the  governor,  and  my 
resolution,  when  he  should  have  been  ap- 
prised of  the  squadron's  arrival,  to  fulfil 
the  obligation  of  receiving  it  with  all  the 
respect  due  to  the  mother  country,  in  case 
the  governor,  after  being  certified  that  it 
was  from  France,  should  meditate  resist- 
ance. Without  attending  to  this  reason- 
able observation,  General  Leclerc  sends 
back  the  Citizen  Granier  without  any  other 
answer  than  this  :  "  That  he  had  orders  to 
use  force,  and  would  execute  them."  A 
trifling  delay  would  have  prevented  much 
calamity.  As  a  man  of  honour,  I  was 
determined  to  observe,  religiously,  what  I 
had  charged  the  citizen  Granier  to  repre- 
sent on  my  behalf  to  General  Leclerc: 
but  this  general  did  not  condescend  to 
give  it  credit;  and,  notwithstanding  the 
protestations  he  received  of  my  devotion 
to  France,  the  port  captain,  whom  I  had 
sent  to  meet  the  squadron,  is  still  detained 
on  board,  and  his  aid-de-camp  forewarns 


JUL 


43 

me,  that  if  I  send  my  adjutant  general,  he 
will  be  similarly  treated.  At  the  same 
time  General  Rochambeau  effects  a  land- 
ing near  Fort  Liberty,  without  giving  no- 
tice to  the  commander  of  that  place, 
marches  upon  the  forts  which  defend  it, 
makes  himself  master  of  them,  and  puts 
to  the  sword  the  brave  men  he  finds  there, 
whilst  the  vessels  enter  the  harbour,  and 
discharge  their  guns  upon  the  town.  On 
the  other  hand,  another  landing  is  made  at 
Limbe,  which  is  likewise  cannonaded, 
and  the  cape  is  placed  between  two  nu- 
merous armies,  with  a  menacing  squadron 
in  front.  The  terms  of  the  letter  which 
General  Leclerc  had  addressed  to  me, 
showed  plainly  enough  the  object  he  had 
in  view.  I  take  counsel  of  the  emergency 
of  the  circumstance  in  which  I  was  placed 
by  the  conduct  of  this  general;  I  take 
counsel,  I  say,  of  his  own  behaviour,  and 
thus  commence  all  the  evils  that  afflict  us. 
After  acting  in  such  a  manner,  what 


44 

must  not  I  suspect?  Had  I  not  reason  to 
presume  unfavourably,  from  the  measures 
just  put  in  execution  against  me?  Yes  I 
avow  it;  however  great  had  been  at  all 
times  my  confidence  in  the  French  Go- 
vernment, I  felt  it  powerfully  shaken  by 
the  thundering  threats,  by  the  blows  aimed 
at  us,  and  the  conduct  of  the  chiefs  of  the 
French  army  determined  -mine. 

You  speak  to  me  of  fortune;  I  have 
no  longer  any;  I  have  lost  all.  Honour  is, 
henceforth,  the  only  possession  which  is 
left  to  me  and  my  family.  You  know  me, 
and  vou  know  whether  or  not  it  is  the 
object  of  my  ambition. 

You  counsel  me  to  make  bold  to  ask 
permission  to  quit  the  colony.  You  cannot 
be  ignorant  that  I  am  not  deficient  in 
courage,  and  in  this  case  it  would  not  fail 
me.  I  had  resolved  long  since  to  quit  I  he 
colony  on  the  restoration  of  peace,  and 
Citizen  Granier  was  half  inclined  to  the 
same  course.     If  he  exists,  he  can   testify 


mm  11 


45 

to  the  truth  of  this  assertion.  My  attach- 
ment to  France  had  made  me  choose  her 
bosom  as  the  asylum  whither  we  might, 
with  our  united  families,  have  retired,  and 
passed  our  days  in  peace,  in  the  sweet 
certainty  of  leaving  all  our  brethren  free 
and  happy  on  the  soil  of  this  colony. 
Why  has  every  thing  concurred  to  frus- 
trate this  hope?  I  expect  to  receive  every 
day  the  blow  that  will  annihilate  me;  and 
Citizen  Granier,  who,  I  learn,  is  detained 
on  board,  has,  perhaps,  already  ceased  to 
exist.  What  is  his  crime  ?  What  harm  has 
he  done?  Is  it  possible  that  his  friendship 
for  me  has  been  his  crime? 

Tou  take  upon  yourself,  my  dear  Com- 
rade, to  give  me  proofs  of  good  faith  and 
frankness  on  the  'part  of  the  French 
Generals;  you  know  not  how  it  grieves 
me  to  be  unable  to  remove  the  just  suspi- 
cion with  which  all  the  facts  I  have  de- 
tailed have  inspired  me;  facts  against 
which  I  can  find  no  reasonable  or  prudent 


46 

pretext  for  shutting  my  eyes.  Happen 
what  may,  honour  is  my  guide;  and  it  is 
with  extreme  repugnance  that  I  impute  to 
any  other  rule  of  conduct  the  actions  and 
promises  of  others;  honour  has  always  to 
me  appeared  so  dear  to  French  officers. 

I  always  cherish  the  esteem  of  good 
citizens.  If  there  exist  at  St.  Domingo 
any  ambitious  men,  who  covet  nothing  but 
honour,  preferment,  or  distinction;  as  for 
me,  my  ambition  always  consisted  in 
meriting  the  honourable  consideration  of 
good  men,  in  seeing  my  fellow  citizens 
happy  ;  in  enjoying,  in  common  with 
them,  the  sole  title  of  free  man,  the  sole 
rights  of  equality,  in  the  bosom  of  my 
tranquil  family,  and  in  the  circle  of  a  few 
estimable  friends. 

You  advise,  my  dear  Comrade,  to  pay 
no  regard  to  my  outlawry;  General  Le- 
clerc,  you  tell  me,  has  said  it  should  not 
have  taken  place  had  he  known  me  sooner, 
and  that  the  Proclamation  should  be  ari- 


■■  ■— i 


47 

nulled  as  soon  as  I  should  have  retracted 
my  error.  I  am  ready  to  retract,  but  my 
doubts  must  be  removed,  my  suspicions 
cleared  up.  There  is  no  sacrifice  that  I  will 
not  make  for  the  peace  and  happiness  of 
my  fellow  citizens,  if  I  am  but  convinced 
that  they  shall  all  be  free  and  happy.  I 
have  but  one  thing  left  to  sacrifice — my 
life,  all  the  rest  1  have  already  made.  Pro- 
duce the  proofs  necessary  for  my  convic- 
tion, and  with  a  willing  heart  I  offer  the 
sacrifice,  if,  after  demonstration  of  rny 
error,  it  can  make  atonement,  and  restore 
tranquillity  and  prosperity  lo  my  country, 
and  to  my  fellow  citizens. 

I  salute  you  with  friendship. 

(Signed)         H.  Christophe. 


— 


48 


N°   XIII. 


Petite  Anse,  30th  Germinal,  year  10. 


Vilton,  Commandant  at  La  Petite  Anse,  to 
Citizen  Henry  Christ ophe,  General  of 
Brigade,  commanding  the  Cordon  of  the 
North. 


My  Dear  Comrade, 

T  can  with  difficulty  express  the 
pleasure  that  your  answer  to  my  letter 
affords  me,  since  it  gives  me  the  hope  of 
seeing  you  once  more  actuated  by  that 
confidence  which  you  should  never  have 
ceased  to  place  in  the  justice  and  genero- 
sity of  the  representative  of  France  in  this 
colony ;  these  are  the  general  characteris- 
tics of  French  officers,  and,  above  all,  of 
the  general  in  chief,  Leclerc;  and  it  was 


J*.*Hi 


HF  H 


49 


the  intimate  knowledge  of  these  qualities, 
that  induced  the   First   Consul  to   make 
choice  of  him  as  the  bearer  of  happiness 
and   peace   to   this    unfortunate    colony. 
Your  submission  to  a  chief  of  such  merit 
will  gain  you  a  protector,  who  will  charge 
himself  with   the  office  of  making  such 
provision  for  you  as  will  lead  you  to  bless 
the   day   of    your    compliance    with    the 
counsel   I  have  given,  and  which  I  now 
repeat  more  strongly  than  ever.    I  made  it 
my  first  business  to  communicate  your  let- 
ter to  him,  as  well  as  to  General  Hardy. 
The  expressions  you  make  use  of  have  met 
with  their  approbation.     The  distrust  you 
discover  in  some  paragraphs  alone  pre- 
vents them  from  being  completely  satisfied. 
The  general  in  chief  himself  is  going  to 
write    to   you.     I   cannot  press  you  too 
strongly  to  place  entire  confidence  in  his 
promises,    as    well   as   in   the  honour  of 
General  Hardy;  and  I  doubt  not  but  you 
will  find  in  their  letters  every  thing  that 

E 


50 

you,  as  well  as  your  fellow  citizens,  ought, 
in  reason,  to  require  for  your  satisfaction. 
With  respect  to  your  friend  Granier,  if 
he  is  detained,  it  is  not  because  of  his 
connections,  but  because  he  has  many 
enemies  here,  who  have  calumniated  him. 
I  have  no  doubt,  that,  as  soon  as  Govern- 
ment shall  have  had  leisure  to  investigate 
his  affair,  he  will  be  immediately  set  at 

liberty. 

Adieu,  my  dear  Comrade:  depend 
upon  the  friendship  I  have  sworn  to  you 
for  life. 

Health  and  friendship. 


(Signed) 


VlLTOX 


51. 


N°  XIV. 

Head  Quarters,  Robillard,  Grand  Boucan, 
2d  Floreal,  Year  10. 

The  General  of  Brigade,  Henry  Christophe, 
commanding  the  Cordon  of  the  North,  to 
Vilton,  Commandant  at  La  Petit  Anse. 

I  again-  receive,  with  pleasure,  in  jour 
letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  the  expression 
of  your  friendship  for  me.     The  success- 
ful issue  of  your  correspondence,  which 
you  seem  to  hope,  depends  upon  General 
Leclerc.    He  has,  indeed,  addressed  to  me 
a  letter;  but  I  have  read  in   it,  with  dis- 
gust, the  proposition  it  contains,  of  dis- 
honouring myself  by  an  act  of  monstrous 
cowardice  and  perfidy. 

I  do  trust,however,that  in  the  character 
which  has  been  given  him  of  me,  if  dictated 
by  truth,  it  has  not  been  represented,  that 


r.-' 


52 

such  actions  were  familiar  to  me,  and  that 
I  was  wholly  divested  of  every  sentiment 
of  delicacy  and  honour. 

I  replied  to  his  letter  in  the  same 
manner  as  I  did  to  that  addressed  to  me 
by  General  Hardy,  which  appeared  to  be 
written  in  that  style  of  frankness  which 
ought  to  distinguish  a  soldier. 

I  have  every  desire  to  abjure  the  dis- 
trust which  I  have  conceived.     I  demand 
of  those  two  Generals  no  more  than  what 
is  necessary   to  renounce  it ;    that  is,  in 
fact,  the  code  of  laws  which  was  promised 
us  by  the  proclamation  addressed  to  us  by 
the    consuls  of  the  republic,  when   they 
communicated  the  constitution  of  year  8. 
In  such  a  code  only  can  lie  the  proof  of 
the  intention  to  maintain  and  consolidate 
liberty  and  equality.     If  these  laws  are  in 
your  possession,  impart  them  to  me;  if 
they  exist,  and  you  have  them  not,  endea- 
vour to  obtain  and  produce  them  to  me. 
To  them  I  look  for  the  restoration  of  tran- 


53 

quillity  to  this  country,  for  the  cement  of 
union  between  the  French  of  both  worlds, 
for  a  stop  to  the  effusion  of  their  blood, 
for  the  reconciliation  with  the  republic  of 
her  children,  who  never  willingly  re- 
nounced her;  and  for  the  re-establishment, 
in  this  island,  of  peace  and  its  blessings, 
in  lieu  of  civil  war  and  its  ravages.  Openly 
proclaim  this  code,  and  let  the  light  of 
truth  shine  on  those  who  may  be  blinded 
with  error ;  then  will  you  enjoy  the  satis- 
faction of  having  contributed  to  the  hap- 
piness of  our  country,  to  that  of  our  fellow 
citizens,  to  my  own  amongst  the  rest ;  for, 
whatever  lot  may  await  me,  my  happiness 
will  consist  in  that  of  my  brethren,  were 
it  even  sealed  with  my  blood. 

The  unfortunate  Granier  is  detained, 
and,  without  doubt,  you  tell  me,  on  ac- 
count of  some  calumnious  insinuations  of 
his  enemies.  Ought  such  a  detention  to 
have  taken  place  without  evidence  ?  and 
is  it  consistent  with  a  just  and  impartial 


54 

government  to  suffer  such  long  delays  in 
the  production  of  the  proofs  requisite  for 
just  condemnation,  or  equitable  acquittal ■? 
But,  placed  as  I  am,  does  it  become  me 
to  plead  the  cause  of  friendship  ? 

My  dear  comrade,  do  not  forget  these 
laws  about  which  I  have  been  speaking  to 
you.  Communicate  them  to  me  without 
delay,  and  you  will  soon  attain  the  object 
you  seem  to  aim  at  in  your  correspon- 
dence. 

I  salute  you  in  friendship. 

(Signed)     Henry  Christophe. 


A  true  copy  of  the  originals  deposited 
in  the  archives  of  the  state, 

Compte  de  Limoxaue, 
Secretary  of  State,  Minister 


of  Foreign  Affairs. 


At  Cape  Henry,  by  P.  Roux, 
-  Printer  to  the  King. 


cm 


NARRATIVE 


OF  THE 


ACCESSION  OF  THEIR  ROYAL  MAJESTIES 


TO  THE 


THRONE  OF  HAYTI, 


Before   entering  upon  the  narrative  of 
the  accession  of  their  Royal  Majesties  to 
the  throne,  we  deem  it  our  duty  to  lay  be- 
fore our  readers  a  succinct  exposition  of 
the  principal  events  which  have  occurred, 
and  of  the  principal  operations  antecedent 
to  this  happy  day  of  everlasting  memory. 
The    Haytian    people    had    scarcely 
breathed,  after  their  deliverance  from  the 
presence  of  those  Vandals  who  have  ra- 


56 

vaged   every   country    into    which   their 
well-known    footsteps  have  strayed,   and 
just  freed  from  disorders,   a  brigand-like 
spirit,  and  from  anarchy,  when  our  inde- 
dependence  began  to  be  established,  the 
state  became  organized — commerce,  agri- 
culture,   and   navigation    flourished— our 
internal  fortifications  were  completed; — 
at  length  the  Haytians,  reunited,  recon- 
ciled, perceived  that   there   existed   and 
could  exist  for  them  no  other  country  in 
the  globe  than  these  happy  and  fortunate 
climes,  which  the  sun  delights  to  illumine, 
abundantly  pouring  forth,  with  a  compla- 
cent heat,  all  the  benignity  of  his  benefi- 
cent rays  on  the  fields  in  which  are  to  be 
found,  in  unparalleled  plenty,  those  fruits 
of  delicious  flavour,  and  those  trees  loaded 
with  the  precious  aromatic  juices  of  Ara- 
bia,   which   produce   the   real  nectar   so 
much  esteemed   and  so  generally  prized, 
its  cottons,  cacaos,  &c.  and  so  many  other 
productions  with  which  bounteous  Nature 


57 

hath  endowed  Hayti,  in  the  measure  of  its 
goodness,  the  true  attribute  of  Divine 
Providence ;  when  our  happiness  was  all 
at  once  totally  and  utterly  subverted.  In- 
subordination and  licentiousness  found 
their  way  into  our  armies ;  some  perfi- 
dious men,  who  sold  themselves  to  the 
enemy,  organized  a  conspiracy,  of  which 
history  furnishes  but  few  examples ;  and 
in  the  sequel,  Dessalines,  the  chief  of  the 
government,  was  assassinated.  The  public 
treasures  were  squandered,  a  few  of  the 
conspirators  seized  the  spoils  of  the  unfor- 
tunate state,  dark  and  secret  plots  were 
agitated  in  the  different  regiments,  calum- 
ny pointed  its  shafts,  and  intrigue  was 
busy.  The  Haytians  took  up  arms,  and 
all  the  evils  that  were  sought  and  foment- 
ed by  the  enemies  of  Hayti,  speedily  be- 
came realized  to  afflict  anew  these  beauti- 
ful countries.  Henry  foresaw  all  that  was 
accumulating  to  oppress  his  native  land  ; 
he  saw  that  the  storm  was  particularly  di- 


58 


■ 


rected  against  the  heads  of  the  illustrious 
and  incorruptible  defenders  of  liberty  ; 
and  that,  this  being  accomplished,  the  fac- 
tions proposed  to  themselves  nothing  less 
than  to  substitute  themselves  in  their  place, 
to  deliver  over  the  country  to  our  enemies, 
to  fascinate  and  lull  the  multitude  by  pro- 
mises and  presents  of  pretended  promo- 
tion, which  were  offered  with  a  too  cul- 
pable facility,  in  order  to  effect  the  more 
certain  attainment  of  their  criminal 
ends. 

Great  at  all  times — ever  the  same — and 
reared  and  brought  up  in  revolutions — in 
the  midst  of  the  din  of  arms,  he  was  un- 
moved at  this; — he  knew  what  the  traitors 
and  other  loose  characters,  who  had  given 
rise  to  the  evils  of  a  civil  war,  were  capa- 
ble of.  His  energy  and  his  resolution 
augmented  with  the  dangers  which  he  had 
to  overcome ;  he  braved  the  fury  of  the 
storm,  put  forth  all  his  efforts,  and  shewed 
himself,   with  the  rapidity  of    lightning, 


59 

wherever  his  presence  was  required  ;  he 
dispersed  and  punished  the  traitors,  re- 
vived the  courage  of  the  brave,  and  suc- 
ceeded in  triumphing  over  the  efforts  of 
the  wicked. 

On  the  18th  of  December  1806,  in  a 
proclamation  dated  from  the  citadel 
Henry,  he  points  out  the  secret  agents  of 
those  ambitious  men  who  had  made  them- 
selves busy,  in  every  way,  in  corrupting 
the  troops. 

The  24th,  he  proceeded  to  disperse  the 
collection  of  troublesome  spirits  assembled 
at  Port  aux  Crimes,  who  were  holding  a 
consultation  under  arms,  yet  reeking  with 
the  blood  of  those  martyrs  to  liberty  whom 
they  had  sacrificed  to  their  rage,  their 
ambition,  and  cupidity. 

The  1st  of  January  1807,  he  fought 
the  famous  battle  of  Cibert,  routing  and 
cutting  in  pieces  the  army  of  Petion,  who 
was  himself  obliged  to  throw  away  his  de- 
corations,  in   order  to  protect  his  flic-lit, 


and  then  plunged  into  a  morass  up  to  his 
neck,  before  returning  to  Port  aux  Crimes. 
Henry  then  lays  siege  to  this  rebel 
city,  but  reflecting  upon  the  number  of 
conspirators  whom  he  had  left  in  the  rear, 
added  to  those  who  abounded  in  the  army, 
and  whose  inflammatory  expressions  were 
scarcely  concealed ;  and  considering  the 
horrors  that  must  ensue  from  the  capture 
of  a  city  by  assault,  he  postponed  the  con- 
quest of  it,  and  marched  his  troops  back 
to  their  cantonments. 

A  council  of  state,  composed  of  the 
generals  and  eminent  citizens,  who  saw 
the  necessity  of  establishing  in  these  tem- 
pestuous times  an  order  of  things,  was 
speedily  convoked,  and  they  instituted  the 
constitution  of  the  17th  of  February  1807, 
which  decreed  to  the  chief  magistrate  the 
title  of  President  of  Hayti. 

The  19th  of  February,  he  offered, 
through  the  medium  of  a  proclamation 
distinguished  for  its  good  sense,  a  general 


61 

amnesty,  and  oblivion  of  the  past  to  all 
the  revolted. 

Without  being  diverted  from  the  great 
conceptions  he  had  formed,  he  organizes 
the  civil  and  commercial  tribunals ;  nomi- 
nates to  vacant  places  in  the  army,  as  well 
as  in  the  magistracy;  stimulates  the  work 
of  cultivation  by  the  establishment  of 
companies  of  agriculturists,  known  by  the 
name  of  "  Police  Guards,"  composed  of 
managers  and  heads  of  houses,  the  utility 
of  which  is  now  so  generally  admitted, 
both  on  account  of  the  public  security  and 
the  improvement  of  cultivation  ;  he  more- 
over restored  public  instruction  in  full 
activity,  examined  into  the  administration 
of  the  public  hospitals,  and  carried  into 
every  branch  of  the  service  that  pene- 
trating eye  which  embraces  all  the  details, 
without  their  detracting  fom  the  vast  con- 
ception of  the  whole. 

The  insurrection  continued  to  spread, 
and  the  Haytians,  not  knowing  what  they 


62 

really  wanted,  urged  by  that  restless  spirit 
which  seems  natural  to  them,  take  up  arms 
and  stir  up  a  revolt,  stimulated  by  harangues 
from  the  rebellious.  The  most  beneficial 
acts  of  the  government;  the  regularly  esta- 
blished pay  of  the  troops  ;  the  buying  up 
of  the  coffee,  that  judicious  measure,  so 
well  calculated  to  enhance  the  value  of 
our  territorial  commodities;  all  became,  in 
the  mouths  of  these  infuriate  demagogues, 
so  many  pretexts  for  an  insurrection  of 
the  troops,  as  well  as  of  that  important 
though  unenlightened  body  of  the  people, 
the  cultivators.  The  good  deeds  of  the 
government  thus  became  as  instruments  in 
the  hands  of  calumniators,  Avith  which 
they  had  the  audacity  to  combat  it.  One 
issue  of  specie,  from  the  public  treasury, 
of  227  thousand  gourd  bottles,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  accomplishing  that  very  laudable 
object  of  paying  for  coffee  at  20  sous  to 
the  growers,  ought  of  itself  to  prove,  to  men 
of  good  faith,  at  once  the  greatness  of  the 


63 

plan,  the  advantages  that  must  result  from 
it,  and  the  solicitude  of  the  government 
that  ordained  it. 

In  the  beginning  of  June  1807,  from 
the  extremity  of  the  insurrection  of  the 
Moustiques  the  president  repairs  in  haste 
before  the  town   of  the  Gonaives,  which 
was  sold  to  the  rebels  by  treason,  and  in  a 
few  days  he  compelled  them  to  reimbark 
with  disgrace,  whilst  the  greater  part  of 
the  revolted,  after  having  got  possession 
of  Arcahaye,  presented  themselves  before 
St.  Marc ;  yet,   when  informed  of  the  ar- 
rival of  the  President  and  of  the  flight  of 
Bazelais,   the  rebels  did  not  think  proper 
to  wait  for  him,  but  withdrew  themselves 
into   their  Port   aux  Crimes;    they  were 
pursued  on  their  way,  without  a  possibility 
of  being  overtaken,    so   precipitate   was 
their  flight! 

In  July,  some  troops  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lamarre  were  sent  against  the 
insurgents  of  Port  de  Paix.     The  ninth 


64 

corps  rose  in   a  mass,   and  deserted  the 
cause  of  legitimate  authority.     The  Presi- 
sident  marched,  and  on  the  other  side  of 
the  mountains  of  St.  Louis  repulsed  the 
rebels,  pursued  them  from  post  to  post  up 
to  the  very  forts  of  Port  de  Paix,  where 
they  intrenched  themselves.     He  there  at- 
tacked them  in  order,  displaying  the  rare 
endowments  of  his  energy  and  courage, 
and  concluded,  in  less  than  fifteen  days,  a 
memorable  campaign,  which  was  followed 
by  the  dispersion  of  Lamarre,  the  capture 
of  all  the  forts  at  Port  de  Paix,  and  a 
great  number  of  prisoners. 

A  complaint,  brought  on  by  the  fa- 
tigues of  this  campaign,  suspended  his 
complete  reduction  of  the  rebels.  The 
operations  were  not  followed  up  with  vi- 
gour; they  contented  themselves  with 
keeping  possession  of  the  town  of  Port  de 
Paix,  and  with  too  much  confidence 
despised  or  neglected  pursuing  a  small 
body  of  the  fugitives  who  were  still  in  the 


n  mn 


woods.  A  fatal  error !  strong  reinforce- 
ments were  sent  to  Lamarre  ;  the  rebels, 
by  the  help  of  their  barges  discovered  a 
method  of  maintaining  their  accomplices 
and  furnishing  them  with  ammunition. 
Lamarre,  on  this,  rallies  his  partisans  and 
makes  his  appearance  at  Damalo,  an  ad- 
vantageous position  in  the  mountains, 
distant  some  leagues  from  Port  de  Paix. 

The  President,  scarcely  recovered  from 
his  indisposition,  and  yet  in  a  state  of  con- 
valescence, sets  out  to  place  himself  at  the 
head  of  the  troops;  he  again  dislodges 
the  revolted  from  all  the  positions  they  oc- 
cupied, and  charges  them  himself  at  the 
head  of  his  staff;  they  broke  and  fled,  pur- 
sued on  all  sides.  Henry  now  saw,  with 
emotion,  that  these  unhappy  men  were 
undeceived,  and  about  to  renounce  their 
errors. 

During  this  expedition  the  troops  of  the 
west  rivalled  those  of  the  north  in  valour 
and  achievements,  in  again  subduing  the 

F 


!■ 


66 

revolted  who  had  the  audacity  to  attack 
the  line.  It  was  on  the  memorable  20th  of 
September,  when  eight  battalions  of  faith- 
ful troops  got  the  better  of  twenty-one  of 
the  revolted,  who  were  intrenched  and  in 
the  most  advantageous  position.  This  in- 
stance is  a  proof  that  bravery  is  insepara- 
ble from  honour  and  fidelity.  These  rebel 
troops  who  could  not  bear  the  sight  and 
presence  of  those  under  the  legitimate  au- 
thority, are  nevertheless  the  same  who 
conquered  the  south  under  the  French 
armies. 

Whilst  the  rebellion  seemed  to  acquire 
consistency  in  the  south,  the  legitimate 
authority  found  one  of  its  firmest  defenders 
in  General  Jean  Baptiste  Perrier,  called 
Gauman,  who  separated  from  the  revolters, 
erected  the  standard  of  fidelity  and  ho- 
nour in  the  mountains  of  the  great  Bay  of 
Jeremy;  rallied  his  brethren,  enlightened 
them  ;  undeceived  them  respecting  the  ab- 
surd calumnies  of  the  revolters,  and  paid 


67 


homage  to  the   President,  whom  he  ac- 
knowledges as    the  only  chief  to  whom 
he  wished  and  ought  to  pay  obedience. 
His  successes,  aided   by  the  means  that 
were  dispatched  to  him,  brought  about  a 
useful  and  fortunate  diversion :  he  kept  the 
rebels    constantly  in   check   and  in   per- 
petual alarm  :   he   pounced,  with  the  ra- 
pidity of  the  eagle,  upon  the  places  where 
he  was  not  expected,  leaving  behind  him 
traces  of  his  having  been  there,  and  retired 
into  inaccessible  fastnesses,  which  he  knew 
how  to  select,  from  the  moment   that  a 
superior  force  marched  against  him:  he 
showed  himself  too  incorruptible  by  any  of 
the  caresses  and   promises  which  the  re- 
volters  had  tendered,   to  attract   him    to 
their   cause:    he    braved     at    once   their 
menaces  and  their  stratagems,  and  shewed 
himself  always  unconquerable. 

Such  brilliant  expeditions  as  these 
we  have  enumerated,  not  having  yet  sick- 
ened the  revolters,  so  blind  is  presump- 


I 


m 


68 

lion !    they  again    directed,    towards    the 
end    of  October,  an   attempt  against   St. 
Marc.     The    President   repaired    to    this 
town,  and  the  day  after  his  arrival  caused 
them  to  be  attacked   at   the    habitations 
Pivert  and  Florenceau,  where  they  had 
gained   time  sufficient  to   intrench  them- 
selves head  high.     The  day  of  the  25th 
wras  rendered  doubly   memorable  by  the 
two  actions  which  took  place,  at  the  ter- 
mination of  which  the  rebels  were  over- 
thrown and  pursued  with  desperate  vigour 
by  the  horse  guards  of  the  President.     A 
great  number  of  prisoners  was  made,  and 
the  fields  of  battle  were  covered  with  dead 
bodies.     The  chests   and   colours    of  the 
rebel  army  fell  into  our  possession.    Then 
were  to  be  seen  the  miseries  of  war  dis- 
played in  all  their  horror;  wretched  fugi- 
tives wandering  about,  lost  in  the  woods, 
perishing  of  hunger  and  of  thirst,  venting 
imprecations    against   those  traitors   who 
had  exposed  them  to  so  deplorable  a  lot," 


69 

and    running,    like   new    Europeans,    to 
the   sea-shore  in  the  hope    of  regaining 
their  vessels  which  were  kept  at  anchor,  as 
the  only  refuge  in  which  they  could  find 
safety.     It  was  on  this  day  too  that  the 
brilliant  valour  of  our  troops  was  so  con- 
spicuous ;  but  particular  praise  is  here  due 
to    the  2d  and  3d   battalions   of  the   2d 
regiment,  and  the  1st  battalion  of  the  27th, 
which  after  a  fatiguing  march  of  thirty-six 
leagues   without   resting,    contributed    so 
effectually  to  the  glory  of  this  day.     The 
women  of  St.  Marc  have  afforded  on  this, 
as  well  as   on  preceding  and  subsequent 
occasions,  proofs  of  patriotism  and  ardent 
devotion  to  their  countrv's  cause,  such  as 
characterised  the  ancient  Spartans.    Spec- 
tators of  the  combat,  they  applauded  from 
the  top  of  the  ramparts  the  valour  of  our 
troops,  and  were  the  first  to  shout  aloud 
the  cry  of  victory.     Their  generous  cares 
have  brought  alleviation   and  comfort  to 
the  aid   of  suffering  humanity,   by   their 


m  MjuwurHii 


70 

affording  in  the  most  ample  manner  that 
relief  to  the  wounded  which  their  state  de- 
manded. 

Gratitude  has  since  rewarded  the  zeal 
and  fidelity  of  the  province  of  the  West, 
with  the  appellation  bestowed  upon  St. 
Marc,  of  the  faithful,  a  title  equally 
honourable  and  glorious  to  her. 

The  enemy  being  driven  away,  the  Pre- 
sident, with  his  accustomed  activity,  set 
out  from  St.  Marc  the  28th,  and  on  the  1st 
of  November  he  was  at  Port  de  Paix,  after 
having  passed  the  Great  Hill,  and  traversed 
the  mountains  of  St.  Louis;  without  rest- 
ing, he  marched  over  those  of  Port  de 
Paix,  caused  the  rebels  to  evacuate  the 
formidable  position  of  Calvary,  which  they 
had  got  possession  of,  then  returned  to  the 
city  of  Port  de  Paix,  organised  a  system 
of  attack  as  well  of  defence,  and  on  the 
7th  he  returned  to  his  capital. 

In  the  course  of  September  in  the  year 
following,  the  revolters  not  being  yet  sick- 


^1 


71 

ened  by  their  repealed  defeats,  were  to  re- 
ceive a  new  proof  of  the  inutility  of  their 
endeavours.  One  of  their  most  formidable 
expeditions  from  the  Port  aux  Crimes,  to 
compose  which  they  had  put  in  requisi- 
tion every  body  from  infancy  to  old  age, 
menaced  the  cordon  of  the  west  at  all 
points,  whilst  Lamarre,  by  a  bold  stroke, 
takes  post,  with  all  the  forces  that  he  could 
collect  in  the  centre  of  the  mountains  of 
Port  de  Paix,  menacing  the  city  at  the 
same  time. 

In  the  west,  the  camps  of  Colleau,  La- 
croix,  Dubourg,  and  the  post  of  Verrier, 
were  successively  attacked,  and  became 
the  theatre  of  the  valour  of  our  troops, 
and  that  of  the  losses  of  the  enemy.  The 
insurgents  in  the  mean  time  send  out  de- 
tachments to  pillage  and  set  on  fire  all 
solitary  and  unprotected  houses,  a  species 
of  brigand-like  warfare  in  which  they 
excel;  then  reuniting  their  troops,  they 
form  the  project  of  laying  siege  to   St. 


Jmt 

72 

Marc,  but  at  a  very  respectful  distance ; 
they  take  up  a  position  at  Langeae  Ros- 
sineau,Jeanton,and  Charette;  there,  think- 
ing themselves  secure,  they  organize  camps; 
no  longer  confiding  in  their  numbers,  they 
raise  intrenchment  upon  intrenchment,  of 
double  and  triple  stages,  and  construct 
gigantic  works,  hastening  all  the  while  the 
receipt  of  ammunition  and  provisions  sup- 
plied by  means  of  their  corsairs,  which 
they  keep  at  anchor  in  the  Bay  of  La- 
conde. 

In  this  position  they  remained  for 
twenty-five  days  ;  but  hunger  began  to  be 
felt,  and  considerable  detachments  from 
the  main  body  traversed  the  mountains  to 
maraud  for  provisions,  but  the  moveable 
columns  of  our  army  repulsed  them  at  the 
point  of  the  bayonet  every  time  they  ap^ 
peared  before  the  plantations. 

The  operation  next  commenced  was 
the  attack  of  the  rebels  at  Charette,  who, 
by  means  of  our  well  served  batteries,  sus- 


73 


taincd  a  considerable  loss,  which  had  the 
effect  of  obliging  them  to  dig  trenches  to 
afford  them  shelter  from  our  bombs  and 
bullets,  which  were  directed  to  intercept 
their  procuring  water  and  every  kind  of 
provisions. 

It  was  determined  to  occupy  the 
position  of  Mary,  in  the  rear  of  the 
enemy,  so  as  to  cut  off  their  retreat.  I 
know  that  our  intrepid  general  thought 
of  nothing  less  than  requesting  to  have  the 
disposal  of  a  part  of  the  forces  of  the 
west,  to  pass  by  the  mountains,  and 
possess  himself  of  the  city  of  Port  aux 
Crimes,  destitute  as  it  was  of  troops,  while 
the  rebels  were  dying  of  hunger,  hemmed 
in  around  all  their  positions. 

In  the  mean  time  the  squadron  with 
stores  and  provisions,  which  had  left  the 
Cape  to  go  to  the  relief  of  St.  Marc,  did 
arrive ;  calm  winds  had  detained  it  on  its 
passage,  but  with  what  pleasure  was  it  de- 
scried by  our  army  in  full  sail  after  the  rebel 


I  ■ 


74 

barks,  and  in  the  act  of  capturing  seven 
of  their  corsairs  that  were  leaving  the 
Port  aux  Crimes  with  ammunition  and 
necessaries,  which  they  were  carrying  to 
the  relief  of  their  accomplices  ;  the  rest 
saved  themselves  by  superior  sailing. 
Our  operations  were  then  carried  on  with 
more  activity,  and  it  was  determined  that 
new  and  vigorous  measures  should  be 
adopted  for  defeating  the  insurgents,  and 
allowing  them  no  time  to  breathe.  Posi- 
tions were  taken  up  within  pistol  shot ; 
and  the  insurgents,  closely  cooped  up, 
cannonaded  or  killed  off,  no  more  dared 
to  make  their  appearance ;  so  that  every 
outlet  being  guarded  to  cut  off  their  re- 
treat, we  in  a  great  measure  calculated 
upon  their  being  reduced;  but  on  the  18th 
of  November  the  rebels  made  their  escape 
by  a  road  abandoned  ever  since  the  revo- 
lution, and  covered  with  shrubs  and  log- 
wood, which  had  been  deemed  imprac- 
ticable; they  were,  nevertheless,  pursued, 


75 

and  it  is  said,  that  in  this  affair  Petion 
disguised  himself  in  female  attire,  many 
women  being  about  the  camp,  and  that 
thus  our  troops  allowed  him  to  pass  on, 
intent  only  on  pursuing  men  with  arms 
in  their  hands.  The  places  abandoned 
by  the  rebels  presented  the  appearance  in 
reality  of  a  churchyard,  in  consequence 
of  the  great  number  of  graves  they  con- 
tained. 

Lamarre  having,  as  we  already  ob- 
served, taken  up  his  position  in  the  moun- 
tains of  Port  de  Paix,  and  fortified  it  in 
an  equal  degree  with  that  of  Port  aux 
Crimes,  saw  himself  surrounded  in  a  simi- 
lar manner,  and  in  want  of  every  thin^; 
he  burnt  with  the  rage  of  despair,  made 
attack  upon  attack,  which  being  uni- 
formly repulsed,  compelled  him  to  retire 
into  his  intrenchments,  not  without  con- 
siderable loss.  To  furnish  some  idea  of 
the  fury  displayed  in  this  quarter,  a  fury 
only  to  be  found  in  civil  wars,  the  most 


76 

formidable  ramparts  on   both  sides,  were 
built  up,  one  against  another,  so  that  no 
one   could    venture   to    lift   up   his   head 
without  being  immediately  shot.  Extreme 
and  indeed  frightful  means  were  employed 
to  annihilate  these  madmen  ;  subterranean 
engagements    took    place ;    sappers    and 
miners    would    work    with    indefatigable 
perseverance  to  blow  up  the  fortifications 
of  each  other,   and   whole   battalions   of 
grenadiers    were    sent  into  the   air ;    the 
ground  covered  with  mangled  limbs,  the 
dying  and  the  dead,  while  others  found 
their  grave  in  the  bowels  of  the    earth. 
What  a  distressing  picture  for  humanity  ! 
let  us  however  pursue  it,  for  truth  requires 
I     should    not    disguise    our    sufferings. 
Those    same   ramparts,    when    destroyed, 
were  as  soon  occupied  again  :  a  murderous 
fire  was  kept  up  from  the  ruins,  whilst  new 
ramparts  were  erecling  to  replace  the  first. 
At  length,  after  a  thousand  engagements, 
famine,   losses,    disease*    and    desertions, 


77 

compelled  the  insurgents  to  break  through 
the  lines  and  retire  into  the  Mole! 

The  quarters  of  Gros-Morne,  the 
mountains  of  Port  de  Paix,  of  Monstigne, 
and  of  Jean  Rabel,  then  breathed  once 
more;  the  cultivators  returned  to  their 
labours,  the  army  formed  a  cordon  in  the 
mountains  which  surround  the  Mole,  and 
besieged  that  place. 

In  the  Spanish  part,  some  conspirators 
sold  to  the  insurgents,  such  as  Stephen 
Albert  and  Gilbert,  endeavoured  to  de- 
ceive them  in  exciting  them  against  us, 
but  they  received  the  reward  of  their 
treason  at  their  own  hands. 

The  skilful  policy  of  the  President 
took  advantage  of  the  happy  moment  of 
the  usurpation  of  the  Spanish  monarchy 
in  Europe  to  draw  closer  the  ties  of  amity 
with  those  in  Hayti.  He  had  long  con- 
ceived that,  as  inhabitants  of  the  same 
soil,  a  similarity  of  wants  ought  to  unite 
us  with  our  brethren,   the  Spanish  Hay- 


78 

tians,  when  the  same  enemies  menace 
our  existence.  To  this  effect,  he  sounds 
their  inclinations  ;  he  finds  them  equally 
well  disposed  with  his  own  ;  he  dispatches 
arms  and  warlike  stores  to  the  general, 
Don  Juan  Sanchez  Ramirez,  and  by  these 
generous  aids  he  enables  him  to  undertake 
offensive  operations  against  the  city  of  St. 
Domingo,  to  attack  the  place  whither  Fer- 
rand  had  taken  refuge  with  the  French 
troops  who  still  occupied  this  point,  and 
finally  to  expel  them  from  it. 

He  restores  the  ancient  ties  of  friend- 
ship and  of  trade  with  this  just,  loyal,  and 
sensible  people,  and  the  result  has  proved 
that  he  has  had  no  occasion  to  repent  of  it. 

The  fury  of  contention  which  we  have 
thus  slightly  sketched,  did  not  however 
prevent  the  chief  of  the  government  from 
directing  his  attention,  even  amid  camps, 
to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  He  had  per- 
ceived that  a  wise  administration  of  the 
revenues  of  the  state  could  alone  save  it. 


79 

Men  of  unimpeachable  integrity  replaced 
those  who  did  not  stand  so  clear  in  their 
office.     A   commission  for  the   examina- 
tion of  the  public  accounts  was  establish- 
ed ;  the  state  then  began  to  feel  the  im- 
mensity of  its  resources  ;   the  troops  were 
clothed,  equipped,  and  paid  ;  a  navy  was 
all   at   once   created,     and    our    seamen 
already,    who  had  only  been  accustomed 
to  manoeuvre  in  slight  vessels,  learnt,  with 
the  aid  of  the  compass,   how  to  navigate 
ships  of  three  masts,  to  cruise  in  the  most 
stormy  latitudes,  and  to  surmount  the  fury 
of  the  storms.   The  Haytian  flag  displayed 
itself  on  the  astonished  ocean,  and   with 
surprise  and  admiration   was  seen  a  new 
people  in  the  history  of  navigation. 

Not  only  did  this  navy  become  the 
terror  of  the  insurgents,  but  it  wrested 
from  them  the  empire  of  the  seas,  of  which 
they  had  become  so  vain. 

The  citadel  Henry,  that  palladium  of 
liberty,    that   majestic    bulwark  of  inde- 


80 

pendence,  that  monument  of  the  greatness 
and  of  the  vast  combinations  of  a  Henry, 
is  built  on  the  lofty  summit  of  one  of  the 
highest  mountains  in  the  island,  whence 
you  may  discover,  to  the  left,  the  island 
of  Tortuga,  and  the  reflection  of  its  beau- 
tiful canal  ;  in  front,  the  gentle  risings, 
with  the  city  of  Cape  Henry,  its  roadstead, 
and  the  vast  expanse  of  the  ocean.  On 
the  right,  La  Grange,  Monte  Christ,  the 
city  of  Fort  Royal,  Mancheneel  Bay,  and 
the  surrounding  hills.  The  eye  is  gratified 
with  the  prospect  of  the  beautiful  plain, 
and  the  magnificent  carpet  of  verdure 
spread  before  it. 

At  the  back,  the  extended  chain  of 
mountains  seems,  as  it  were,  the  frame  to 
this  enchanting  picture.  The  position, 
fortified  by  nature,  and  to  which  art  has 
added  all  its  science,  with  casemates  and 
bomb  proofs,  has  secured  it  from  being 
successfully  besieged,  while  the  mouths  of 
the  cannon  overtop  the  elevation  of  the 


81 

high  ground,  and  command  the  adjacent 
territory,  affording  protection  to  the  whole 
of  the  north,  and  indeed  of  Hayti  itself, 
this  being  the  most  formidable  defence  it 
possesses. 

The   fortifications    in    the  interior,    if 
they  had  but  the  sole  advantage  of  having 
taught  us  to  regard  lightly  the  capture  of 
our  sea-ports,  would  always  claim  a  great 
degree  of  importance  in  that  point  of  view 
alone.     A  nation  impressed  with  the  con- 
viction  that  the  guarantee  of  individual 
protection  to  its  members,   exists  only  in 
favoured  situations   of  ground,    and   that 
this  guarantee  is  to  be  found  only  in  its 
valour,  in  the  sacrifices  it  is  willing  to  un- 
dergo, and  moreover,  in  the  woods  and 
mountains  that  are  familiar  to  its  inhabit- 
ants ;— such  a  nation,  I  say,  will  not  de- 
spond at  the  temporary  abandonment  of 
some  villages,  which  good  policy  and  sa- 
lutary precaution  may  have  induced  them 
to  set  on  fire  at  the  approach  of  ils  ene- 

G 


82 

mies;  particularly  when,  on  a  proper 
foresight,  it  is  actually  necessary,  in  order 
to  baffle  the  designs  of  their  oppressors, 
providing  themselves,  at  the  same  time, 
with  every  thing  necessary,  to  resist  all 
such  attacks  as  may  be  directed  against 
them. 

Sans  Souci,  a  town  rising  into  prefer- 
ence, and  likely  to  become  the  capital  of 
Hayti,  has  been  established.  Ravines 
have  been  filled  up,  mountains  levelled, 
and  public  roads  laid  out.  This  superb 
royal  palace,  the  glory  of  Hayti,  is  carried 
up  to  a  great  elevation  ;  the  beauty  and 
durability  of  its  construction,  its  sumptuous 
apartments,  all  with  inlaid  work,  and  lined 
with  the  most  beautiful  and  rarest  tapestry, 
which  was  amassed  at  a  great  expense,  and 
with  particular  care  in  the  selection. 

The  furniture,  and  elegant  tapestry,  are 
selected  with  good  taste,  the  gardens  ar- 
ranged with  a  just  symmetry,  through 
which  meanders  a  pure  stream,  having  a 


HMMMHHM 


83 

degree  of  freshness  that  particularly  cha- 
racterizes it,  the  jets  d'eau,  the  fruit  trees, 
and  European  productions,  &c.  &c.  com- 
bine to   embellish  the   retreat  of  a  hero, 
and  to  attract  the  admiration  of  strangers; 
whilst  a  church,  whose  noble  dome  agree- 
ably points  out  the  richness  of  its  archi- 
tecture, and  other  public  establishments, 
such   as    arsenals,    dock-yards,    and    bar- 
racks, have  sprung  up  around  in  spite  of 
the  ravages  of  war.     To  see  the  astonish- 
ing activity  diffused  in  all  these  works, 
one  would  say  that  the  greatest  tranquil- 
lity  had  prevailed,  and  that  it   was  the 
hand  of  peace  which  brought  them  to  per- 
fection ;  immense  treasures,  the  fruits  of 
economy  in  the  public  administration  of 
finances,  fill   the  spacious  coffers  of  the 
citadel  Henry. 

I  know  it  to  be  one  of  the  intentions 
of  our  King  to  have  the  rotunda  of  his  pa- 
lace in  the  citadel  paved  and  lined  with 
quadruples.   He  is  rich  enough  to  do  this. 


84 

Such  a  novel  species  of  apartment  will  re- 
flect a  precious  drapery,  and  be  without 
parallel  in  the  world.  On  the  frontispiece 
of  this  monument  the  motto  of  Louis  XIV 
should  be  inscribed, 

Nee  pluribus  impar. 

A  worthy  minister  of  religion,  and  phi- 
lanthropic,   author,    the    Abbe    Gregoire, 
wdio,  since  the  commencement  of  his   ca- 
reer, has  devoted  his  pen  to  the  investiga- 
tion of  truth,   and  the   defence  of  huma- 
nity, has,  by  his   affecting  work    on  the 
Literature  of  the  Negroes,  written    with 
all  the  eloquence  and  simplicity  of  truth, 
avenged  our  rights  by  openly  publishing, 
in    the  face  of  his  countrymen,    at  once 
their  crimes  and  the  injustice  of  the  pre- 
tended  superiority   of  their  species   over 
ours.     The  President  read  his  work  with 
all  that  interest  it  inspires,  and  has  voted 
him  his  thanks  conveyed  in  a  Hay lian  work 
called  "   The  Cry  of  Nature/'  which   do 


85 

equal  honour  to  the  virtuous  prelate  to 
whom  they  are  addressed,  and  the  head  of 
the  government  conferring  such  a  mark  of 
respect,  at  once  public  and  flattering  in  its 
acknowled  ement. 

The  siege  of  the  Mole  was  converted 
into  a  blockade  by  sea  and  land :  the  Pre- 
sident was  desirous  of  reducing  the  rebels 
and  sparing  the  effusion  of  blood  at  the 
same  time.     It  was  in  their  cruise   before 
this  place  that  our  seamen  served   their 
apprenticeship,   and    attained   that  supe- 
riority   which    has     since     distinguished 
them.     One  trait  of  these  John  Barts  of 
the  new  world  ought  not  to  be  passed  over 
in  silence.  The  Foudroyant  having  missed 
the  anchorage  at  the  platform  early  in  the 
night  of  the  28th  of  March,  1809,   drifted 
into  the  midst  of  five  vessels  of  the  rebel 
party,  who  were  endeavouring  secretly  to 
throw  succours  into  the  Cape.     The   cap- 
tain of  this  ship  kept  them  all  in  check  by 


86 

a  bold  manoeuvre,  and  the  fire  of  mus- 
quetry  and  great  guns  until  daylight,  when 
our  squadron  was  enabled  to  go  to  his 
assistance  and  extricate  him,  pursuing  the 
rebels  to  their  hiding  places,  after  having 
frustrated  the  object  of  their  expedition. 

Four  months  after  this  event  a  new  in- 
cursion took  place,  after  the  manner  of 
that  of  September,  1808;  having  again 
for  its  object  to  bring  off  Lamarre.  The 
rebels  had  forgotten  the  many  defeats  they 
had  experienced  in  so  many  quarters,  they 
wanted  one  lesson  more,  which  they 
speedily  received ;  but  being  too  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  environs  of  St.  Marc, 
they  contented  themselves  with  appearing 
before  the  Mirebalais,  and  when  they  were 
about  to  be  attacked,  nearly  the  whole  of 
their  forces  retreated  a  great  way  into  the 
Spanish  part,  and  then  fell  unexpectedly 
upon  the  spring  and  the  great  river,  having 
promised  themselves  nothing  less,  in  the 


11 


87 

height  of  folly  and  presumption,  than  a 
march  upon  the  Capital,  as  they  had  pom- 
pously given  out. 

The  President,  informed  of  the  projects 
of  the  rebels,  would  not  take  any  step  to 
give  them  a  confidence  which  he  was  sure 
they  would  abuse:  the  event  has  justified 
his  conjectures.  It  was  only  on  their  ar- 
rival in  front  of  the  spring,  that  troops  were 
sent  aeainst  them  to  harass  them.  Without 
giving  the  rebels  time  to  recollect  them- 
selves, they  were  immediately  attacked 
and  routed.  The  perfidious  David  Trois, 
commandant  of  the  expedition,  lost  his  life 
on  the  occasion;  many  of  their  noted 
chiefs  fell  into  our  power,  pursued  by  our 
troops,  who  effected  a  junction  with  those 
of  the  west,  in  the  Spanish  Savannas:  on 
their  arrival  at  Banique,  they  found  the 
TArtibonite  swollen  with  rain.  One  party 
attempted  to  cross  it  by  swimming,  and 
were  carried  away  by  the  flood.  Our  army 
being   close   up,   the  attack   became  ex- 


1 

',<  { i 

' 

H 

5 ' 

88 

tremely  animated;  the  horse  guards  of  the 
President  charged,  cutting  down  or  dis- 
persing in  every  direction  all  opposed  to 
them.  The  loss  of  men  drowned  is  esti- 
mated at  two  battalions.  Lamarre  at- 
tempted also  to  make  an  attack  upon  our 
cordon  of  troops;  but  he  found  a  wall  of 
brass  which  he  could  never  pierce,  and 
abandoned  his  enterprise,  his  horse,  two 
aid-de-camps,  and  a  multitude  of  his  ac- 
complices on  the  field. 

The  following  paragraph  contains  a 
very  just  and  sensible  reflection,  extracted 
from  the  general  orders  to  the  army  of 
37th  of  August,  1809,  which  give  a.  narra- 
tive of  these  two  victories. 

"  It  is  in  vain  that  the  mild  policy  of 
his  Serene  Highness  the  Lord  President 
induces  him  to  abstain  from  attacking  the 
revolted,  in  order  to  afford  them  time  for 
repentance.  These  ungrateful  beings  are 
unmindful  of  his  paternal  intentions;  they 
falsely  imagine,  because  he  does  not  carry 


89 

fire  and  sword  into  their  dwellings,  when 
the  innocent  would  fall  victims  to  such  a 
disaster,  that  there  are  no  means  of  re- 
ducing them;  but  the  most  efficacious 
method  of  reducing  them  is  to  leave  them 
to  themselves.  In  their  intense  blindness 
they  come  to  receive  the  punishment  due 
to  their  crimes." 

The    disorganized    faction    that   had 
placed   Petion  at  its  head,  seeing  he  did 
not  accord  with   their   wishes  to  the  end 
they  proposed  to  themselves,  and  otherwise 
convinced  by  their  experience  of  his  want 
of  talents  and  of  energy,   solicited  the  re- 
call of  Rigaud,  a  man  who  was  born  evi- 
dently for  the  ill  luck  of  his  country,  when 
we  consider  the  sad  and  deplorable  effects 
produced  by  his  rebellion  against  the  Go- 
vernor Louverture,  misfortunes  which  are 
but   too   well   known.     To   conceal    their 
projects,  and  the  end  which  the  perfidious 
government  that  employs  him  proposes  to 
itself,  and  to  gull  and  deceive  respecting 


90 

his  connivance,  they  caused  him  to  adopt 
the  pretext  of  an  escape,  as  if  nothing  could 
be  more  easy  than  to  lull  the  vigilance  of 
a  restless  and  suspicious  police,   such  as 
that  established  by  Bonaparte  in  his  states, 
whose  spies  and  agents  abound  in  every 
court,    and  likewise   in    all  parts   of  the 
globe,  to   carry  into   effect  the  plans  of 
their  master.     One  must  be  blind  indeed 
to  suppose  that  a  hapless  islander  (espe- 
cially of  his  colour)  could  be  able  to  save 
himself  from  the  dungeons  in  which  he 
had  pined,  so  long  as  the  occasion  did  not 
offer  of  administering  to  the  purposes  ex- 
pected of  him.     Besides,  his  arrival,  and 
the  means  by  which  he  set  about  it,  were 
sufficient  to  do  away  with  all  doubt  in 
that  respect.     He  sets  out  then  under  a 
feigned  and  disguised  name;  he  is  accom- 
panied by  two  aides-de-camp,  which  leads 
to  an  evident  supposition  of  the  part  they 
intend  he   should   act.     He   reaches   the 
United  States,  directed  and  recommended 


*  U  I9U3 


91 

to  some  French  agents.  He  keeps  him- 
self concealed,  not  to  excite  suspicion,  and 
to  shun  an  exposure.  Notwithstanding, 
he  is  marked  out  by  the  friends  of  our 
government;  he  slips  away  and  avoids  the 
British  cruisers,  and  on  the  7th  April 
1810,  towards  night,  arrives  at  Aux  Cayes. 
He  is  received  with  welcome  by  those  of 
his  partisans  whose  foolish  and  presump- 
tuous hopes  he  had  excited;  but  the  ma- 
jority of  good  citizens  conceal  themselves 
or  remain  silent;  they  do  not  allow  them- 
selves to  be  stunned  by  the  declamations 
of  this  pretended  martyr  to  liberty,  this 
contemptible  apostle  of  falsehood,  this 
sneaking  instrument  of  our  enemies,  who 
comes  to  aid  their  criminal  endeavours. 
He  soon  repairs  to  Port  aux  Crimes; 
having  been  unsuccessful  in  recovering  the 
tatters  of  this  usurped  authority,  for  the 
traitors  do  not  agree  amongst  themselves, 
he  returns  to  Aux  Cayes  with  the  most  crafty 
of  his  partisans,  and  there  he  at  length 


92 

concludes  by  bringing  about  a  division 
between  the  department  of  the  south  and 
that  portion  of  the  west  occupied  by  the 
rebels,  till  he  may  at  length  substitute  him- 
self in  the  room  of  Petion,  the  present 
object  of  his  ambition. 

Hence  springs  a  most  sorrowful  consi- 
deration for  humanity.  We  know  that 
our  dissensions  give  joy  to  the  friends  of 
slavery,  that  our  common  tyrants  wish  to 
see  them  during  all  our  days,  and  that 
the}r  calculate  upon  nothing  short  of  a 
total  annihilation  of  the  population  of 
Hayti,  whom  they  wish  to  replace  by  new 
wretches  transplanted  from  the  regions  of 
Africa.  We  are  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  whole  extent  of  their  villainy; 
and  we  seem  eager,  in  our  rivalry,  to  serve 
them  effectually,  by  carrying  on  the  work 
of  destruction  amongst  ourselves.  O  de- 
lirium  of  the  passions !  O  inconceivable 
fatality!  to  what  lengths  will  men  suffer 
themselves  to  be  carried  who  listen  to  the 


mm* 


93 

false  illusions  of  ambition!  May  we  not 
apprehend  that  our  enemies  will,  with 
justice,  apply  to  us  these  two  verses? 

Too  prodigal  of  blood,  they  ought  to  stay, 
As  our  avengers,  they  each  other  slay. 

Rigaud  is  the  more  culpable,  that,  after 
having  experienced  at  different  times  the 
effects  of  the  wiles  of  the  French  govern- 
ment, he  still  consents,  a  third  time,  to  be- 
come again  their  tool,  and  to  labour  for  the 
destruction  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  En- 
lightened as  he  is,  the  language  he  ought 
to  have  held,  when  he  touched  the  soil  of 
Hayti,  would  have  been  at  once  becoming 
and  easily  expressed. 

"  I  return/'  he  should  have  said  to  the 
head  of  the  government,  "  from  that  bar- 
barous country,  where,  as  the  reward  of 
my  easy  compliance,  I  was  left  to  languish 
in  dungeons;  I  have  heard  deliberations 
on  the  ruin  of  my  fellow-citizens.  Wel- 
comed from  the  moment  when  they  thought 


94 

I  might  cooperate  in  this  abominable  de- 
sign, I  found  myself  afterwards  treated 
and  caressed;  they  put  my  ambition  to 
the  test ;  they  offered  me  a  fortune  and  the 
restoration  of  the  former  rank  I  held. 
But,  senseless  men!  how  could  they  think 
that  I  was  so  devoid  of  reason  and  of  good 
sense,  so  easy  and  so  stupid  as  to  lend  my- 
self to  their  criminal  designs?  The  two  cruel 
lessons  of  experience  I  have  undergone 
have  instructed  me  too  well.  I  have  dis- 
sembled, I  have  consented  to  all;  I  have 
promised  every  thing  to  extricate  myself 
from  the  fetters  of  bondage.  My  first 
thought,  on  reaching  this  classic  land  of 
liberty,  is  that  of  acknowledging  the  reign- 
ing sovereign,  whose  cause  is  inseparable 
from  mine.  To  him  I  owe  the  confession 
of  former  errors,  and  at  his  feet  I  ought  to 
lay  my  repentance.  I  swear  fidelity  to 
him,  and  henceforth  to  labour  in  consoli- 
dating the  liberty  and  independence  of 
my  country,  the  sole  end  for  which  I  took 


95 

up  arms/'  Truly,  and  we  do  not  hesitate 
to  say,  had  he  maintained  such  language 
as  this,  had  he  employed  his  influence  in 
reclaiming  Petion  and  his  associates  to 
right  principles,  had  he  not  sought  to  dis- 
member the  state  that  he  might  appro- 
priate to  himself  its  spoils,  he  would  have 
been  received  with  open  arms  by  the  head 
of  the  government,  who  would  have  par- 
doned his  faults,  and  overlooked  his  past 
errors,  as  he  would  have  wished  that  God 
might  pardon  them;  and  finally,  he  would 
have  drawn  down  upon  him  the  blessings 
of  the  people ;  instead  of  which,  by  pur- 
suing a  line  of  conduct  diametrically  oppo- 
site, he  has  prepared  for  himself  the  most 
inauspicious  omens,  and,  as  a  final  pros- 
pect, he  digs  his  own  grave  and  that  of 
his  partisans. 

"  You  have  been  the  first"  (said  the 
head  of  the  government  to  Bonnet,  when 
after  the  decease  of  the  Emperor  he  came 
to  the  Cape)  "  to  exhibit  to  the  troops 


96 

breaches  of  discipline,  so  that  when  you 
wished  to  restore  order  and  duty  amongst 
them,  you  could  never  effect  it ;  they  will 
turn  their  arms  against  you,  yourselves, 
when  once  tainted  with  crime.  To  pro- 
long your  existence,  you  will  be  obliged 
to  allow  them  to  do  whatever  they  please. 
When  the  treasures  of  the  state  which  you 
have  dilapidated,  shall  become  exhausted, 
you  can  no  longer  pay  them ;  you  will  be 
constrained  to  have  recourse  to  extreme 
measures,  and  to  suffer  the  fatal  effects  of 
all  their  licentiousness.  As  for  Petion,  I 
pity  him  ;  instead  of  being  the  chief,  he  is 
only  the  slave  and  instrument  of  your  fac- 
tion. When  he  shall  be  well  drawn  in, 
and  on  affairs  becoming  desperate,  you 
will  abandon  him,  as  you,  Bonnet,  parti- 
cularly, did  with  General  Vilatte,  whose 
ruin  you  were  the  cause  of  on  the  30th 
Ventose.  In  exciting  a  civil  war,  you  will 
be  responsible  for  all  the  mischiefs  that 
will  be  the  result  of  it,  for  one  knows  very 


■  it  ma 


97 

well  the  day  when  the  sword  is  drawn 
from  the  scabbard,  but  no  one  can  tell 
when  it  shall  be  put  up  again/' 

What  words  could  be  more  prophetic 
than  these  ?  All  that  Henry  had  predicted 
has  come  to  pass.    The  chief  instigator  of 
the  most  signal  treason  has  seen  himself, 
in  his  turn,  betrayed,  abandoned  by  the 
perfidious   wretches  who  had  drawn  him 
into  the  abyss.     Has  not  Bonnet  been  one 
of  the  first  to  go  and  join  Rigaud,  and  to 
declare  himself  against  the  rebel  Petion  ? 
To  resume  the  thread  of  the  narrative. 
The   President  having  employed  all  the 
means  which  his  great  mind  could  devise, 
and  despairing  of  getting  possession  of  the 
Mole  unless  by  force  of  arms,  resolved  to 
take  the  command  in  person  of  the  troops 
who  were  besieging  it ;  and  after  vigorous 
operations,  in  which  he  displayed  his  ta- 
lents in  the  great  art  of  war,  he  had  the 
glory  of  making  himself  master  of  this 
famous  rebel  city,  and  of  causing   those 

H 


98 

who  defended  it  to  lay  down  their  arms  at 
discretion,  after  the  two  principal  leaders 
had  lost  their  lives  in  the  place. 

The  operations  alone  of  this  siege  would 
require  a  very  lengthened  work  to  de- 
scribe, for  they  abound  in  traits  of  bravery 
and  heroism  which  belong  to  the  Haytian 

nation. 

Subjoined  is  the  Proclamation  which 
the  President  addressed  to  the  army  after 
the  taking  of  this  city,  and  which  so  well 
paints  the  sentiments  of  his  heart. 


99 


Stale  of  Hayti. 


PROCLAMATION. 


■ 

I§ffl 

1 

JK 

HENRY  CHRLSTOPHE, 

President  and  Generalissimo  of  the  Land  and 
Sea  Forces, 

TO   THE   LAND  AND  NAVAL  ARMAMENTS   OF   THE 
STATE  OF  HAYTI. 

Soldiers! 

The  place  of  St.  Nicholas  Mole  has 
just  fallen  by  the  success  of  jour  arms, 
rebellion  is  extinguished  in  this  quarter, 
and  you  have  planted  on  every  side  the 
colours  of  the  legitimate  authority,  already 
so  distinguished  by  the  numerous  triumphs 
obtained  over  the  enemies  of  liberty. 
Twenty  days  of  regular  siege  have  suf- 


100 

ficed  to  destroy,  to  the  very  foundations, 
those  fortresses  which  parricidal  hands  had 
raised  in  defence  of  rebellion.     In  vain  a 
pretending  expedition  had  flattered  itself 
with  the  hope  of  perpetuating   intestine 
dissensions,  and  sacrificing  at  the  shrine 
of  error ;  your  arms,  strengthened  by  the 
most  just  of  causes,  have,  in  a  few  days, 
overthrown    these    edifices,    and    buried 
under   their  ruins  the  projects   and   pre- 
sumptive hopes  of  a  criminal  faction. 

Weary  of  temporising  measures,  that 
had  for  their  object  to  spare  the  effusion 
of  blood,   and  having  perceived  that  no- 
thing could  equal  my  patience  and  my 
kindness,     but    the     obduracy    and    the 
inflexibility  of  the  factious,  I  decided  on 
the  fate   of  this  guilty  place.     The  two 
chiefs,    who  successively  took   the  com- 
mand of  it,  have  bitten  the  dust ;  two  of 
their  vessels  of  war  being  shattered,  pre- 
sented in  the  roads  nothing  more  than  un- 
availing skeletons  ;  a  considerable  pile  of 


«4? 


101 

cannon,  of  mortars,  of  stores,  and  provi- 
sions of  every  kind,  are  the  results  of 
your  toils,  and  the  reward  of  your  valour  ; 
while  these  men,  who  have  issued  from 
the  extremity  of  the  south,  with  the  intent 
to  deprive  you  of  the  most  precious  of  all 
blessings,  now  obliged  to  surrender  at  dis- 
cretion, have  experienced  that  your  cle- 
mency is  equal  to  your  valour. 

Such  is  ever  the  recompence  of  true 
courage  !     Nothing  can  resist  it,  because 
it  is  maintained  by  fidelity  to  one's  chief 
guided  by  honour,  and   inspired   by  pa- 
triotism.—Soldiers,  and  you,  brave  seamen, 
who  have  rivalled  in  all  respects  the  land 
forces,   you  whose  efforts  have  braved  the 
winds,  the  currents,   and  the  waves,  in  a 
cruise  which  will  be  the  admiration  of  all 
who  are  experienced  in  naval  affairs,  the 
new  lustre  which  your  glorious   exploits 
have  just  reflected  upon  the  arms  of  your 
chief  is  your  best  eulogium.     In  truth,  the 
zeal,  the  constancy,  the  loyalty,  the  fide- 


102 

lity,  and  the  intrepidity  which  you  have 
displayed  in  a  multitude  of  engagements, 
which  were   rendered   necessary  through 
the  most  inconceivable  animosity,  consti- 
tute at  once  my  glory  and  my  pride  ;  yes, 
I  have  found  in   you  the  most  intrepid 
warriors,    who   have    contributed    to   the 
establishment    of    liberty    and    indepen- 
dence, and  I  have,  more  than  once,  in  this 
campaign,  gloried  in  being  at  your  head. 
It  is  indeed  gratifying  to  me  to  declare  so- 
lemnly, that  you  have  all  deserved  well  of 
the  country  !    and  that  it  will  be  a  satis- 
faction for  my  heart  to  decree  honorary 
rewards  to  those  of  you   who   have  most 
distinguished  themselves. 

But  to  acquire  distinction  in  the  ca- 
reer of  heroes  is  not  all ;  there  is  another 
virtue,  another  species  of  glory  of  which 
we  ought  to  furnish  an  example. 

You  have  seen  the  inveterate  sup- 
porters of  error,  the  obstinate  partisans  of 
a  cause  revolting  to  reason  as  well  as  to 


■  HI 


103 

nature  ;  you  have  seen  them,  I  say,  these 
unhappy  children  of  the  south,  basely 
abandoned  and  betrayed  by  their  com- 
rades, after  having  experienced  all  that 
human  misfortunes  have  in  them  of  ex- 
tremest  bitterness,  after  having  been  com- 
pelled to  lay  down  their  arms,  to  come 
and  throw  themselves  at  my  feet,  to  ac- 
knowledge their  errors,  and  implore  my 
clemency  ;  they  thought  to  find  in  me  an 
irritated  conqueror ;  they  expected  to  read 
in  my  offended  front  their  sentence  to  die. 
Ungrateful  men !  they  have  only  been 
witnesses  of  my  compassion,  and  of  the 
tears  which  their  repentance  has  wrung 
from  me.  You  too,  soldiers,  melted  at 
this  example,  have  nobly  shared  with 
them  your  tents,  you  clothing,  and  your 
food ;  they  have  found  no  other  than 
brethren  in  you,  and  your  arms  have 
carefully  borne  their  sick  and  wounded 
to  the  hospitals,  to  be  treated  and 
attended   in    the   same   manner   as   your 


MM 


104 

own  companions.  But  still  more,  the  9th 
regiment,  that  same  one  which  first  raised 
the  standard  of  revolt,  as  well  as  the  re- 
mains of  the  16th,  18th,  21st,  22d,  23d, 
and  24th,  made  prisoners,  are  to-day  asto- 
nished at  taking  rank  in  the  army  of 
Hayti  ;  but  let  their  astonishment  cease 
when  they  know  that  in  punishing,  a  fa- 
ther is  always  paternal;  and  let  them  re- 
member these  words  of  the  common  Fa- 
ther of  mankind:  "  There  is  more  joy  in 
heaven  over  that  one  sheep  which  is  found 
again,  than  for  the  whole  flock  that  hath 
never  strayed." 

May  this  trait  of  magnanimity  soften 
the  hearts  of  those  who  still  foment  or  en- 
courage calumny  !  Let  them  at  length 
understand  that  it  is  good  to  sacrifice  pri- 
vate passions  to  the  general  benefit;  Jet 
them  consider  that  the  vile  agents  of  the 
French  government,  like  greedy  vultures, 
are  only  watching  an  opportunity  to  fall 
upon  their  prey ;  let  them  reflect,  lhat  the 


105 

vessel  of  independence  in  which  we  are 
all  embarked,  must  save  itself,  or  perish 
with  the  passengers  ;  and  that,  to  enable 
it  to  reach  the  desired  port  in  safety,  it  is 
glorious  to  rally  with  brethren  who  know 
how  to  fight,  to  conquer,  and  forgive.  For 
my  part,  convinced  as  I  am  that  our  di- 
visions constitute  the  joy  and  the  hope  of 
our  enemies ;  persuaded  that  this  region  is 
the  only  one  which  is  still  at  the  service  of 
free  minds  ;  assured  by  experience  that 
the  cause  of  the  black  and  of  the  yellow  is 
one  and  indivisible;  and  acquainted  by 
ample  proof  of  the  new  plots  that  are 
framing  by  our  common  tyrants  to  render 
our  quarrels  of  endless  duration ;  I  call 
upon  God  and  upon  men  to  witness,  that 
no  sacrifice  shall  be  too  dear  for  me  that 
can  tend  to  reunite  the  children  of  Hayti 
under  the  paternal  shield. — Trusting  in  my 
own  means,  and  confident  of  the  legiti- 
macy of  my  cause,  which  give  strength  to 
my  ascendancy,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  renew 


106 

here  the  general  amnesty  which  I  have 
already  offered,  to  promote  the  welfare  of 
the  state,  the  only  object  of  my  ambition. 
But,  if  it  be  desirable  that  one  portion 
of  the  Haytians,  who  are  still  under  the 
influence  of  error,  should  relinquish  that 
error,  and  expiate  the  wrongs  of  many 
years  by  a  moment  of  repentance,  it  is  for 
the  public  advantage  that  the  members  of 
the  great  family  should  reunite,  to  the 
consternation  and  despair  of  our  tyrants, 
and  not  the  less  necessary  to  preserve  that 
attitude  which  befits  men,  who,  having 
done  much,  are  aware  that  there  still  re- 
mains much  more  for  them  to  do. 


Soldiers, 

You  are  about  to  return  to  your 
respective  garrisons  and  cantonments,  to 
refresh  }^ourselves  after  the  toilsome 
fatigues  you  have  undergone ;  carry  Avith 
you  that  sense  of  order,  of  subordination 


W  II  I 


107 

and  discipline  which  is  the  sacred  pledge 
of  victory. 

It  is  my  intention  to  distribute  the 
rewards  of  valour  to  those  who  have  dis- 
tinguished themselves  by  their  good 
deeds :  your  corps  are  about  to  be  com- 
pleted, and  clothed  and  equipped  anew ; 
enjoy  then  in  peace  the  fruit  of  your 
laurels,  and  be  ready,  at  the  first  signal,  to 
complete  the  triumph  of  the  legitimate 
authority. 

Done  at  our  Palace  of  Cape  Henry, 
the  8th  October  1810,  in  the  seventh  year 
of  the  independence  of  Hayti. 

Henry  Christopiie. 
By  the  President, 

The  Field  Marshal,  and  private  Se- 
cretary of  his  Serene  Highness, 

Prevost. 


■ 

1 

(in 

I 

With  mixed  sentiments  of  affection 
and  transport  the  President  was  received 
on  his  return  from  the  campaign  :  every 


108 

one  flocked  to  scatter  before  his  feet  the 
laurels  of  victory ;  and  from  Port  de  Paix 
to  Henry  there  were  nothing  but  triumphal 
arches  and  trophies,  raised  by  the  emula- 
tive delights  of  the  people.  His  progress 
was  in  fact  the  whole  way  a  triumphal 
march.  How  delightful,  how  honourable 
to  be  thus  beloved  !  but  how  pleasing  be- 
sides to  have  such  worthy  citizens  who 
think  the  same ! 

The  war  being  happily  terminated, 
and  the  north  entirely  cleared  of  enemies, 
the  troops  were  sent  back  to  their  homes, 
to  enjoy  that  repose  of  which  they  had  so 
much  need. 

Receive,  ye  brave  and  faithful  troops 
who  acknowledge  the  legitimate  authority, 
a  tribute  of  admiration,  and  the  homage 
of  respect  from  one  of  your  companions 
in  arms,  who  knows  the  spirit  of  a  soldier, 
who  delights  in  being  in  the  midst  of  you, 
who  has  sometimes  shared  your  dangers, 
and  to  whom  your  lots  can  never   be   a 


W  II  ! 


109 

matter  of  indifference.   The  God  of  battles 
has   blessed  and  crowned  your  arms  with 
glory.     Thanks  be  to  you !  you  have  de- 
livered your  countrymen  from  the  fury  of 
civil    war   and    of    anarchy ;    you    have 
doubtless    done    much,    but    you    think 
nothing  done  so  long  as  it  remains  for 
you  to  plant  your  victorious  standards  in 
every  quarter  which  rebellion  may  defile. 
The  President,  not  yet  recovered  from 
the  fatigues  at  the  Mole,  applied  himself 
next  to  the  organization  of  the  forces,  both 
land  and  naval ;  he  passes  the  troops  in 
review,  has  the  muster  roll  of  names  called 
over,    causes   all    accounts   to    be  settled 
down  to  the  last  soldier  of  every  regiment, 
sends  back  to  the  labours  of  cultivation 
such  as  he  does  not  think  proper  to  be  re- 
tained in  the  service,  replaces  them  with 
young  recruits,  nominates  to  vacant  places, 
completes  the  regiments  and  crews,  has 
the  arms  of  the  troops  repaired  and  placed 
in  a  proper  state,  as  well  as  the  vessels  of 


110 

the  squadron  :  he  clothes  the  army,  and 
provisions  the  fleet  for  a  cruise. 

He  organizes  in  a  legion  the  troops  of 
the  South  that  surrendered  at  the  Mole, 
appoints  to  the  vacant  places  in  this  corps, 
and  gives  them  rank  in  the  army.  Un- 
deceived of  their  errors,  he  no  longer  con- 
siders them  otherwise  than  as  his  children. 

He  engages  in  a  plan  of  farming  out 
the  demesnes;  and  in  the  distribution  of 
farms  he  is  not  unmindful  of  those  un- 
fortunate widows  and  hapless  orphans 
whom  the  fate  of  war  or  the  course  of 
nature  has  deprived  of  a  husband,  of  a 
tender  father ;  he  replaces  the  want  of 
this  tender  father  to  these  interesting 
creatures,  not  only  in  securing  their 
maintenance,  but  by  procuring  for  them 
the  benefits  of  an  education,  which  is  equi- 
valent to  replacing,  for  the  country,  the 
authors  of  their  being! 

The  President  then  visits  the  pro- 
vinces.    He  is  received  throughout,  not  as 


Ill 

the  conqueror  of  the  Mole,  but  like  a  vivi- 
fying genius  come  to  visit  those  parts. 
His  ameliorating  eye  embraces  all  sides. 
He  has  the  sweet  satisfaction  of  seeing 
that  the  cultivators,  being  every  where  re- 
gularly paid  by  a  fourth  of  the  gross  pro- 
duce, were  praising  the  freedom  they  en- 
joyed. If  unjust  and  rapacious  farmers 
no  more  deprive  them  of  the  wages  of 
their  labour,  and  grow  rich  by  the  sweat 
of  their  brow ;  if  cattle  are  allowed  to 
ravage  no  more  their  gardens  and  pro- 
vision grounds;  if  the  banana  is  allowed 
to  ripen  on  the  banana  tree,  it  is  to  Henry 
that  these  men  of  nature  are  indebted  for 
it.  He  it  is  who  animates  industry,  and 
gives  life  to  commerce.  In  his  presence 
the  people  vent  their  exclamations  of  joy, 
the  unequivocal  returns  of  a  degree  of 
affection  and  attachment  bordering  upon 
idolatry.  From  his  palace  he  descends 
into  the  lowly  cottage  of  the  cultivator,  as 
into  the  soldier's  hut,  and  their  happiness 


112 


is  at  all  times  the  constant  object  of  his 
most  lively  and  tenderest  solicitude. 

There-establishment  of  manners,  which 
now  become  the  order  of  the  day,  impart- 
ed its  influence  on  the  peace  and  comfort 
of  families.  Vice  disappeared,  and  hid 
its  corrupt  practices;  the  sacred  tie  of 
marriage  was  respected,  that  tender  union 
which  binds  man  to  woman,  creates  vir- 
tuous companions,  and  attaches  the  citizen 
to  his  country,  the  great  family  of  the  state, 
by  the  image  of  his  own  and  of  domestic 
happiness  ;  as  the  greatest  encouragement 
to  which,  the  supreme  head  furnishes,  him- 
self, a  touching  example  of  the  conjugal 
virtues :  he  proves  that  good  manners  are 
the  attendants  of  good  rnonarchs,  and  con- 
stitute the  glory  of  their  reign ;  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  from  licentiousness  come  bad 
princes,  to  the  disgrace  of  their  govern- 
ment. 

The  President  thought  to  yield  to  the 
dictates  of  his  generous  breast,  which  was 


113 

affected  with  the  calamities  of  civil  war : 
in  the  midst  of  victory  he  sacrifices  his  re- 
sentments. Forgetful  of  his  offers  and  pro- 
mises of  peace  having  been  so  frequently 
despised,  he  thought  it  due  to  his  citizens, 
in  order  to  convince  them  still  more  fully 
of  his  intentions,  to  dispatch  commission- 
ers empowered  to  treat  for  peace  with  the 
revolted  Petion  at  Port  aux  Crimes;  these 
commissioners  were  followed  by  a  deputa- 
tion of  twelve  military  men  from  the  dif- 
ferent corps  of  the  South,  who  surrender- 
ed at  the  Mole,  for  the  purpose  of  inform- 
ing their  comrades  of  the  treatment  they 
had  experienced.     It  was  natural  to  ex- 
pect that   offers   of  sincerity   like    these 
would  have  been  properly  appreciated,  as 
they  ought  to  have  been;  and   all  good 
citizens    began    already    to   flatter  them- 
selves with  a  hope  of  the  war  being  ter- 
minated.    Vain  hope  !  that  dream  is  fled; 
the  mind  of  the  president  is  now  the  more 
persuaded,  that  it  is  only  by  the  adoption 


114 


\vi 


of  rigorous  measures,  as  at  the  Cape,  that 
he  can  expect  to  triumph  over  the  too 
guilty  infatuation  of  the  revolters  ! 

I  pass  with  satisfaction  from  this  de- 
tail of  our  grievances,  and  now  arrive  at 
the  most  interesting  part  of  my  work. 

Genius    of  my   country,    inspire   my 
understanding !    Truth,    it   is    under   thy 
auspices  I  have  taken  up  the  pen.    Deign 
to  direct  it  still,   that  my  writings,  ani- 
mated   by   thy    sublime   eloquence,    may 
carry  into  the   remotest  climes  the  glory 
and  the  virtue  of  a  Henry,   that  his  be- 
loved   name    may   never    be  pronounced 
abroad  but  with  the  veneration  which  it 
inspires;  and  that,  instructed  in  his  good 
qualities,  and   by  the  recital  of  what  he 
has  done  for  his  people  and  for  posterity, 
all  foreigners  may  at  length  agree,  that  in 
the  lot  of  this  class  of  mankind,  hitherto 
groaning  under  the   yoke  of  prejudices, 
there   are  found  to   be,  as   among  them, 
those  extraordinary  beings,  evidently  under 


AAA. 


■  U  I 


115 

the  protection  of  nature  and  of  Heaven 
who  are  to  appear  in   the  revolutions  of 
this  world  to  heal  their  afflictions,  and  re- 
store   social   order    to    those   limits   from 
which  the  impetuous  course  of  events  had 
chased  it! 

The  Hajtians  had  just  celebrated  the 
eighth  year  of  their  independence;  and  if 
the  dawn  of  that  beautiful  day  did  not  as 
yet  witness  their  reunion,  at  least  they 
were  abundantly  persuaded  by  the  great 
achievements  that  Henry  had  accom- 
plished, to  hope,  that  he  alone  had  the 
will  as  well  as  the  power  to  consolidate 
and  strengthen  the  foundations  of  that  in- 
dependence, so  earnestly  to  be  desired. 

For  some  time  the  declared  opinion 
of  the  most  respectable  and  enlightened 
citizens  was  in  favour  of  placing  Henry 
on  the  throne;  they  had  known  the  insuffi- 
ciency of  the  title  with  which  they  had 
invested  him  in  calamitous  times.  The 
chief  of  a  warlike  nation,  who  ought  never 


116 


to  forget  that,  the  moment  when  that  na- 
tion lays  aside  its  warlike  character,  will  be 
that  when  it  will  run  the  risk  of  its  existence 
being  annihilated,  or  rather  that  its  exist- 
ence is  essentially  connected  with  its  mar- 
tial ardour;  this  Chief,  I  say,  will  not  long 
be  able  to  maintain  the  character  of  a  dig- 
nity which  does  not  associate  with  it  the  idea 
of  the  sovereign  power:  the  revision  of  the 
constitution  was  therefore  decided  upon. 
The  council  of  state  applied  itself  with  zeal 
to  this  purpose;  but  its  labours  which  were 
directed  to  the  offering  of  a  monument  of 
the  gratitude  and  acknowledgement  of  all 
good  Haytians,  by  adjudging  the  crown  to 
Henry,  and  making  it  hereditary  in  his 
illlustrious  house,  could  not  remain  secret. 
It  transpired,  when  he  was  on  a  journey 
to  Fort  Dauphin,  the  26th  March,  a  day 
for  ever  celebrated,  when  the  head  of  the 
state  was  hailed  and  proclaimed  King,  his 
august  spouse  Queen  of  Hayti,  and  their 
son  Prince  Royal.    The  happy  news  once 


117 

spread,  communicated  with  the  rapidity 
of  the  electric  flame;  and  the  general  as- 
sent of  all  classes  of  society,  proved  that 
this  good  and  magnanimous  people  fore- 
saw the  propriety  of  so  great  and  glorious 
an  event;    it  is   needless  to  observe,  that 
their   majesties   were    received    with   un- 
bounded transports  of  affection  and  joy  on 
their  arrival  in  the  capital.     It  was  to  no 
purpose  they  entered   it    by  night:   they 
found    all    the  people   stirring,   eager   to 
lavish  upon  them  those  marks  of  respect, 
and    those    congratulations,    which   carry 
with  them  such  sincerity  and  feeling  when 
they  proceed  from  the  heart.     Their  ma- 
jesties received,  the  same  night,  the  felici- 
tations and   homage  of  all  the  civil  and 
military  bodies,   as  well  as  those  of  the 
foreign  merchants  established  in  the  capi- 
tal, who  thought  it  their  duty  to  pay  this 
tribute  of  respect  and  veneration  to  their 
majesties. 

The  council   of  state   having  formed 


MMUM 


118 

itself  into  a  general  council,   and  having 
accordingly  invited  to  the  meeting  all  the 
principal    officers    of    the   land    and    sea 
forces,  and  such  of  the  principal  citizens 
as  were  considered  worthy  of  being  ad- 
mitted to  the  deliberations,  to  give  them 
more  eclat,  then  put  the  finishing  stroke  to 
their  immortal  work,   and    proceeded  in 
grand  convocation,  the  4th  April,  to  the 
palace  of  their  majesties.   Being  presented 
by  the  grand  master  of  the  ceremonies  to 
their  majesties,  who  were  surrounded  by 
their  royal  family ;  his  excellency  Lieute- 
nant General  Paul  Romain,  the  organ  of 
the  general  council,  expressed  himself  in 
the  following  terms : 

"  The  council  of  state  has  the  honour  to 
present  to  your  Majesty  the  law  of  the  consti- 
tution, the  completion  of  which  has  been 
the  object  of  its  most  profound  meditations. 
We  shall  have  fulfilled  the  expectations 
of  the  people  and  of  the  army,  and  our 
labours  will  have  corresponded  with  the 


a 


119 

wish  of  our  hearts,  if  the  fundamental 
basis  on  which  this  new  kingdom  is  about 
to  rest,  is  happily  calculated  to  reconcile 
public  happiness  with  the  majesty  of  the 
throne,  and  the  dignity  of  the  national 
representation. 

This  day  of  everlasting  memory  on 
which  the  Haytian  people  are  to  acknow- 
ledge, in  the  face  of  heaven  and  of  earth, 
their  protector,  their  father,  and  their  king, 
in  the  person  of  that  generous  being  who 
has  saved  them,  impresses  our  minds  with 
the  most  delightful  emotions. 

At  the  sight  of  the  diadem  which  is 
about  to  rest  on  that  august  front  whereon 
our  glorious  destinies  are  inscribed,  trem- 
ble, ye  enemies  of  our  country!  This  mo- 
ment has  for  ever  decided  on  the  sove- 
reignty of  these  realms,  and  it  is  that  of  a 
triumph  for  all  hearts,  since  at  length  they 
have  crowned  the  idol  of  their  choice. 

To  the  valiant  arm  of  Henry  the  scep- 
tre  belongs;    it   is   the  attribute    of  true 


120 

courage ;  and  fortune,  ever  attentive  to  the 
voice  of  genius,  assigns  to  him,  at  this 
moment,  the  reward  of  twenty  years  of 
labour. 

Hayti,  erect  thy  proud  head;  be  no 
more  alarmed  respecting  thy  future  pros- 
perity, and  offer  up  to  Heaven  a  return  of 
thanks;  for,  when  a  Henry  ascends  the 
throne,  the  days  of  Sully  are  about  to 
re-appear." 

His  Majesty  replied : 

"  Gentlemen, 

"  I  have  no  other  happiness  than  that 
of  the  people  of  Hayti,  of  whose  toils  I 
have  partaken;  and  nothing  that  interests 
the  welfare  of  the  state  can  be  indifferent 
to  me. 

The  nation  has  judged  necessary  to  its 
prosperity  and  safety  to  elevate  me  to  the 
throne,  and  to  fix  the  hereditary  succes- 
sion in  my  family;    I  yield    to  its  wish, 


121 

since   it   contributes   to   the   public   feli- 
city. 

This  day,  in  giving  me  the  measure  of 
all  hearts,  will  never  cease  to  be  present 
to  my  mind;  it  will  recall  to  me  all  that 
the  Haytian  people  hath  done  for  me  and 
my  family,  and  every  moment  of  my  life 
shall  be  devoted  to  recompensing  it  for  its 
filial  tenderness. 

I  will  be  on  the  throne,  the  same  as  I 
have  been  in  adversity,  and  such  as.  be- 
comes a  good  king  to  be;  and  may  my 
descendants  inherit  successively  that  pure 
affection  with  which  my  heart  throbs  for 
my  country!" 

Then  his  Excellency  Lieutenant  Gene- 
ral Paul  Romain,  addressing  himself  to 
her  Majesty  the  Queen,  said, 

"  Madam, 

"  We  have  just  had  the  honour  of  pre- 
senting to  your  august  spouse  the  law  of 
the  constitution,  which  for  ever  fixes  the 


122 

destiny  of  Hayti,  at  the  same  time  that  it 
renders  hereditary,  in  the  family  of  our 
sovereign,  the  monarchy  of  the  state. 

If  any  thing  can  add  to  the  gratifying 
sensations  that  animate  our  hearts,  it  is  to 
see  the  eminent  qualities  Heaven  has  be- 
stowed upon  you,  raised  to  that  throne 
which  the  affection  and  acknowledgment 
of  the  Haitians  has  prepared  for  you. 

Eternal  thanks  be  to  the  Almighty, 
who  seems  never  to  have  raised  so  high 
such  sense  and  goodness  of  which  your 
heart  is  the  sanctuary,  unless  for  purposes 
of  more  extended  influence  over  that  coun- 
try on  which  they  are  shed. 

The  Council  of  State  delights  in  plac- 
ing at  the  feet  of  your  Majesty  the  tri- 
bute of  love,  of  respect,  of  gratitude,  and 
admiration,  which  your  virtues  are  so  well 
calculated  to  inspire/' 


123 


Her  Majesty  replied : 

"  Gentlemen, 

"  The  appellation  of  Queen,  which 
the  nation  has  just  decreed  to  me,  unites 
me  more  closely  with  the  fortunes  of  the 
Haytian  people,  to  whom  I  delight  in 
being  a  tender  mother. 

I  shall  never  be  unmindful,  whilst  on 
the  throne,  of  the  duties  which  the  Royal 
Majesty  enjoins:  and  seeing  my  family  is 
destined  hereafter  to  take  my  place,  it 
will  be  my  pleasing  duty  to  superintend 
their  education  with  peculiar  care,  so  that 
my  children  may  be  to  me  my  dearest  de- 
corations, as  on  them  will  one  day  depend 
the  destiny  of  my  country/' 


]24 


CONSTITUTIONAL   LAW 

OF    THE 

COUNCIL  OF  STATE 

Which  establishes  Royalty  in  Hayti. 

The  Council  of  State,  at  an  extraordinary 
meeting  held  for  the  purpose  of  delibe- 
rating upon  the  alterations  which  it  is 
necessary  to  introduce  in  the  state  of 
Hayti,  and  on  the  form  of  government 
most  suitable  thereto ; 

Considering  that,  when  the  constitution 
of  the  17  th  of  February  1807,  anno  4,  was 
promulgated,  the  state  found  itself  in  fact 
without  any  social  compact;  and  the 
storms  of  civil  contention  raged  with  such 
fury,  as  not  to  permit  the  representatives 
of  the  people  to  fix  in  a  permanent  man- 
ner the  only  mode  of  government  which 
is  really  adapted  to  us  ; 


125 

That  this  constitution,  notwithstanding, 
all  the  informality  which  it  appeared  to 
consist  of,  and  its  numerous  imperfections, 
of  which  the  representatives  themselves 
were  not  unaware,  was  yet  suited  at  that 
time  to  the  crisis  which  gave  it  birth,  and 
the  tempests  then  hovering  over  its  infan- 
cy. That  the  few  great  principles  of  which 
it  consisted  were  nevertheless  sufficient  for 
the  happiness  of  the  people,  in  securing 
all  their  rights  in  those  deplorable  times. 

Considering,  that  at  the  present  pe- 
riod, thanks  to  the  genius  of  the  supreme 
Magistrate  who  holds  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment, whose  elevated  conceptions  and 
brilliant  valour  have  prevailed  in  restoring 
order,  happiness,  and  prosperity ;  the 
flourishing  state  of  cultivation,  of  trade 
and  navigation ;  the  re-establishment  of 
manners,  religion,  and  morality;  the  high 
discipline  observed  in  the  army  and  the 
fleet ;  seem  to  promise  a  lasting  duration 
to  the  state.     That  it  becomes  us  at  pre- 


126 

sent,  more  than  ever,  to  establish  a  fixed 
order  of  things,  a  mode  of  government 
calculated  to  rule  at  all  times  the  country 
that  gave  us  birth. 

Considering  that  it  is  urgently  neces- 
sary to  invest  the  sovereign  authority  with 
a  character  great  and  august,  so  as  to  con- 
vey an  idea  of  the  supremacy  of  power  ; 

That   the   erection     of    an    hereditary 
throne    is   the  necessary   consequence  of 
this  forcible  consideration  ; 

That  the  inheritance  of  power  to  be 
vested  only  as  to  the  male  legitimate  chil- 
dren (to  the  perpetual  exclusion  of  fe- 
males) in  an  illustrious  family,  constantly 
devoted  to  the  glory  and  happiness  of  the 
country,  which  owes  its  political  existence 
to  it,  is  as  much  a  duty  as  a  signal  mark 
of  national  acknowledgment. 

That  it  is  the  nation  which  now  exer- 
cises, through  us,  its  will  and  its  sovereign- 
ty, in  confiding  them  to  him  who  has  res- 
cued it  from  that  abyss  in  which  its  most 


p*s 


127 

inveterate  enemies  would  extinguish  it,  to 
him  who  governs  it  with  so  much  glory, 
that  this  nation  has  nothing  to  fear  for  its 
liberty,  its  independence,  and  its  happi- 
ness. 

That  it  is  necessary  also  to  establish 
high  dignities,  as  well  to  uphold  the  splen- 
dour of  the  throne  as  to  reward  eminent 
services  rendered  to  the  country  by  officers 
who  devote  themselves  to  the  happiness, 
the  glory,  and  prosperity  of  the  state. 

The  Council  of  State,  therefore,  enacts, 
in  consequence,  the  Organic  Law  follow 
insr ; 


ACT  I. 

Of  the  Supreme  Authority. 

ARTICLE  I. 

The  President,  Henry  Christophe,  is 
declared  King  of  Hayti,  under  the  name 
of  Henry. 


128 

This  title,  with  its  prerogatives  and  pri- 
vileges, shall  be  hereditary  in  the  male 
and  legitimate  descendants  of  his  family 
in  a  direct  line,  by  elder  birthright,  to  the 
exclusion  of  females. 

Art.  2.  All  the  acts  of  the  kingdom 
shall  be  in  the  name  of  the  King,  pub- 
lished and  promulgated  under  the  royal 
seal. 

Art.  3.  In  default  of  male  children  in 
a  direct  line,  the  succession  shall  pass  into 
the  family  of  the  Prince  nearest  akin  to 
the  sovereign,  or  the  most  ancient  in  dig- 
nity. , 

Art.  4.  Meanwhile,  it  shall  be  lawful 
for  the  King  to  adopt  the  children  of  such 
Prince  of  the  kingdom  as  he  shall  judge 
proper,  in  default  of  an  heir-apparent. 

Art.  5.  In  the  event  of  there  happen- 
ing to  be,  subsequent  to  the  adoption, 
male  children,  their  right  of  succession 
shall  prevail  over  that  of  the  adopted 
children. 


i  i«nr\  \ 


129 

Art.  6.  At  the  decease  of  the  Kins:* 
and  until  his  succession  is  acknowledged, 
the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  go- 
verned by  the  ministers  and  the  King's 
Council,  who  shall  jointly  form  a  general 
council :  their  decisions  to  be  determined 
by  a  majority  of  voices.  The  secretary  of 
state  to  keep  a  record  of  the  deliberations. 


ACT  II. 

Of  the  Royal  Family, 

Art.  7.  The  King's  spouse  is  declared 
Queen  of  Hayti. 

Art.  8.  The  members  of  the  royal  fa- 
mily shall  bear  the  title  of  Princes  and 
Princesses ;  they  are  to  be  styled  Royal 
Highnesses.  The  heir-apparent  denomi- 
nated Prince  Royal. 

Art.  9.  The  Princes  are  to  take  their 
seats  as  members  of  the  council  of  state, 
on  their  coming  of  age. 

K 


130 


Art.  10.  The  Royal  Princes  and  Prin- 
cesses cannot  marry  without  the  appro- 
bation of  the  King. 

Art.  11.  The  King  himself  directs  the 
organization  of  his  palace  in  a  manner 
conformable  to  the  dignity  of  the  crown. 

Art.  12.  There  shall  be  established, 
after  the  orders  of  the  King,  palaces  and 
castles  in  those  parts  of  the  kingdom 
which  he  shall  judge  proper  to  fix  upon. 


ACT  III. 

Of  the  Hegency. 

Art.  13.  The  King  is  a  minor  until  he 
shall  have  completed  his  fifteenth  }Tear  : 
during  his  minority  he  shall  be  styled  a 
Regent  of  the  kingdom. 

Art.  14.  The  Protector  shall  be  a  I; 
least  twenty-five  years  of  age,  and  shall  be 
chosen  from  among  the  Princes  most 
nearly  related  to  the  King  (to  the  exclu- 


■  ii 


■M 


*M 


131 

sion  of  females),  and  in  default  of  such, 
from  among  the  great  dignitaries  of  the 
kingdom. 

Art.  15.  In  default  of  the  appoint- 
ment  of  a  protector  on  the  part  of  the 
King,  the  general  council  will  select  one 
in  the  manner  prescribed  in  the  foregoing 
article. 

Art.  16.  The  protector  exercises,  until 
the  King  comes  of  age,  all  the  attributes 
of  the  royal  dignity. 

Art.  1 7.  He  cannot  conclude  any  treaty 
of  peace,  alliance,  or  commerce,  nor  make 
any  declaration  of  war  until  after  mature 
deliberation,  and  the  advice  of  the  general 
council :  their  opinions  shall  be  taken  ac- 
cording to  the  majority  of  votes ;  and  in 
case  of  equality,  that  side  which  is  found 
to  be  conformable  to  the  opinion  of  the 
protector,  shall  preponderate. 

Art.  18.  The  protector  cannot  nomi- 
nate either  to  the  great   dignities   of  the 


i . 


132 


i 


kingdom  or  to  the  situations  of  general  of- 
ficers in  the  land  and  sea  forces. 

Art.  19.  All  the  acts  of  the  regency  are 
in  the  name  of  the  King,  who  is  minor. 

Art.  20.  The  care  of  the  King,  during 
his  minority,  is  confided  to  his  mother, 
and  in  default  of  her,  to  the  prince  ap- 
pointed by  the  late  King. 

Neither  the  protector,  nor  his  descend- 
ants, shall  be  eligible  for  the  charge  of  the 
King,  who  is  minor. 


ACT  IV. 

Of  the  Great  Council,  and  of  the  Privy 
Council. 

An.  21.  The  great  council  is  composed 
of  the  princes  of  the  blood,  of  princes, 
dukes,  and  counts,  nominated  and  chosen 
by  his  Majesty,  who  himself  fixes  iheir 
number. 


m 


133 

Art.  22.  The  King  presides  at  the 
council,  and  when  he  does  not  preside  in 
person,  he  fixes  upon  one  of  the  dignita- 
ries of  the  kingdom  to  fulfil  that  office. 

Art.  23.  The  privy  council  is  chosen 
by  the  King  from  among  the  great  digni- 
taries of  the  kingdom. 


ACT  V. 

Of  the  Great  Officers  of  the  Kingdom. 


Art.  24.  The  great  officers  of  the  king- 
dom are  grand  marshals  of  Hayti :  they 
are  chosen  from  among  the  generals  of  all 
ranks,  according  to  merit. 

Art.  25.  Their  number  is  not  limited  ; 
the  King  determines  upon  it  at  every  pro- 
motion. 

Art.  26.  The  places  of  great  officers  of 
the  kingdom  are  for  life. 

Art.  27.  When,  by  the  King's  order,  or 
on  account  of  being  invalided,  any  one  of 


134 

the  great  officers  of  the  kingdom  shall  cease 
to  be  aclivety  emplo}red,  he  shall  never- 
theless retain  his  titles,  his  rank,  and  the 
half  of  his  pay. 


1 


ACT  VI. 

Of  the  Ministry. 

Art.  28.  There  shall  be  in  the  kingdom 
four  ministers  chosen  and  appointed  by 
the  King : 

The  minister  of  war  and  marine, 

The  minister  of  finances  and  of  the  in- 
terior, 

The  minister  of  foreign  affairs, 

and 

The  minister  of  justice. 

Art.  29-  The  ministers  are  members  of 
the  council,  and  have  a  deliberative  voice. 

Art.  30.  The  ministers  account  directly 
to  his  Majesty,  and  receive  his  orders. 


*"»■ »» 


135 

ACT  VII. 

Of  the  Oaths. 

Art.  31.  The  King  at  his  accession,  or 
on  his  coming  of  age,  takes  an  oath,  upon 
the  Gospels,  in  presence  of  the  great  au- 
thorities of  the  kingdom. 

Art.  32.  The  protector,  before  under- 
taking the  exercise  of  his  functions,  also 
takes  an  oath,  with  the  same  formalities. 

Art.  S3.  The  principal  clergy,  the 
great  officers,  the  ministers,  and  the  secre- 
tary of  state,  also  take  the  oath  of  fidelity 
at  the  King's  hands. 

ACT  VIII. 
Of  the  Promulgation. 

Art.  34.    The  promulgation  of  all  the 
acts  of  the  kingdom  is  thus  couched  : 
We,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the  con- 


19! 


136 

stitutional  law  of  the  state,  King  of  Hayti, 
to  all  present  and  to  come,  greeting. 

And  all  public  acts  will  conclude 
thus : 

■We  do  hereby  order  and  command, 
that  these  presents,  sealed  with  our  seal, 
be  addressed  to  all  courts,  tribunals,  and 
administrative  authorities,  to  be  transcrib- 
ed in  their  registers,  to  be  observed  and 
caused  to  be  observed  throughout  the  king- 
dom ;  and  the  minister  of  justice  is  charged 
with  the  promulgation  thereof. 

Art.  33.  The  executory  proceedings  in 
judgments  of  the  courts  of  justice  and  of 
the  tribunals,  are  to  run  thus : 

We,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  of  the 
constitutional  law  of  the  state,  King  of 
Hayti,  to  all  present  and  to  come,  greet- 
ing. 

Then  follows  the  copy  of  the  judgment 
or  decree  :  "  We  order  and  command  all 
constables  and  other  officers,  on  this  re- 
quisition, to  put  in  execution  the  said  judg- 


■  unu 


137 

ment,  and  our  attorneys  in  the  tribunals 
to  promote  the  same;  and  the  comman- 
dants and  officers  of  the  public  force  to 
assist,  whensoever  they  may  be  legally 
required  so  to  do. 

In  testimony  of  which  the  present  judg- 
ment has  been  signed  by  the  president  of 
the  court,  and  the  register. 

Done  by  the  council  of  state  of  Hayti, 
at  Cape  Henry,  the  28th  March,  1811, 
the  8th  year  of  independence. 


Signed Paid  Romain,  senior;  An- 
drew Vernet,  Touissant  Brave,  Jean  Philippe, 
Daux,  Martial  Besse,  Jean  Pierre  Richard, 
Jean  Fleury,  Jean  Baptiste  Juge,  Etienne 
JSIagny,  Secretary. 

We,  the  apostolic  Prefect,  and  the 
general  officers  of  the  army  and  navy,  the 
administrators  of  the  finances,  and  officers 
of  justice  undersigned,  as  well  in  our  own 
names  as  in  the  names  of  the  army  and  the 
people,  of  which  we  are  here  the  represen- 


138 


! 


tatives,  do  join,  in  heart  and  soul,  with  the 
council  of  state,  for  the  proclamation  of 
his  majesty  Henry  Christophe,  king  of 
Hayti,  such  being  our  wish  and  that  of  the 
people,  and  of  the  army,  for  a  long  time 
past. 

C.  Brelle,  Apostolic  Prefect ;  N.  Joa- 
chim Rouanez,  Lieut.  Generals ;  Pierre 
Touissant,  Raphael,  Louis  Achille,  Charles 
Carlot,  Cottereau,  Jasmin,  Prevost,  Dupont, 
Charles  Pierre,  Guerrier,  Simon,  Placid V 
Lebrun,  Field  Marshals;  Bastien,  Jean  Bap- 
tiste,  Pierre  St.  Jean,  Bear  Admirals;  Al- 
manjor  jun.  Henry  Proix,  Chevalier,  Papa- 
Her,  Redmond,  Sicard,  Ferrier,  Dosson, 
Caze,  Brigadier  Generals ;  Bastien  Fabien, 
Cadet  Antoine,  Bernardine  Sprew,  Com- 
manders in  the  Navy ;  Stanislas,  Latortue, 
Joseph  Latortue,  Comptrollers ;  Delon,  In- 
spector; Jean  Baptiste,  Petit  Treasure?-; 
P.  A.  Charrier,  Director  of  Domains;  L. 
Raphael,  Director  of  Customs;  Boyer, 
Keeper  of  the  Central  Jf'arehouse;    Juste 


139 

Hugonin,  Commissary  General  of  Govern- 
ment ;  Isaac,  Justice  of  the  Peace ;  Lagrone, 
Charlatte,  Notaries;  Dupuy,  Interpreter  of 
Government. 

The  6th  of  April  was  the  day  chosen 
for   the   publication    of  the  constitution. 
The  council  of  state  in  grand  assembly; 
the   commissary  general  of  government, 
bearing  the  original  of  the  constitutional 
law;  the  governor  of  the  capital,  the  offi- 
cers of  the  staff,  and  those  of  the  regiments 
in  garrison  at  the  capital ;  the  officers  of 
administration,  the  members  of  the  tribu- 
nals,   the  advocates;    the  principle   mer- 
chants of  Hayti,  and  foreigners;  besides 
a  multitude  of  respectable  citizens  of  all 
ranks   and   degrees,    mixed   and   blended 
together,    all   animated  with   the  liveliest 
joy,   which  was  depicted  in   their  looks, 
then    repaired,    at  the  sound  of   warlike 
music,  to  all  the  public  places  and  cross- 
ways,  and  heard  read  to  them  copies  of 


140 

the  address  from  the  council  of  state  to  the 
people,  as  follows. 


The  Council   of  State,  to  the  People,  and 
to  the  Army  and  Navy  of  Hayti 

Fellow  Citizens, 

Your  representatives  are  once  more 
assembled  for  the  purpose  of  revising  the 
constitution  of  Hayti,  of  the  17th  February, 
1807,  Anno  4.  Having  to  pronounce  upon 
your  dearest  interests,  they  have  done  so 
with  all  the  zeal  and  patriotism  of  Avhich 
they  are  capable.     To  justify  your  confi- 
dence, they  have  called  upon  the  most  en- 
lightened  Haytians;   they  have  matured, 
in  the  silence  of  the  cabinet,  that  form  of 
government  which  is  adapted  to  the  coun- 
try that  gave  us  birth ;   they  have  never 
lost  sight  of  your  happiness,   with  which 
they  are  indispensably  connected,  and  now 
present  to  you  the  fruit  of  their  labours. 

When  the  state,  menaced  by  the  con- 


i  ii  i 


141 

spiracies  which  were  formed  in  its  very 
breast,  and  lighted  up  by  our  cruel  and  in- 
veterate enemies,  presented  only  a  picture 
of  chaos  and  general  disorder,  the  great 
man  who  governs  us  perceived  the  neces- 
sity of  a  social  pact,  around  which  might 
unite  all  those  Haytians  for  whom  the 
name  of  country  is  not  an  empty  sound: 
he  convoked  us,  and  we  hastened  to  second 
his  views,  and  to  offer  to  you  the  code  of 
laws,  which  has  now  been  amended* 

We  did  not  at  that  time  disguise  the 
fact  that  this  work  was  not  entirely  accom- 
plished :  we  thought  that  the  principles  we 
proclaimed  might  at  least  suffice  for  the 
crisis  in  which  we  found  ourselves ;  and 
seeing  the  storms  that  raged  around  the 
vessel  of  the  state,  we  reserved  to  ourselves 
the  care  of  retouching  our  work,  of  per- 
fecting and  adapting  it  still  more  to  our 
customs,  our  manners,  and  our  laws.  In 
this  flattering  hope,  we  waited  till  the  tem- 
pest being  alla}'ed,  and  the  sky  more  se- 


f  I 


142 

rene,    might  allow  of  our    resuming   the 
course  of  our  labours. 

Thanks  to  the  tutelary  genius  of  Hayti, 
thanks  to  the  supreme  magistrate;  thanks 
to  his  elevated  conceptions,  his  brilliant 
valour,  his  energy,  his  activity.  Victory, 
faithful  to  his  arms,  has  seated  itself  be- 
neath his  colours;  tranquillity  reappears, 
order  is  established;  discipline  has  been 
permanently  restored  in  the  army  and  in 
the  fleet;  conspiracies  have  been  sup- 
pressed; the  conspirators  punished;  jus- 
tice has  resumed  ils  course;  morals  and 
public  instruction  have  been  reformed; 
cultivation  and  commerce  have  been  bet^- 
tered;  at  length, .happiness  and  prosperity 
have  appeared  once  more,  and  promise  a 
lasting  duration  to  the  state;  this  we  have 
thought  the  happy  occasion  for  perfecting 
the  institutions  which  we  had  but  roughly 
commenced,  and  we  said  to  ourselves,  the 
time  is  now  come. 

In  order   to   preserve  ourselves  from 


143 

i « 

those  violent  checks,  those  horrible  convul- 

sions  which   have  so   often  agitated  and 

overturned  this  body  politic;  to  curb  that 

, 

ebb  and  flow  of  passion,  those  plots  of  in- 

trigue, the  fury  of  factions,   and  the  reac- 

tion of  parties;  in  a  word,  to  shun  for  ever 

that  chaos,  that  confusion  and  perpetual 

\ 

clashing  which  result  from  those  monstrous 

\ 

* 

associations   known    under   the   name    of 

; 

popular  bodies ;  we  have  felt  the  necessity 

1 1 

of  having   one   sole   and   supreme   head, 

under  whose  powerful  protection  there  shall 
be  no  more  collision :  our  hearts  have 
been  in  unison  with  those  of  the  people 
and  of  the  army,  who  have  conceived  that 
the  government  of  one  individual  is  the 
most  natural,  the  least  subject  to  troubles 
and  reverses,  and  such  as  unites,  in  a  su- 
preme degree,  the  power  of  maintaining 
our  laws,  protecting  our  rights,  defending 
our  liberty,  and  making  us  respected 
abroad. 


But  it  was  not  enough  to  invest  the 


144 


sovereign  authority  with  a  character  grand 
and  imposing,  such  as  to  give  an  idea  of 
the  majesty  of  power,  to  impress  that  re- 
spect inseparable  from  the  royal  authority, 
but  which  gave  all  the  latitude  possible  for 
doing  good,  in  recognising  only  the  law 
to  be  subservient  to  his  will ;  it  was  neces- 
sary moreover,  in  the  event  of  a  vacancy 
in  the  throne,  to  consider  the  best  method 
to  be  observed,  in  order  to  obviate  those 
interminable  civil  broils,  to  maintain  tran- 
quillity, and  the  stability  of  the  body  poli- 
tic, when  hereditary  succession  appeared 
to  us  the  most  suitable  to  this  important 
end. 

Passing  from  these  high  considerations 
to  others  essential  for  the  purpose  of  con- 
ferring splendour  upon  the  throne,  we  have 
been  occupied  with  instituting  an  hereditary 
nobility,  whose  honour  is  to  be  their  dis- 
tinguishing character ;  whose  fidelity  must 
be  above  all  proof;  their  devotion  un- 
bounded, and  their  resolution  inflexible  to 


145 

conquer  or  die  in  defence  of  that  throne 
from  which  they  derive  their  primitive 
lustre. 

We  have  analyzed  the  powers,  the  at- 
tributes  and  denominations   assigned  in 
every  part  of  the  world  to  these  superior 
beings,  born  evidently  to  command  their 
species ;  but  accountable,  at  the  same  time, 
to  the  Supreme  One>  for  all  the  benefits  or 
evils  that  may  result  from  their  administra- 
tion ;  and  by  our  study  of  the  characters 
of  those  who  have  held  the  government  of 
our  island  since  we  took  up  arms  in  de* 
fence  of  our  rights,  and  finally  since  the 
expulsion  of  our  enemies,  and  the  procla- 
mation of  our  independence,  we  have  con^- 
sidered,  that  the  title  of  Governor-general 
conferred   upon   the   pious,    the    upright 
commander  in  chief,  Toussaint  Louver- 
ture  of  glorious  memory,  and  afterwards 
upon  the  immortal  founder  of  our  inde- 
pendence, was  in  no  wise  adapted  to  the 
dignity  of  the  supreme  magistrate,  inas- 

L 


■ 


146 

much  as  it  seemed  that  such  a  denomina- 
tion would  be  only  suitable  at  most  to  an 
officer  in  the  pay  of  any  power  whatever  : 
on  the  other  hand,  the  magnificent  title  of 
Emperor,  given  to  the  general  in  chief 
Dessalines,   although   worthy   indeed    of 
being   offered  to   such  a  man,   after  the 
eminent  services  he  had  rendered  to  the 
state,  and  to  his  fellow  citizens,  yet  want- 
ed justness  in  its  application.     An  em- 
peror is  considered  to  take  the  lead  of  other 
sovereigns  ;  or  at  least,  so  exalted  a  dignity 
supposes  in  the  possessor  of  it,  not  only 
the  same  power,  'and  the  same  dominion, 
but  moreover  a  real  and  effective  com- 
mand over  different  states  and  territories. 
Again,  the  temporary  title  of  President 
given  to  his  successor,  the  great  Henry, 
our  august  chief,  does  not  convey  the  idea 
of  supreme  power,  and  can  only  be  appli- 
cable in  an  assemblage  of  men  met  to- 
gether, where  the  exercise  of  those  func- 
tions is  necessary,  or  in  a  judicial  body. 


147 

The  example  of  the  United  States,  govern- 
ed by   a   president*    does   not   alter   our 
opinion  as  to  the  insufficiency  of  this  title; 
the  Americans,  having  succeeded  in  adopt- 
ing the  federative  system,  may,  as  a  new 
people,  approve  of  their  present  govern* 
ment;    but  we  have    carried    our   views 
further :    and   though  we  appear   in  the 
same  hypothetical  situation  as  the  Ameri- 
cans, being  a  new  people,  still  we  possess 
the  wants,  the  manners,  the  virtues,  and 
we  will  add,  the  vices  of  the  old  states. 
Of  all  the  modes  of  government,  that  which 
has  appeared  to  us  most  justly  deserving  of 
a  preference,  is   one  of  a  middle  tenor, 
between  those  hitherto  put  in  practice  at 
Hayti :  we  have  observed,  with  the  great 
Montesquieu,*  the  excellence  of  a  paternal 
monarchial  government  over  other  govern- 
ments.    The   extent   of  the   territory   of 
Hayti  is  more  than  sufficient  for  the  for- 
mation of  a  kingdom  :  many  of  the  Euro- 

*  Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  Lois,  Chap.  XI. 


148 

peaii  states,  acknowledged  by  all  the  es- 
tablished powers,have  neither  the  same  ex- 
tent, the  same  resources,  the  same  wealth, 
nor  the  same  population.  We  say  nothing 
as  to  the  same  martial  valour  and  heroic 
character  of  the  Haytian  people:  its 
glory  is  known  throughout  the  world  ! 

The  establishment  of  a  throne,  heredi- 
tary in  the  family  of  that  great  man  who 
has  governed  this  state  with  so  much  re- 
nown, has,  therefore,  appeared  to  us  ne- 
cessary, as  a  sacred  and  imperious  duty, 
as  well  as  a  signal  mark  of  the  national  gra- 
tude.  The  purity  of  his  intentions,  the 
fidelity  of  his  soul,  are  to  us  infallible 
guarantees  that  the  Haytian  people  will 
have  nothing  to  fear  for  their  liberties, 
their  independence,  or  their  felicity. 
The  natural  consequence  of  the  establish- 
ment of  the  throne  has  been  the  foundation 
of  a  rank  of  hereditary  nobility,  into  which 
might  be  admitted  all  such  distinguished 
citizens  as  have  rendered  important  services 


149 

to  the  state,  whether  in  the  magistracy, 
in  the  profession  of  arms,  or  in  science 
and  letters.  It  has  been  our  wish  to  add 
to  the  splendour  of  the  throne  by  this 
illustrious  institution,  which  will  tend  in 
itself  to  excite  a  generous  emulation,  and  a 
heartfelt  devotion  to  the  service  of  the 
prince  and  of  the  kingdom. 

If,  to  justify  our  choice,  it  were  neces- 
sary to  cite  examples,  we  should  find 
them  numerous  in  history.  How  many 
great  men,  the  sole  artizans  of  their  own 
fortune,  by  the  aid  alone  of  their  genius, 
by  the  vigour  of  their  understanding,  have 
founded  empires,  and  extended  wide  their 
boundaries;  have  given  to  their  people 
the  precious  advantages  of  a  society  wisely 
ordered,  together  with  a  taste  for  know^ 
ledge,  and  the  arts  of  civilized  Jife.  With- 
out going  further  back,  we  may  look  at 
the  striking  instance  which  presents  itself 
to  all  his  cotemporaries,  of  that  extraor- 
dinary man,  our  implacable  enemy;  he, 


Il 


150 

whose  every  thought  meditates  our  destruc- 
tion,  and  who  at  this   time  reigns  with 
such    absolute    sway   in    Europe;    what 
was   he  prior  to   the  commencement  of 
that   celebrated  revolution,    to  the    issue 
of    which     he     owes    his    rapid    eleva- 
tion?   Nothing     but    a     slender    reed, 
whose  fragile   and    precarious    existence 
was  then  to  all  appearance  very  remote 
from  attaining  such  an  exalted  degree  of 
glory   and   of  power.     Like    those   who 
raised  him  to  the  highest  rank,  we  now 
exercise  the  privileges  of  men,  which  we 
derive  from  nature  :    after  having  re-con- 
quered our  rights,  our  liberty,  and  our  in- 
dependence, it  is  our  will  to  found,  in  this 
new  world,  an  Hereditary  Monarchy  :  we 
hasten   to  decide  at  length  the,  hitherto 
uncertain,  destinies  of  this  country,    by 
declaring  that  Henry  is  invested  with  the 
sovereign   authority/ that   the   throne   is 
hereditary  in  his  family,  and  that  the  hap- 
piness of  Haytians  is  to  be  dated  from  the 


151 

period   of  the   foundation    of   sovereign 
power  in  these  territories. 

Fellow  Citizens,  in  adjusting  the  fun- 
damental bases  of  the  kingdom  which  we 
have  erected,  we  believe  we  have  merited 
the  great  confidence  you  thought  proper 
to  place  in  us.  If  a  few  envious  or  pusil- 
lanimous traducers  stand  up  against  these 
new  institutions  we  have  adopted,  we 
answer,  that  it  is  time  to  dispel  all  re- 
mains of  any  hope  our  enemies  may  still 
entertain.  Should  these  same  enemies  not 
have  profited  by  the  terrible  experience 
they  have  acquired,  and  should  they,  in 
the  blindness  of  their  rage,  again  pollute 
our  soil  with  their  bloodthirsty  battalions, 
may  they  find  at  their  approach  a  united 
people,  who  have  already  made  a  trial 
of  their  strength  ;  inured  to  martial  dis- 
cipline through  intestine  divisions,  fami- 
liarised to  danger  and  to  war ;  a  nation 
armed  and  ready  to  dispute  with  them  the 
country  they   would   invade!    they   will 


152 

find  a  distinguished  monarch,  ranking 
among  the  worthies  of  the  19th  century, 
oftentimes  crowned  with  laurels  of  victory, 
now  re-united,  and  surrounded  with  his 
faithful  nobles,  ready  to  brave  every 
danger,  to  perish  for  the  safety  of  his 
people,  and  rather  to  bury  himself  under 
the  ruins  of  his  throne  than  crouch  be- 
neath an  ignominious  yoke.  May  the 
happy  people  of  beauteous  Hayti,  so 
favoured  by  nature,  reunite  with  each 
other  around  the  constitutional  law,  a  law 
which  regard  for  their  happiness,  our  only 
aim,  first  suggested  ;  may  they  swear  to 
defend  it,  and  then  we  shall  be  competent 
to  withstand  all  the  tyrants  in  the  uni- 
verse, 

Fellow  Citizens,  we  shall  be  abundantly 
rewarded  for  our  toils,  if,  in  the  secure 
possession  of  your  rights,  you  shall  find,  in 
deriving  from  them  all  the  happiness 
which  we  have  been  desirous  of  enabling 
you  to  enjoy,  new  motives  of  attachment 


153 

to     the     government    of     our    common 
country. 

Done  at  Cape  Henry,  the  4th  April, 
1811,  the  eighth  jrear  of  independence. 
Signed, 

Paul  Romain,  sen.  Andre  Vernet,  Tous- 
saint  Brave,  Jean  Philip  Daux,  Martial 
Besse,  Jean  Pierre  Richard,  Jean  Fleury, 
Jean  Baptiste  Juge,  Etienne  Magnay,  secre- 
tary. 


Immediately  after  this  address,  the 
Constitutional  Act  was  read  over  to  the 
people,  who  received  the  same  with  loud 
and  repeated  acclamations  of  "  Long 
live  the  King,  long  live  the  Queen,  the 
Prince,  and  Royal  Family!" 

In  the  course  of  a  short  time  the  public 
edicts  of  government,  directing  the  organi- 
zation of  the  new  form  of  government, 
successively  made  their  appearance,  and 
the  celerity  of  their  publication  did  not 
detract  from  the  wisdom  of  their  contents. 


KINGDOM  OF  HAYTI. 


Manifesto  of  the  King. 

Sovereign  of  a  nation  too  long  op- 
pressed, a  nation  which  has  suffered  cruel 
persecution,  and  which,  by  its  energy,  its 
perseverance,  its  valour,  and  its  prowess, 
has  succeeded  in  acquiring,  by  the  sword, 
liberty  and  independence  ;  the  only  object 
of  our  constant  solicitude,  of  our  incessant 
labours,  for  the  happiness  of  the  virtuous, 
brave,  and  generous  people,  who  have 
confided  to  us  their  destinies,  has  always 
been,  to  give  it  a  place  within  the  pale  of 
civilized  nations. 

It  is  under  the  present  favourable  cir- 
cumstances, now  that  liberal  and  healino- 
opinions  seem  to  efface  the  memory  of 
those  disastrous   times,  when   the  pfcople 


155 

groaned  under  oppression ;  now  that  we 
see  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe  busied  about 
the  welfare  of  their  subjects ;  that  we  deem 
it  our  duty  to  elevate  our  voice,  to  justify, 
before  the  tribunal  of  nations,  the  legiti- 
macy of  our  independence. 

A  simple  statement  of  facts,  a  plain 
narrative  of  the  events  which  have  led  to 
our  independence,  will  suffice  to  prove  to 
demonstration,  to  the  universe  at  large, 
our  rights  and  the  justice  of  our  cause. 

We  will  not  attempt  to  give  a  sketch  of 
the  deplorable  situation  into  which  we 
were  plunged  before  the  epocha  of  our 
emancipation ;  the  world  knows  how,  for 
the  space  of  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty 
years,  we  groaned  under  the  frightful  yoke 
of  slavery,  doomed  to  contempt  and  suf- 
fering. The  tale  of  our  long  misfortunes, 
and  the  picture  of  the  horrible  tortures  that 
we  have  endured  beneath  the  colonial  sys- 
tem, are  the  province  of  our  history,  which 
will  transmit  them  to  posterity. 


156 

We  hasten  to  emerge  from  this  period 
of  disgrace  and  iniquity,  to  arrive  at  the 
epoch  when  universal  liberty  was  pro- 
claimed by  the  agents  of  the  French  go- 
vernment, and  sanctioned  by  France  her- 
self, during  many  years  of  connexion  and 
communication,  of  mutual  and  uninter- 
rupted correspondence,  between  the  go- 
vernments of  the  two  countries. 

We  merited  the  blessings  of  liberty,  by 
our  loyal  attachment  to  the  mother  coun- 
try; we  evinced  our  gratitude  when,  reduced 
to  our  own  resources,  deprived  of  all  com- 
munication with  the  parent  state,  we  re- 
sisted every  seduction ;  when,  inflexible 
to  menaces,  deaf  to  propositions,  inacces- 
sible to  artifice,  we  braved  misery,  fa- 
mine, privations  of  every  description, 
and  finally  triumphed  over  her  numerous 
enemies,  as  well  internal  as  external. 

We  were  then  far  from  anticipating, 
as  a  reward  for  so  much  constancy  and 
such  sacrifices  of  our  blood,  that,  after  the 


•^Jfli 


157 

lapse  of  twelve  years,  and  in  a  manner 
the  most  barbarous,  France  would  desire 
to  ravish  from  us  that  most  precious  of 
all  possessions,  Liberty. 

Under  the  administration  of  the  Go- 
vernor General,  Toussaint  Louverture, 
Hayti  was  regenerating  from  her  ashes; 
every  thing  seemed  to  promise  us  a  happy 
futurity.  The  arrival  of  General  Hedou- 
ville  made  a  total  change  in  the  aspect  of 
affairs,  and  gave  a  mortal  blow  to  public 
tranquillity.  We  will  not  enter  into  the 
details  of  his  intrigues  with  the  Haytian 
General  Rigaud,  and  how  he  succeeded 
in  persuading  him  to  rebel  against  his  le- 
gitimate chief;  we  shall  go  no  further  than 
to  say,  that,  before  he  quitted  the  island, 
this  agent  effected  the  subversion  of  all 
order,  by  spreading  among  us  the  brands 
of  discord,  and  lighting  up  the  torch  of 
civil  war ;  and  that  it  was  not  till  torrents 
of  blood  had  been  shed,  that  tranquillity 
could  be  re-established. 


158 


Always  intent  upon  the  work  of  re- 
storation, the  Governor,  Toussaint  Lou- 
verture,  under  his  paternal  administration, 
had  reinstated,  in  full  force,  law,  morals, 
religion,  education,  and  industry  ;  agricul- 
ture and  commerce  were  flourishing.  He 
favoured  the  white  colonists,  particularly 
the  planters.  Indeed,  his  attentions  and 
partialities  had  been  carried  to  such  a 
length,  that  he  was  loudly  blamed  for  en- 
tertaining more  affection  for  them  than 
for  those  of  his  own  colour.  Nor  was  this 
reproach  without  foundation ;  for,  a  few 
months  before  the  arrival  of  the  French,  he 
immolated  his  own  nephew,  General 
Moyse,  who  had  disregarded  the  orders  he 
had  given  for  the  protection  of  the  colo- 
nists. That  act  of  the  governor,  added  to 
the  great  confidence  he  had  placed  in  the 
French  authorities,  was  the  principal  cause 
of  the  feeble  resistance  tlie  French  encoun- 
tered in  Hayti.  Indeed,  his  confidence 
in  these  authorities  was  such,  that  he  had 


159 

discharged  the  greater  part  of  the  regular 
troops,  and  sent  them  back  to  the  tillage 
of  the  soil. 

Such  was  the  situation  of  things,  when 
the  peace  of  Amiens  was  negociating.  It 
was  hardly  concluded,  before  a  formidable 
armament  disembarked  upon  the  whole 
extent  of  our  coasts  a  numerous  army, 
which  took  us  by  surprise  at  the  moment 
we  thought  ourselves  in  the  most  perfect 
security,  and  plunged  us  at  once  into  an 
abyss  of  calamity. 

Posterity  will  scarcely  credit,  that  in 
an  enlightened  age,  when  philanthropy 
was  generally  diffused  among  mankind, 
an  enterprise  so  abominable  should  ever 
have  taken  place.  It  was  from  the  midst 
of  an  intelligent  people  that  this  swarm  of 
barbarians  issued  forth  with  the  criminal 
design  of  exterminating  a  civilized  and 
peaceable  nation,  or  replunging  them 
for  ever  in  slavery  and  bondage. 

It   was   not  enough  to   come  with  a 


I  ■ 


1(50 


strong  hand  ;  it  was  necessary,  the  better 
to  insure  success  to  the  expedition,  to  em- 
ploy perfidious  and  infamous  means;  it  was 
necessary  to  sow  disunion  amongst  us,  as 
a  salutary  diversion  in  favour  of  their  de- 
structive projects.  They  neglected  nothing 
to  attain  their  execrable  ends.  The  chiefs 
of  both  colours  who  were  to  be  found  in 
France*  the  sons  of  the  Governor  Louver- 
ture  himself,  were  pressed  into  the  service 
for .  the  expedition.  They  were,  like  our- 
selves, cajoled  by  the  proclamation  of  the 
First  Consul,  a  masterpiece  of  perfidy,  in 
which  he  told  us,  "  You  are  all  equal  and 
free  before  God  and  before  the  Republic/* 
At  the  same  time  that  the  instructions  of 
General  Leclerc  were  expressly  in  favour 
of  slavery.  It  was  not  enough  to  call 
upon  men  to  witness  his  falsehood,  but 
the. Divinity  too  must  be  insulted  by  this 
horrible  and  blasphemous  appeal. 

The  major  part  of  the  population,  de- 
ceived by  fallacious  promises,  accustomed 


ttftL3 


u^n/: 


161 

for  ages  to  consider  themselves  as  French, 
submitted  without  resistance.    So  little  did 
the  governor  himself  expect  to  have  any 
enemy  to  combat,  that  he  had  given  no 
orders  to  his  general  to  resist,  in   case  of 
attack.     When  the  French  squadron  was 
descried,  he  was  making  the  circuit  of  the 
eastern  side  of  the  island  ;  if  some  generals 
resisted,  it  was  only  in  consequence  of  the 
menaces  and  hostile  manner  of  summoning 
them  to  surrender,  which  made  them  take 
counsel  of  their  duty,  their  honour,  and 
the   circumstances   in    which   they    were 
placed. 

As  evidence  of  the  truth  of  these  asser- 
tions, we  refer  to  the  original  documents, 
printed  and  annexed  to  these  presents, 
from  No.  1  to  L4  inclusivelv. 

After  some  months  resistance,  the  Go- 
vernor General  yielded  to  the  pressing 
entreaties  of  General  Leclerc,  and  to  his 
solemn  protestations  that  the  maintenance 
of  liberty  was  the  basis  of  his  instructions, 

M 


»! 


162 

and  that  France  would  never  violate  its 
most  beautiful  work.  Peace  was  negotiated 
with  the  French  on  this  footing,  and  the 
Governor  Toussaint  resigned  his  authority, 
and  retired  peaceably  to  the  retreat  which 
he  had  chosen. 

Scarcely  had  the  French  succeeded  in 
extending  their  dominion  over  the  whole 
island,  more  by  cunning  and  persuasion 
than  by  the  force  of  thair  arms,  when  they 
began  to  put  in  execution  their  frightful 
system  of  slavery  and  destruction. 

As  a  step  towards  this  object,  they  re- 
solved to  arrest  Governor  Toussaint  Lou- 
verture;  they  forged  a  correspondence, 
(composed  by  mercenary  and  machiave- 
lian  scribblers) ;  they  imputed  to  him  de- 
signs which  never  entered  his  head  ;  they 
kidnapped  him  from  his  habitation  at 
Pongaudin,  while  reposing  in  the  full  faith 
of  treaties;  loaded  with  fetters,  he  was  drag- 
ged, with  his  family,  on  board  the  Hero  and 
transported  to  France.    All  Europe  knows 


MA 


U*l 


165 

how  he  terminated  his  unfortunate  career 
in  the  torments  and  horrors  of  the  dun- 
geons of  the  Chateau  de  Joux,  in  Tranche- 
Comte. 

Such  was  the  reward  bestowed  on  his 
attachment,  and  the  great  and  eminent 
services  he  had  rendered  to  France  and 
the  colonists. 

That  moment  was  the  signal  of  arrests 
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  island. 
All  those  who  had  shewn  strength  of  soul, 
of  intellect,  or  of  character,  at  the  time 
when   we  vindicated   the   rights  of  man, 
were  the  first  to   be  laid  hold   of;    they 
spared  not  even  the  traitors  who  most  con- 
tributed to  the  success  of  the  French  ar- 
mies,  by  informing  and  conducting  their 
advanced  guards,  and  themselves  marking 
down  and  arresting  their  fellow-citizens. 
At  first  they  offered  them  for  sale  in  the 
foreign   colonies;    failing  in  this  project, 
they  resolved  to  convey  them   to  France, 
where  labour  in  the  galleys,  and  in  the 


164 


highways,   fetters,   or   dungeons,  awaited 

them. 

It  was   then  that  the  white  colonists, 
whose   numbers   progressively  increased, 
believing  their  power  already  confirmed, 
threw  off  the  mask  of  dissimulation,  loudly 
declared    the  reestablishment  of  slavery, 
and    took    their    measures    accordingly. 
These  men  had  the  impudence  to  claim, 
as  their    slaves,    citizens,  men   who   had 
recommended    themselves    by  the   signal 
services  they  had  rendered  their  country, 
as  well   in  a  civil  as  in  a  military  capa- 
city;   virtuous    and  upright    magistrates; 
warriors  covered  with  scars,  whose  blood 
had  flowed  in  the  cause  of  France  and 
liberty,  were  again  subjected  to  the  yoke 
of  slavery.     These  colonists,  scarcely  re- 
seated in  their  estates,  affected  all  those 
airs  of  haughtiness  with  which   insolent 
masters  always  treat  their  slaves.     While 
their  power  yet  hung  upon  a  thread,  they 
already  marked   out   and    selected   those 


165 

whom  they  designed  to  be  the  first  victims 
sacrificed  to  their  revenge. 

Then  arrived  the  infamous  decree  of 
Bonaparte,  which  confirmed  the  reesta- 
blishment  of  slavery.  The  better  to  insult 
our  misery,  he  also  employed  towards  us 
the  same  mystic  jargon  which  he  used 
towards  the  people  of  Europe;  for  it  was 
to  him  habitual.  This  decree  was  brought 
us  by  a  traitor,  who  had  sold  himself;  in 
short,  by  Hercules,  a  black  officer;  to  sum 
up  all,  his  slave. 

The  proud  and  liberticide  faction  of 
the  colonists,  and  dealers  in  human  flesh, 
which,  since  the  commencement  of  the 
Revolution,  has  worried  all  the  successive 
governments  of  France  with  their  plans, 
projects,  most  extravagant  and  atrocious 
memorials,  all  tending  to  our  destruction; 
this  faction,  tormented  by  the  remem- 
brance of  the  despotism  which  it  had 
exercised  in  Hayti,  agitated  by  a  whirl- 
wind of  different  passions,  employed  every 


166 


means  that  could  be  devised,  to  re- 
gain the  prey  that  bad  escaped  them; 
Independents  under  the  Constiluent  As- 
sembly; Terrorists  under  the  Jacobins; 
and,  in  fine,  zealous  Bonapartists:  they 
borrowed  the  mask  of  all  parties,  to  gain 
their  countenance  and  favour. 

It  was  thus  that,   by  their  perfidious 
counsels,  they  induced  Bonaparte  to  un- 
dertake   the    unjust    expedition    against 
Hayti.     It  was  this  faction  which,   after 
having  forced  him  to  this  step,  furnished 
the  pecuniary  means   by  the  lists  of  sub- 
scriptions which  were  opened  at  that  pe- 
riod.    In  short,  it  was  this  faction  which 
has  made  the  blood  of  our  fellow-country- 
men flow  in  torrents;  it  was  this  faction 
which  instigated  the  unheard  of  tortures 
which  we  have  experienced;  tortures  so 
frightful  as  could  be  devised  by  none  but 
the  colonists,  hardened  by  the  practice  of 
every  species  of  crime.     It  is  to  the  colo- 
nists that  France  owes  the  loss  of  a  nume- 


rous  army,  which  met  its  fate  in  the  plains 
and  morasses  of  Hayti;  it  is  to  them  that 
she  owes  the  shame  of  an  enterprise  which 
has  imprinted  an  indelible  stain  on  the 
name  of  Frenchmen. 

We  are  persuaded,  after  the  cruel  expe- 
rience that  we  have  had  of  the  spirit  which 
-animates  these  colonists,  these  dealers  and 
traffickers  in  human  flesh,  and  their  vile  sa- 
tellites, that  they  will  once  more  employ 
their  usual  artifices  to  involve  the  French 
cabinet  in  a  new  enterprize  against  us.     s 

If  ever  this  enterprize  take  place,  which 
we  can  hardly  bring  ourselves  to  believe, 
it  is  to  this  cast,  the  enemies  of  the  human 
race,  that  we  shall  be  indebted  for  it ;  for 
we  are  very  far  from  imputing  to  the  Eu- 
ropeans, who  can  have  no  idea  of  the 
colonial  system,  of  which  we  have  been 
the  victims,  the  dreadful  evils  we  have 
.endured.  What  interest  could  the  French 
people  have  in  carrying  war  into  the  heart 
of  a  nation  which  was  proud  of  its  sub- 


168 

jection  to  them?  What  interest  had  they 
in  coming  to  bury  themselves  in  our  de- 
structive climate,  and  lo  render  themselves 
the  tools  and  instruments  of  the  colonists, 
and  to  sate  the  thirst  of  riches  and  ven- 
geance which  inflames  them? 

However,  the  majority  of  the  people 
began  to  take  up  arms  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  their  lives  and  liberties  from 
hazard:  this  first  movement  spread  alarm 
among  the  French,  and  appeared  suffi- 
ciently serious  to  General  Leclerc,  to 
cause  him  to  convoke  an  extraordinary 
assembly  of  the  colonists,  in  order  to 
adopt  measures  best  calculated  to  restore 
a  better  state  of  things;  but  these  colo- 
nists, very  far  from  relaxing  in  their  atro- 
cious principles,  from  the  imperious  sense 
of  danger,  unanimously  replied  in  these 
words,  "  No  slavery,  no  colony." 

As  a  member  of  this  council,  in  vain 
we  raised  our  voice  to  stop  the  completion 
of  the  ruin  of  our  fellow-countrymen  and 


of  our  country ;  in  vain  did  we  represent 
the  excessive  injustice  of  replunging  free 
men  into  slavery;  in  vain,  apprised  of  the 
spirit  of  our  countrymen,  their  love  of 
liberty,  we  denounced  this  measure  as 
the  only  means  of  ruining  the  country, 
and  detaching  it  from  France  for  ever: 
all  was  to  no  purpose.  Convinced  that 
there  remained  no  hopes  of  conciliation, 
that  we  must  choose  between — the  bonds 
of  slavery  and  death — with  arms  in  our 
hands,  we  undeceived  our  fellow-citizens, 
-who  had  their  eyes  fixed  upon  us;  and 
took  to  arms  in  obedience  to  the  unani- 
mous impulse,  with  the  resolution  to  expel 
our  tyrants  for  ever  from  our  territory,  to 
conquer  or  die. 

General  Leclerc  had  already  announced 
the  reduction  of  the  island,  and  even  re- 
ceived, from  almost  every  maritime  town 
in  France  (where  the  advocates  of  the  slave 
trade  mostly  resided)  letters  of  congratula- 
tion on  the  pretended  conquest  of  Hayti, 


no 


> 


and  the  restoration  of  slavery.  Ashamed  at 
having  given  rise  to  delusive  expectations, 
chagrined  at  his  inability  to  execute  his 
detestable  enterprise,  and  dreading  the  apr 
proach  of  a  terrible  war,  despair  consumed 
his  days,  and  hurried  him  to  the  tomb. 

Among  the  catalogue  of  crimes  which 
signalised  the  administration  of  General 
Leclerc,  his  conduct  to  the  Haytian  Gene- 
ral, Maurepas,  would  excite  indignation 
in  hearts  least  accessible  to  pity — Maure- 
pas, a  man  of  mild  and  gentle  manners, 
esteemed  for  his  integrity  by  his  fellow- 
citizens,  was  one  of  the  first  to  surrender 
to  the  French,  and  had  rendered  them 
signal  services;  yet  this  man  was  sud- 
denly carried  off  to  Port-de-Paix,  and  put 
on  board  the  Admiral's  vessel,  then  riding 
at  anchor  in  the  Cape  roads,  where,  after 
binding  him  to  the  main-mast,  the}',  in 
derision,  fixed  with  nails  such  as  are  used 
in  ship-building,  two  old  epaulettes  on 
his  shoulders,  and  an  old  general's  hat  on 


171 

his  head.  In  that  frightful  condition,  these 
cannibals,  after  having  glutted  their  fero- 
cious mirth  and  exultation,  precipitated 
him  with  his  wife  and  children  into  the 
sea:  such  was  the  catastrophe  of  that  vir- 
tuous and  unfortunate  soldier. 

To  the  command  of  Leclerc  succeeded 
Rochambeau.     This  monstrous   agent  of 
Bonaparte,  a  worthy  accomplice  of  the 
colonists,  stained  himself  with  every  crime, 
sparing  neither  sex,  nor  infancy,  nor  age; 
he  surpassed  in  cruelty  the  most  accom- 
plished villains    of    ancient    or    modern 
times.     Gibbets  were  everywhere  erected, 
drownings,  burnings ;   the  most   horrible 
punishments  were  put  in  practice  by  his 
orders;  instead  of  scuttled  vessels,  he  in- 
vented a  new  machine  of  destruction,  in 
which  victims  of  both  sexes,  heaped  upon 
one  another,  were  suffocated  by  wholesale 
in  the  smoke  of  sulphur. 

In  his  insensate  rage,  he  procured  from 
Cuba,  at  a  great  expense,  human   blood- 


172 

hounds,  under  charge  of  oneNoailles,  of  an 
illustrious  French  family  (who  was  the  first 
after  the  Revolution  to  betray  his  bene- 
factors), and  the  human  race  was  delivered 
to  be  devoured  by  dogs  that  will  partake 
of  the  frightful  immortality  of  their  mas- 
ters. What  was  our  crime?  What  had  we 
done  to  deserve  such  a  proscription?  What! 
must  our  African  original  be  an  eternal 
opprobrium?  Must  the  colour  of  our  epi- 
dermis be  the  seal  of  our  eternal  degra- 
dation ? 

According  to  the  exact  return  made 
by  order  of  the  government,  during  the 
space  of  twenty-one  months  that  the 
French  resided  in  this  island,  more  than 
16,000  of  our  fellow-countrymen  have 
perished  under  the  tortures  we  have  speci- 
fied. The  cruelties  inflicted  by  these  mo- 
dern conquerors  upon  the  children  of 
Hayti,  blotted  out  the  crimes  of  the  Pi- 
zarros,  the  Cortez,  the  Bodavillas,  those 
early  scourges  of  the  New  World. 


173 

In  spite  of  all  their  efforts,  we  have 
succeeded  in  expelling  these  oppressors 
from  our  soil. 

To  guarantee  ourselves  for  ever  from 
the  return  of  such  barbarities,  and  un- 
heard of  crimes,  to  protect  ourselves  from 
similar  perfidy  and  injustice,  we  resolved 
to  throw  off  for  ever  the  yoke  of  foreign 
domination.  In  pursuance  of  this  resolu- 
tion, on  the  1st  of  January  1804,  in  a  gene- 
ral assembly  of  the  national  representa- 
tives, the  independence  of  Hayti  was  so- 
lemnly proclaimed,  and  we  pronounced 
the  oath  to  die  free  and  independent,  and 
never  again  to  submit  to  any  foreign 
domination  whatsoever. 

Like  other  people,  our  first  years  were 
not  exempt  from  error  and  trouble;  like 
them  we  passed  through  the  vicissitudes 
inseparable  from  revolutions. 

Since  our  accession  to  the  throne,  our 
first  object  has  been  to  elevate  the  name 
and  dignity  of  the  people  of  Hayti;  con- 


^Mj 

1 

1 

H 

0 

tl:i 

■4 

' 

Wt 

174 

vinced  that  good  faith,  candour,  and  pro- 
bitj,  in  our  dealings,  the  inviolability  of 
property,  and  personal  rights  of  men, 
could  alone  attain  that  end  in  our  internal 
and  external  relations;  fully  persuaded 
that  it  is  the  laws  which  constitute  the 
happiness  of  men  united  in  society,  our 
first  measure  has  been  the  compiling  of  a 
code  of  laws  suitable  to  our  usages,  our 
climate,  and  our  manners.  After  assi- 
duous application,  with  the  inspiration 
and  assistance  of  the  Almighty,  we  have 
at  length  put  the  finishing  hand  to  this 
basis  of  our  social  edifice. 

We  have  constantly  fostered  and  pro- 
tected agriculture  and  commerce,  the 
channels  of  public  prosperity;  abundant 
harvests  have  been  the  fruit  of  the  toilsome 
exertions  of  our  industrious  cultivators;  a 
considerable  quantity  of  produce  has  been 
exported  from  our  harbours  since  we  pro- 
claimed our  independence,  and  particu- 
larly in  the  years  1812,  1813,  and  1814, 


by  foreign  nations,  who  carry  on  a  traffic 
with  us  as  safe  as  it  is  lucrative. 

While  directing  an  anxious  inquiry 
into  the  measures  capable  of  reviving  in- 
ternal prosperity,  we  have  never  diverted 
our  attention  from  the  events  which  were 
passing  in  Europe,  in  the  bloody  struggle 
that  she  has  had  to  sustain,  nor  have  we 
ever  lost  sight,  for  one  instant,  of  our  sys- 
tem of  military  defence. 

In  this  attitude  we  waited  till  Bona- 
parte, that  enemy  of  the  world,  should 
come  to  attack  us,  and  with  his  usual 
weapons,  perfidy  and  force;  not  forget- 
ting that,  after  the  peace  of  Amiens,  his 
first  object  was  the  famous  expedition  for 
our  extermination. 

But  the  God  of  battles,  who  raises  up 
and  casts  down  thrones  at  his  nod,  in  his 
justice,  has  not  willed  that  this  oppressor 
of  nations  should  accomplish  this  horrible 
design.  We  trust  that  his  fall  will  give 
peace  and  repose  to  the  world ;  we  hope 


176 

that  the  return  of  those  liberal  and  sound 
principles  which  animate  the  European 
powers  will  bring  them  to  acknowledge  the 
independence  of  a  people  who  ask  for 
nothing  but  to  enjoy  peace  and  commerce, 
which  are  the  chief  aims  of  all  civilised 
nations. 

It  is  in  vain  to  attempt,  once  more,  by 
means  of  force  or  seduction,  to  make  us 
return  under  a  foreign  yoke.  We  are  in  no 
danger  from  the  absurd  system  of  deceiv- 
ing, in  order  to  govern  mankind.  In- 
structed by  experience,  we  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  truth,  of  reason,  and  of  our 
own  strength  ;  and  the  clouds  of  prejudice, 
in  which  our  enemies  wrould  enwrap  and 
beguile  us,  are  vanished  for  ever. 

We  can  no  more  be  the  victims  of  our 
credulity  and  of  good  faith  ;  we  can  never 
forget  that  an  attempt  has  once  been  made 
upon  our  liberty.  The  heart-rending  image 
of  the  horrible  torments  which  have  preci- 
pitated our  fathers,  our  mothers,  our  wives, 


our  children,  into  the  tomb,  shall  never  be 
effaced  from  our  memory. 

We  are  no  longer  open  to  deception : 
the  underhand   practices  of  our  enemies 
have  been  made  known  to  us ;  we  have 
before  our  eyes  the  memoirs  and  the  pro- 
jects of  Malouet,   Barre  de  Saint-Venaut, 
of  the  Pages  and  the   Brulleys,  and  the 
many  other  colonists  ;  the  political  creed 
of  these  brokers   of  human   flesh,   these 
counsellors  of  evil,  is  well  known  to  us.  It 
is  comprised  in  two  words,  slavery  and  de- 
struction :  we  are  not  ignorant  of  the  cri 
minal  intrigues  and  the  shameful  practices 
of  those  apostles  of  crime  and  falsehood  ; 
they  have  taught   us   by  their   writings, 
more  than  by  the  tortures  that  we  have 
undergone,  that  the  only  solid  guarantee 
of  our  political  rights,  of  our  very  exist- 
ence, is  the  preservation  of  our  indepen- 
dence. 

Weappeal  to  all  the  Sovereigns  of  the 
world,  to  the  brave  and  loyal  British  na- 

N 


178 

tion,  which  has  been  the  first  to  proclaim, 
in  its  august  Senate,  the  abolition  of  the 
infamous   traffic   in  Negroes;  which  has 
done  still  more,  in  employing  the  ascen- 
dancy of  victory  for  the  noble  purpose  of 
recommending  the  abolition  to  all  other 
states  with  which  she  has  concluded  al- 
liances ;  we  appeal  to  the  philanthropists 
of  all  nations  ;  in  fine,  to  mankind  at  large, 
to  the  whole  universe,  what  people,  after 
twenty-five  years  of  battle  and  bloodshed, 
having  won  their  liberty  and  independ- 
ence with  the  sword,  will  ever  consent  to 
lay  down  their  arms,  and  become  again 
the  sport  and  the  victims  of  their  cruel 
oppressors  ?     We  ask,  what  people  would 
stoop  to  such  an  excess  of  baseness  ?    No, 
the  last  of  the  Haytians  will  breathe  out 
his  last  sigh  before  he  will  renounce  his 
independence. 

We  will  not  do  any  power  the  in- 
justice to  suppose  it  capable  of  forming 
the   chimerical  hope   of  establishing   its 


authority    in    Hayti    by    the    force    of 
arms. 

The  power  that  should  undertake  this 
enterprize,  would  have  to  march  a  long 
time  over  ruins  and  carcases  ;  and  if,  after 
having  displayed  all  its  means,  it  should 
at  length  make  itself  master  of  the  coun- 
try, after  burying  the  flower  of  its  troops, 
which  yet  we  hold  to  be  impossible,  what 
will  it  have  purchased  with  the  loss  of  so 
much  treasure,  with  the  effusion  of  so 
much  blood  ? 

It  would  not  be  presumptuous  to  be- 
lieve that  his  Majesty,  Louis  XVIII.  fol- 
lowing the  impulse  of  the  philanthropic 
spirit  which  has  ever  reigned  in  his  family, 
and  imitating  the  example  of  his  unfortu- 
nate brother,   Louis  XVI.  in  his  political 
conduct    towards    the   United    States   of 
America,  will  tread  in  the  steps  of  that 
monarch,  and  acknowledge  the  indepen- 
dence of  Hayti.     It  would  be  but  an  act 
of  justice,    a  poor  amends  for  the  evils 


180 

we  have  suffered  under  the  government  of 

France. 

It  is  in  vain  that  our  detractors  dare 
still  to  allege,  that  'we  must  not  be  considered 
as  a  political  body  aspiring  to  independence, 
and  collectively  occupied  in  the  means  to  ob- 
tain it* 

This  absurd  assertion,  invented  by  the 
craft,  the  wickedness,  and  base  selfishness 
of  the  advocates  of  the  Slave  Trade,  merits 
the  most  profound  contempt  and  indigna- 
tion of  the  good  men  of  all  countries  ;  and 
is  sufficiently  belied  by  eleven  years'  actual 
enjoyment  of  independence  and  its  happy 
results.     There  is  no  example  of  a  people 
that  have  made  so  rapid  a  progress  in  ci- 
vilization. 

Free  by  right,  and  independent  in  fact, 
we  will  never  renounce  these  blessings ;  no, 
never  will  we  consent  to  see  subverted  the 
edifice  we  have  raised  and  cemented  by 

*  Introduction  to  the  Memoirs  of  St.  Domingo. 
Malonet,  vol.  iv.  p.  50. 


181 

our  blood  ;  at  least,  without  being  buried 
beneath  its  ruins. 

To  the  commercial  powers  inclined  to 
connect  themselves  with  us,  we  offer  our 
friendship,  the  security  of  their  property, 
and  our  royal  protection  to  their  peaceable 
subjects,  who  may  land  upon  our  shores 
with  the  intention  of  pursuing  their  com- 
mercial affairs,  and  conform  with  our  laws 
and  customs. 

King  of  a  free  people,  a  soldier  by 
profession,  we  dread  not  war,  nor  the 
enemy  with  which  we  may  have  to  fight; 
we  have  already  declared  our  resolution 
not  to  intermeddle,  in  any  manner,  in  the 
internal  government  of  our  neighbours ; 
we  wish  to  enjoy,  at  home,  peace  and 
tranquillity,  and  to  exercise  the  universal 
prerogative  of  making  such  laws  for  our- 
selves as  our  exigencies  require.  If,  after 
the  frank  exposure  of  our  sentiments  and 
of  the  justice  of  our  cause,  a  hostile  foot 
shall  plant  itself  upon  our   territory,    in 


182 

violation  of  the  rights  of  nations,  our  first 
duty  will  then  be  to  repel  the  act  of  ag- 
gression by  every  means  in  our  power. 

We  solemnly  declare,  that  we  will 
never  become  a  party  to  any  treaty,  to 
any  condition,  that  may  compromise  the 
honour,  the  liberty,  or  the  independence 
of  the  Haytian  people;  that,  true  to  our 
oath,  we  will  sooner  bury  ourselves  beneath 
the  ruins  of  our  native  country,  than  suf- 
fer an  infraction  of  our  political  rights. 

Given  at  our  palace  of  Sans  Souci, 

the  18th  of  September,  1814,  in  the  11th 

year  of  independence,  and  the  4th  of  our 

reign. 

HENRY. 
(By  the  King) 

Comte  de  Limonade, 

Secretary  of  State,  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs. 


183 


From  Sans  Souci,  the  3d  January, 
1816. 

The  anniversary  of  the  festival  of  our 
immortal  independence  (written  from  the 
above  city)  has  been  celebrated  with  the 
greatest  pomp  during  two  days. 

The  day  before,  at  sun-set,  and  the  day 
after,  at  the  first  break  of  morn,  salvos  of 
artillery  saluted  the  beautiful  day  of  inde- 
pendence. 


At  seven  o'clock  the  five  superb  regiments 
of  the  household  troops  of  the  king,  in 
the  closest  order,  and  the  different  corps  of 
the  garrison,  filed  off  from  their  barracks 
to  repair  to  the  exercising  ground. 

At  eight  o'clock,  the  dignitaries  and 
grand  officers  assembled, went  to  the  palace 
of  His  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Royal, 
generalissimo  of  the  army,  to  form  his 
retinue,  and  accompany  him  to  the 
ground. 


184 

The  whole  marched  off  to  the  sound  of 
drums  and  music.  On  reaching  the  place 
of  exercise,  his  Royal  Highness  ordered 
the  manoeuvre  of  forming  the  troops  in 
column  to  be  performed,  and  desired  the 
populace  to  approach,  in  order  to  hear 
read  the  Act  of  Independence  and  the 
Proclamation  of  the  King.    - 

The  Chevalier  de  Prezeau,  secretary  to 
the  King,  read  aloud  the  Act  of  Independ- 
ence, and  at  the  termination  of  it,  cries  of 
"  Independence  for  ever  !"  were  heard  in 
all  quarters. 

Then  Baron  de  Vastey  read  aloud  the 
Proclamation  of  the  King,  which  carried 
enthusiasm  to  its  height,  and  was  equally 
received  with  cries  of  "  Independence  for 
ever  !  Long  live  the  King  !  Liberty  for 
ever  Y[ 

These  readings  being  finished,  his 
Royal  Highness  repaired  with  his  retinue 
to  the  palace  of  the  King,  his  august  fa- 
ther, to  pay  him  his  respectful  homage. 


185 

The  dignitaries,  civil  and  administrative 
officers,  were  introduced  by  the  grand 
master  of  the  ceremonies  in  the  great  sa- 
loon, and  ranked  according  to  the  order  of 
precedence.  Immediately  after  the  King 
made  his  appearance,  having  on  each  side 
the  Queen,  the  Prince  Royal,  and  the 
Princesses  Royal. 

Baron  Dessalines,  major  general,  the 
Organ  of  the  Peers,  advanced  respectfully, 
and  addressed  the  King  in  the  following 
speech  : 


Sire, 


To  offer  to  your  Majesty  and  your 
august  family,  on  the  anniversary  of  the 
immortal  independence  of  our  country, 
the  tribute  of  our  respectful  homage,  of  our 
veneration,  our  fidelity  and  unbounded  de- 
votion, is  to  discharge  the  debt  of  our 
hearts  unto  your  Majesty,  as  the  pledge  of 
our  gratitude. 


186 

The  wisdom  of  your  Majesty's  admini- 
stration claims  the  affection  of  all  Hay- 
tians,  the  esteem  and  admiration  of  fo- 
reigners. Sire,  your  Majesty  had  scarcely 
concluded  the  preparations  for  the  defence 
of  our  country ;  your  profound  discern- 
ment had  scarcely  provided  for  all  that  is 
morally  possible  to  foresee  in  the  safety  of 
the  people,  when  your  Majesty,  entertain- 
ing the  noble  idea  of  raising  up  the  cha- 
racter of  the  nation,  engaged  in  the  intro- 
duction of  knowledge  into  the  kingdom, 
as  the  means  of  civilizing  man. — You  are 
desirous,  Sire,  of  uniting  with  the  sublime 
institutions  which  you  have  given  us,  and 
of  adding  to  justice  and  morality,  which 
have  made  such  rapid  progress  amongst 
us,  the  arts  and  sciences,  those  amiable 
offsprings  of  peaceable  times  ! 

All  your  Majesty's  thoughts,  all  your 
desires,  invoke  among  us  unison  and 
peace.  The  Hay  tian  people  do  that  justice 
to  your  Majesty  which  is  but  due,  that, 


m 


187 

if  all  the  districts  of  Haytians  are  not  yet 
reunited,  your  Majesty  has  nevertheless 
done  all  in  your  power  in  order  to  ac- 
complish this  most  gratifying  end ;  but, 
what  must  be  consolatory  to  the  benefi- 
cent heart  of  your  Majesty  is,  that  its  pa- 
ternal advances  have  not  been  thrown 
away.  Already  the  majority  of  our  bre- 
thren, who  have  been  hurried  on  in  error 
by  a  vile  and  ambitious  man  who  has 
sacrificed  all,  are  now  about  to  open  their 
eyes  to  the  light  of  conviction,  and  to  re- 
unite themselves  under  the  banners  of 
your  Majesty,  which  are  those  of  their 
own  proper  cause,  of  liberty  and  indepen- 
dence. 

Pursue,  Sire,  your  glorious  destinies : 
may  you  ever  be  to  the  Haytians  that 
great  guide  which  is  to  direct  their  steps 
in  the  new  career  they  are  about  to  com- 
mence ;  the  compass  by  which  to  steer  our 
warriors  in  the  paths  of  honour  and  glory, 
as  well  as  in  the  practice  of  the  duty  of  a 


Ma. 


188 


good  father,  good  husband,  and  good 
Haytian !  your  Majesty  will  find  in  your 
own  heart  the  sweetest  recompence  for  all 
your  troubles,  for  all  your  toils  and  works 
that  are  imperishable. 

Permit,  Sire,  your  officers  to  wish  you 
all  the  happiness  and  blessings  of  which 
your  Majesty  is  so  worthy.  May  the  Su- 
preme Being  preserve  you  many  years  to 
be  the  support  of  the  country,  and  the 
consternation  of  our  tyrants. 

Long  live  the  King !  Independence 
for  ever  ! 


His  Majesty  received  the  address  of 
the  dignitaries  and  peers  very  graciously, 
and  replied  in  the  following  terms  : 


Sirs,  Dignitaries  and  Officers  of  the 
civil  and  administrative  bodies, — It  is 
with  the  most  lively  acknowledgments 
that  we  receive  the  wishes  you  express 
on    our  behalf  at  the  commencement  of 


189 

this  new  year.  Penetrated  with  the  sin- 
cerity of  those  wishes,  we  receive  them 
with  the  most  profound  regard.  You  will 
learn  by  our  Proclamation  of  this  day,  the 
state  of  the  prosperity  of  the  kingdom, 
and  our  views  of  augmenting  its  renown, 
All  our  power  shall  be  exerted  to  advance 
the  happiness  of  the  people;  their  fe- 
licity, their  reputation,  shall  ever  be  the 
object  of  our  constant  solicitude,  and  the 
end  of  our  unceasing  vigilance  and  toil. 

By  promoting  amongst  you  union, 
which  creates  strength,  under  the  regula- 
tion of  the  laws  ;  by  practising  good  con- 
duct, and  the  observance  of  justice  and  of 
equity  ;  by  fostering  and  encouraging  the 
arts  and  sciences,  so  as  to  attract  the 
consideration  and  good- will  of  friendly 
powers,  by  our  wisdom,  our  good  faith, 
and  the  security  of  our  trade;  by  our 
warlike  attitude,  and  our  steady  resolution; 
let  us  render  ourselves  worthy  of  liberty 
and   independence !    May  these   sublime 


■j 


190 

sentiments  be  engraven  on  our  hearts! 
Such,  gentlemen,  is  the  end  to  which  all 
our  views  and  endeavours  are  directed; 
and  this  same  sun  that  illumes  with  its 
beneficent  rajs  the  day  we  are  celebrating, 
will  rise  ever  beaming  on  us,  and  our  pos- 
terity ! 


The  ceremony  being  over,  the  Prince 
and  Princesses  Royal  got  into  their  car- 
riages to  go  to  church,  and  assist  in  divine 
service. 

After  mass  their  Majesties  returned  to 
the  palace  in  the  same  order  in  which  they 
had  set  out.  A  splendid  entertainment 
was  served  up  ;  the  utmost  gaiety  pre- 
vailed during  the  repast,  and  after  dinner, 
during  the  dessert,  patriotic  toasts  were 
given  and  received  with  loud  acclama- 
tions, followed  by  music,  the  flourish  of 
trumpets,  and  salutes  of  cannon. 

At  night  the  palace  and  city  were  illu- 
minated in  the  most  brilliant  manner  ;  a 


191 

grand  ball  was  given  at  the  palace.  The 
two  days  of  rejoicing  to  commemorate  our 
immortal  independence  were  passed  in 
the  most  pleasing  enjoyments  :  never  was 
the  court  more  brilliantly  attended :  the 
unanimity,  freedom,  and  gaiety  that  pre- 
vailed, were  proofs  of  the  unbounded  at- 
tachment which  the  Haytians  feel  for 
their  liberty  and  their  independence. 


192 


REFLECTIONS 


OF 


THE    EDITOR. 


The  greatest  happiness  of  a  nation  is 
that  of  possessing  a  wise  and  valiant  King, 
who  knows  how  to  make  his  rights  re- 
spected abroad,  and  who  studies  the  in- 
ternal administration  of  his  laws  with 
justice  and  equity :  this  happiness  we 
possess  :  we  have,  in  our  beloved  Sove- 
reign, this  wise  and  valiant  monarch:  it  is 
he  who  by  his  energy  and  his  courage 
knows  how  to  cause  our  liberty  and  inde- 
pendence to  be  respected :  it  is  he  who 
by  the  wisdom  of  his  administration  has 
attracted  towards  us  the  admiration  and 
esteem  of  strangers :  he  it  is  who  has 
amended  our  manners,  fixed  our  institu- 
tions and  our  laws,  and  who  is  still  further 


193 

desirous,  lo  complete  his  benefits  to  the 
full,  by  introducing  into  the  kingdom  the 
lights  of  learning,  by  affording  his  protec- 
tion to  the  arts  and  sciences  ;  he  it  is  who 
watches  by  night  and  day  for  the  main- 
tenance of  our  rights ;  he  observes  the 
plots  of  Frenchmen  and  of  their  partisans, 
to  discomfit  them ;  it  is  around  thiswise  and 
valiant  King,  therefore,  my  brethren,  that 
we  ought  all  to  rally  and  to  fight  until 
our  latest  breath,  in  order  to  establish 
our  rights,  our  liberty,  and  our  indepen- 
dence ! 

Why,  my  brethren,  have  not  all  of  us 
this  sublime  thought  ?  Why  is  it  that  one 
weak  portion  of  the  Haytians  still  bends 
under  the  ignominious  yoke  of  a  traitor? 
They  know  not,  all  the  while,  the  sundry 
crimes  with  which  Petion  is  covered :  do 
they  wait  then  till,  with  their  hands  and 
feet  bound,  they  are  delivered  up,  before 
they  will  open  their  eyes  ? 

Has  not  Petion  renounced  real  inde- 
o 


194 


pendence  in  consideration  of  retaining 
onl}~  one  species  of  independence,  the  in- 
ternal administration  ?  has  he  not  bartered 
away  the  rights  of  the  people  with  an  in- 
famous spy?  would  he  not  have  delivered 
them  up  to  the  mercy  of  their  butchers, 
if  he  were  not  apprehensive  of  risking  his 
safety  and  his  existence?  has  he  not 
granted  the  exclusive  privilege  of  trade  to 
France?  has  he  not  agreed  that  he  had 
become  Haytian  against  his  will,  through 
necessity,  at  a  time  when  he  could  not 
act  otherwise  ?  is  it  not  he  who  would 
send  the  Haytians  to  the  Island  of  Ratau  ? 
is  it  not  he  who  has  furnished  Dauxion 
Lavaysse  with  all  the  plans  and  designs 
for  a  conquest,  to  reduce  us  to  a  state  of 
slavery  ?  Finally,  is  it  not  he  who  is  per- 
petually conspiring  abroad  and  at  home 
in  favour  of  the  French  ?  Meronet,  Gar- 
bage, Tapiant,  Liott,  Dauxion  Lavaysse, 
Catineau  Laroche,  the  two  brothers  Pra- 
dert,  are  not  these  his  agents  and  his  ac- 


195 

complices?  I  should  never  finish  in  re- 
counting the  history  of  all  his  crimes. 
Blind  must  that  man  be  who  serves  such 
a  monster. 

We  feel  a  great  curiosity  to  learn  in 
what  manner  Petion  has  kept  the  anniver- 
sary of  independence  at  Port  au  Prince, 
he  who  had  already  sacrificed  it,  who 
carried  his  repugnance  to  it  so  far  as  not 
to  be  desirous  of  pronouncing  the  word  or 
inserting  it  in  his  writings  :  but  as  this 
hypocrite  often  sings  his  recantation  ac- 
cording to  circumstances,  it  is  probable 
he  will  have  observed  the  day  with  much 
ceremony,  to  mask  his  criminal  intentions, 
in  order,  if  possible,  to  dispel  the  recol- 
lection of  his  intrigues  with  Dauxion 
Lavaysse. 

We  are  informed  that,  for  some  time 
past,  he  affects  in  his  conversation  to 
speak  against  the  French,  with  a  view  to 
attempt  to  regain  that  popularity  which 
his  treason  forfeited  ;  but  every  one  se- 


196 


I 


cretly  derides  him ;  no  one  is  the  dupe  of 
his  fresh  juggles ;  and  they  are  right ;  for 
a  traitor  is  ever  to  be  mistrusted. 

We  also  learn  from  London,  that  M. 
Laine  and  M.  the  Duke  de  Lewis,  two 
violent  ex-colonists,  fill  the  highest  situa- 
tions about  Louis  XVIII. :  these  two  gen- 
tlemen, governed  by  the  same  views  as  the 
late  Malonet,  will  not  fail  to  make,  with 
Petion,  a  new  league  against  the  liberty 
and  independence  of  the  Haytian  people. 

Two  vessels  of  war,  it  is  said,  have 
sailed  from  France  with  commissioners 
to  confer  with  Petion  ;  we  enjoin  our 
citizens  of  the  west  and  southern  pro- 
vinces to  have  their  eyes  open  to  watch 
Petion's  conduct  with  that  of  the  wdiite 
Frenchmen,  and  not  to  allow  themselves 
to  be  deceived  by  this  traitor  as  before; 
if  they  have  still  the  insolence  to  threaten 
you,  to  treat  you  as  offending  savages, 
and  to  entrap  you,  as  the  negroes,  to  be 
subservient  to  their  own   purposes,  seize 


197 

them  as  well  as  that  traitor  Petion;  de- 
liver them  over  to  us,  that  they  may  share 
the  destiny  of  that  spy  Franco  Medina, 
who  is  their  accomplice! 


ROYAL  GAZETTE  OF  HAYTI. 

4th  JANUARY  1816, 
Thirteenth  Year  of  Independence. 


UNION  CREATES  STRENGTH. 


From  Cape  Henry  the  3d  January 
1816,  the  Year  13. 

All  the  nations  of  the  earth  have  had  re- 
markable seras,  to  which  they  have  attached 
the  greatest  celebrity :  in  order  to  perpetuate 
the  remembrance  of  benefits  they  have  re- 
ceived, they  have  instituted  festivals  and  public 
recreations  wherein  they  might  indulge  the 
effusions  of  their  hearts.  Religion,  the  wisdom 
of  states,  has  consecrated  these  customs. 

It  is  in  these  public  festivals  that  the  na- 


199 

tional  spirit  displays  itself,  the  enthusiasm  that 
reigns  in  the  heart  is  the  certain  testimony  of 
affection  and  attachment  in  the  people  to  that 
object  which  is  the  cause  of  the  general  rejoic- 
ing. Having  thus  premised,  we  shall  proceed 
to  notice  the  anniversary  of  our  immortal  In- 
dependence which  has  just  been  celebrated 
throughout  the  kingdom  with  more  pomp  and 
magnificence  than  ever! 

Indeed,  what  epoch  should  be  more  glorious 
for  Haytians  than  the  aniversary  of  their  Inde- 
pendence, the  sole  guarantee  of  their  political 
and  individual  existence?  Memorable  is  the 
day  on  which  we  burst  and  broke  in  pieces  our 
chains !  Great  and  glorious  is  this  day,  on 
which,  restored  to  our  true  dignity,  we  have 
sworn  to  posterity,  to  the  whole  universe,  ever 
to  renounce  France,  and  to  die  sooner  than 
exist  under  its  dominion. 

Before  publishing  the  details  of  the  festi- 
val, we  will  lay  before  our  readers  the  Procla- 
mation of  the  King,  our  august  and  beloved 
Sovereign,  the  defender  of  our  rights,  the  chief 
and  firmest  support  of  our  liberty  and  of  our 
Independence. 


200 


Kingdom  of  Hayti. 


PROCLAMATION. 


THE  KING  TO  THE  HAYTIANS. 


HAYT1AJSTS  ! 

This  is  the  sacred  day,  for  ever  memora- 
ble, on  which  we  proclaimed  in  the  face  of  the 
universe,  our  firm  and  unalterable  resolution, 
to  live  free  and  independent,  or  to  die.  Liberty 
and  Independence !  How  do  these  words  recall 
to  us  great  and  glorious  recollections!  to  what 
sublime  sentiments  do  they  give  rise  in  our 
minds,  and  how  ought  we  to  cherish  these 
precious  benefits,  the  prize  of  our  constancy 
and  our  valour,  purchased  by  the  purest  of  our 
blood! 

Our  first  thought  on  this  great  day  is  to 
offer  up  our   thanks  to  Divine  Providence  for 


201 

the  full  measure  of  his  benefits  poured  out  upon 
us,  in  releasing  us  from  the  state  of  ignominy 
and  misery  into  which  we  were  plunged,  to 
restore  us  to  a  state  of  society,  civilization,  and 
to  happiness. 

This  first  duty  being  fulfilled,  there  remains 
for  us  a  second,  very  dear  to  our  paternal 
heart,  which  is  that  of  laying  before  you  the 
situation  of  the  kingdom  in  an  explanation 
of  the  results  of  our  labours  for  the  past  year; 
you  will  perceive  our  state  of  existing  prospe- 
rity, and    we  shall    make  known  to  you  our 


views  of  introducing  into  the  kingdom  the  arts 
and  sciences,  to  encourage  and  protect  them, 
to  make  them  flourish,  and  to  employ  and  com- 
bine all  those  measures  of  wisdom  which  can 
contribute  to  the  happiness  and  prosperity  of 
the  Haytian  people. 

Relying  with  confidence  on  your  unremitting 
and  generous  efforts,  we  are  fully  convinced  that 
you  will  contribute  at  all  times  to  second  us  in 
the  execution  of  our  projects,  and  that  you  will 
apply  to  them  the  same  zeal,  the  same  ardour, 
of  which  we  have  received  so  many  proofs,  par- 
ticularly in  the  year  which  has  just  elapsed. 


202 


Resolved  never  to  interfere  but  in  matters 
that  concern  us,  solely  occupied  with  the  care 
of  ameliorating  our  internal  situation,  and  con- 
solidating, by  institutions  and  by  laws,  the 
edifice  of  our  liberty  and  of  our  independence; 
in  1814  we  were  menaced  with  an  unjust  ag- 
gression ;  the  French,  instead  of  enjoying  like 
other  nations  the  advantages  and  sweets  of  that 
peace  which  they  had  just  obtained  of  the 
High  Allies,  instead  of  applying  themselves 
like  them  to  healing  the  evils  of  war,  instead 
of  making  some  amends  for  their  cruelties  and 
injuries  to  us,  by  a  conduct  more  humane  and 
diametrically  opposite,  at  first,  attempted  again 
to  revive  their  odious  pretensions,  and  to  dis- 
turb us  in  the  peaceful  enjoyment  of  our  rights  ; 
pretensions  equally  unjust,  chimerical,  and 
barbarous,  devoid  of  every  kind  of  foundation 
and  of  reason!  Pretensions  as  vain,  as  erro- 
neous, as  those  which  would  arrogate  to  us  the 
kingdom  of  France! 

Our  posterity  will  not  have  to  reproach  us 
for  having  been  wanting  in  all  that  our  honour, 
our  country,  our  dearest  interests  prescribed 
to  us ;  we  have  replied  to  their  new  outrages 


stolen 4  ■ 


203 

with  the  firmness  and  energy  that  characte- 
rize us,  and  thus  will  we  ever  repel  all  unjust 
pretensions,  all  propositions  offered  in  con- 
tempt of  our  liberty  and  of  our  indepen- 
dence. 

Our  existence  as  a  nation  and  as  individuals 

being  menaced,  the  year  1815  was  employed  in 
making  preparations  for  war;  our  system  of 
defence  was  wholly  completed;  our  citadels 
were  finished,  perfected,  and  stocked  with  pro- 
visions and  warlike  stores ;  the  army  kept  con- 
stantly on  the  war- footing,  was  again  consider- 
ably increased,  skeleton  corps  were  filled  up 
complete,  new  regiments  were  raised,  the  mi- 
litias of  the  kingdom  were  newly  organized  in 
a  manner  more  suitable  to  our  localities,  and  to 
their  destinations ;  the  troops  of  the  line  were 
clothed,  equipped,  and  provided  with  new 
musquets ;  the  royal  Dahomets  clothed  and 
equipped  themselves  voluntarily  at  their  own 
cost  and  expense  ;  we  have  decorated  with  the 
cross  of  our  order  many  brave  officers  of  this 
corps  as  the  reward  of  their  zeal,  and  the  emi- 
nent services  which  they  have  never  ceased 
to  render  to  their  country. 


204 


i1 ; 


Good  order  and  discipline  prevail  among; 
the  troops  of  every  description;  they  are  con- 
stantly exercised  in  the  manoeuvres ;  our  pre- 
parations of  war  are  finished ;  the  whole  popu- 
lation is  armed;  our  magazines  are  provided 
with  necessaries  to  maintain  a  long  war,  with- 
out desiring  it,  without  provoking  it,  without 
fearing  it:  confiding  in  the  most  just  of  causes, 
the  future  has  nothing  in  it  that  can  alarm  us-. 
we  may  look  it  in  the  face  with  security. 

Our  finances  are  in  a  satisfactory  state. 
Without  bordering  on  parsimony,  the  receipts 
of  the  current  year  have  been  sufficient  to  keep 
pace  with  the  enormous  expenditure  to  which 
our  state  of  war  has  unavoidably  given  rise. 

Entirely  warriors  and  agriculturists  by  na- 
ture, notwithstanding  our  military  preparations 
we  have  never  ceased  to  entertain  a  solicitude 
for  cultivation,  the  fundamental  basis  of  our 
riches,  that  source  from  which  flow  the  power 
and  prosperity  of  the  kingdom. 

Commerce  has  continued  to  be  most  lucra- 
tive. We  are  abundantly  provided  with  objects 
of  consumption  imported  into  the  country. 
Numerous  vessels  of  friendly  powers   have  ef- 


HH 


205 

fected  the  sale  of  their  cargoes  in  our  ports,  and 
sailed  again  richly  laden  with  commodities. 
Agriculture,  that  principal  source  of  our  na- 
tional prosperity,  will  increase  still  progressively 
by  the  impulse  we  give  to  it,  and  by  the  en- 
couragements and  privileges  granted  to  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country.  Commerce,  inti- 
mately connected  by  its  relations  with  the  suc- 
cess of  agriculture,  will  augment  itself  equally 
by  the  profits,  the  protection,  the  security  of 
persons,  and  of  property,  which  we  grant  to 
foreign  merchants  who  trade  with  us. 

Population  increases  by  degrees:  the  happi- 
ness of  which  the  different  classes  of  society 
partake,  is  the  sure  guarantee  of  its  increase. 

The  laws  are  regularly  executed;  the  magis- 
trates fulfil  their  duties;  justice  is  exercised 
with  scrupulous  exactness ;  the  people  daily 
acquire  the  knowledge  of  their  rights  and  of 
their  duties ;  their  public  spirit  is  excellent;  it 
is  impossible  to  deceive  them  respecting  their 
true  interests. 

History  informs  us  that  all  nations,  prior  to 
their  civilization,  were  sunk  in  the  darkness  of 
barbarism  :  it  is  only  after  the  lapse  of  a  consi- 


206 

derable  time  that  they  civilize  themselves  by 
the  introduction  of  knowledge,  the  effect  of  in- 
struction and  of  time.  With  a  view  to  discharge 
that  prime  duty  in  the  administration  of  a  state, 
public  instruction  has  particularly  engaged  our 
attention  :  we  have  sought  from  abroad  for 
learned  professors  and  skilful  artists  of  every 
kind,  in  order  to  introduce  into  the  kingdom 
the  arts  and  sciences. 

The  professors  and  artists  who  shall  estab- 
lish themselves  here  for  the  purpose  of  under- 
taking the  instruction  of  youth,  shall  be  parti- 
cularly encouraged  and  protected;  they  will 
experience  the  utmost  toleration  :  difference  of 
nation  and  religion  will  be  no  ground  of  ex- 
clusion :  we  shall  pay  respect  to  merit  and  ta- 
lents alone.  The  virtuous  man,  without  any 
regard  to  the  country  that  may  have  given  him 
birth,  or  the  faith  in  which  he  may  have  been 
brought  up,  shall  always  meet  a  kind  reception, 
and  shall  enjoy  the  advantages  of  protection 
and  security  which  our  laws  impart  to  strangers 
of  all  nations  who  inhabit  the  kingdom. 

The  places  of  education,  the  colleges,   the 
royal  and  military  school,  will  become  the  nur- 


207 

sery  from  whence  are  to  issue  our  statesmen, 
magistrates  of  enlightened  character,  and  mili- 
tary men  instructed  in  the  art  of  war. 

During  the  completion  of  our  plans,  we  have 
given  orders  for  making  a  constant  progress  in 
the  construction  of  buildings  necessary  for  the 
public  establishments  in  the  towns  and  in  the 
country. 

The  situation  of  the  kingdom  at  large  is 
such  as  to  present  us  only  with  matter  of  satis- 
faction. We  are  arrived  at  the  summit  of  our 
wishes,  since  at  the  commencement  of  this  new 
year,  we  have  the  sweet  satisfaction  of  an- 
nouncing to  you  the  total  extinction  of  civil 
war. 

This  species  of  insanity,  this  fury  of  pas- 
sions which  had  been  kindled  in  some  hearts, 
is  visibly  extinguished :  already  a  part  of  the 
people  in  the  southern  province  have  ranged 
themselves  under  our  standard,  and  the  rest  are 
ready  to  unite  with  our  brave  companions  who 
have  embraced  the  cause  of  legitimate  autho- 
rity, of  liberty,  and  independence.  What  do  I 
say  ?  It  is  their  own  cause.  We  are  also  assured 
that  theHaytians  of  the  western  portion  are  like- 


208 

wise  ready  to  imitate  the  good  example  of  our 
fellow-countrymen  of  the  south. 

Sovereign  of  the  nation,  our   paternal   af- 
fection   extends    equally    over    all     Haytians. 
From  the  south  to  the  north,  from  the  east  to 
the  west,  all  parts  of  the  territory  form  the  in- 
tegrity   of  our   kingdom  ;    all    its   inhabitants 
have  therefore  equal  claim  to  the  benevolence 
of  the  King  of  Hayti ;  for  we  have  already  re- 
peated, and  we  repeat  it  again,  that  we  do  not 
consider  ourselves  as  king  over  a  portion  of  the 
territory,  or  of  a  part' of  the  population,  but  of 
all  the   kingdom,   and   of    the  whole    people. 
Those  who  have  been  hurried   on  in  error  and 
misfortune  by    an  ambitious    man,    are   much 
more  to   be   pitied    than   blamed ;    a  day  will 
come,  and  that  day  is  not  distant,  when  they 
will  discover  their  errors;  then  will  they  rival 
us  in  order  to  consolidate  the  rights  and  liberty, 
and  independence  of  our  country. 

Resolved  never  to  be  diverted  from  our 
pacific  system,  just  and  liberal  as  it  is,  the  only 
one  that  accords  with  our  paternal  heart,  and 
the  general  interests  of  the  people,  and  satisfied 
with  the  good   intentions  displayed  by  the  in- 


209 

habitants  of  the  southern  province,  we  have 
sent  back  to  their  homes  the  troops  of  that 
part  which  happened  to  be  in  our  ranks  through 
the  events  of  the  war,  in  order  that  they  may 
defend  them,  and  in  testimony  of  their  o-ood 
conduct,  and  of  the  zeal  which  animates  them 
for  the  good  of  our  service.  The  sailors  and 
inhabitants  of  that  province  which  have  fallen 
into  our  hands  have  been  well  treated,  and 
kindly  received  by  our  orders  :  those  who  have 
manifested  a  desire  to  return  to  their  homes 
have  been  sent  back  to  the  bosom  of  their  fa- 
milies. 

Haytians !  such  is  the  exposition  of  our 
internal  situation.  Our  situation  improves  every 
day.  Held  in  consideration  without,  and  within, 
we  assume  a  respectable  attitude.  The  military 
art  which  defends  the  country  is  brouo-ht  to 
perfection.  The  social  virtues  which  form  <>ood 
fathers  of  families,  good  sons,  and  chaste 
spouses,  are  practised.  Religion  is  reverenced  ; 
our  manners  become  refined ;  the  conjugal  tie 
is  respected;  the  odious  vices,  the  offspring  of 
ignorance  and  of  a  barbarous  thraldrom,  sensi- 
bly disappear,  or  are  obliged  to  hide  themselves 

p 


210 


Pf 


in  darkness.  The  protection  afforded  to  mar- 
riage, the  decay  of  vice,  with  the  shame  that 
is  attached  to  it,  ensure  the  progress  of  mo- 
rality, which  with  the  difference  of  knowledge, 
concurs  powerfully  to  our  attainment  of  a  de- 
gree of  civilization  at  which  the  most  polished 
nations  of  the  earth  have  arrived. 

Haytians !  twenty-six  years  of  revolution 
unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world,  thir- 
teen of  the  independence  so  gloriously  ac- 
quired, have  effected  wonders !  No,  we  are  no 
longer  the  same  men  !  What  prodigious  changes 
have  been  effected  in  every  thing  that  sur- 
rounds us  !  Formerly  the  dejected  counte- 
nance— the  look  fixed  upon  the  ground— assi- 
milated to  the  brutes— and  oppressed  under  the 
scourge  of  the  tormenter,  we  nevertheless  ex- 
isted, though  extinct  as  to  the  world.  We  had 
faculties,  yet  these  faculties  were  annihilated 
under  the  load  of  servitude  and  of  ignorance  I 
The  cry  of  liberty  made  itself  heard,  and  sud- 
denly we  broke  our  irons  into  pieces.  With  a 
countenance  erect,  and  the  look  fixed  upon 
Heaven,  we  could  contemplate  the  works  of 
Divine  munificence !     Restored  to  the  dignity 


2il 

of  man,  and  to  society,   we  acquired  a  new  ex- 
istence, our  faculties   developed  themselves,  a 
career  of  happiness  and  of  glory  unfolds  itself 
before  us!     Mighty  God!    Supreme  arbiter  of 
the   universe,  thanksgiving   be  ever   rendered 
unto  thee !     Accept  the  solemn  vows  and  ado- 
ration we   offer  up  to  thee !     Virtuous  philan- 
thropists !    friends  of  humanity!    contemplate 
the  work  of  your  hands,  the  fruit  of  your  la- 
bour and  your  toils,  still  redouble,  if  it  be  pos- 
sible, your  zeal  and  ardour  to  establish  the  hap- 
piness of  the  human  race!  the  Haytians  will 
justify  your  generous  efforts  by  their  deeds  and 
memorable  examples! 

Henceforth  the  calumniators  of  the  human 
species  will  have  to  argue  by  sophisms,  and  by 
cases  of  exception  ;  instead  of  replying  to  them, 
we  will  make  rapid  strides  towards  civilization. 
Let  them  dispute,  if  they  please,  the  existence 
of  our  intellectual  faculties,  our  little  or  no 
aptness  for  the  arts  and  sciences,  whilst  we  re- 
ply to  these  by  irresistible  arguments,  and  prove 
to  the  impious,  by  facts  and  by  examples,  that 
the  blacks,  like  the  whites,  are  men,  and  like 
them  are  the  works  of  a  Divine  Omnipotence  ! 


II 


212 

Generals,  officers,  subalterns  and  soldiers 
by  land  and  by  sea,  Royal  Dahomets,  magis- 
trates, inhabitants  of  the  towns  and  of  the 
country,  receive  our  congratulations  for  the 
zeal  and  ardour  you  have  exerted  in  seconding 
our  preparations  for  the  defence  of  our  country, 
your  generous  devotion  and  patriotism  deserve 
our  gratitude  and  the  acknowledgments  of  the 
country ! 

You  have  proved  to  the  world,  that  all 
manner  of  sacrifices  are  to  you  as  nothing,  when 
the  maintenance  of  those  rights  which  you 
derive  from  God,  from  nature,  and  from  jus- 
tice, is  called  in  question ;  persevere  always 
in  these  sublime  sentiments,  and  you  will  be 
invincible;  contemn,  disdain  that  which  pusil- 
lanimous men  may  value,  Life  and  Fortune. 
You  Haytians,  your  true  interests,  without 
which,  all  the  others  are  as  nought,  are  Li- 
berty and  Independence ' 

Our  tyrants  overwhelmed  with  the  same 
weight  of  calamity  with  which  they  had  af- 
flicted the  Universe,  are  compelled  to  leave 
us  quiet.  Once  victims  of  our  good  faith  and 
our  credulity,  let  us  never  forget,  that  the  first 


UAOTUrU.U 


213 


use  they  made  of  the  last  peace  was  to  endea- 
vour to  deceive  us  a  second  time  in  the  most 
perfidious  manner.  Can  we  again  sutler  our- 
selves to  be  so  deceived  ?  Which  is  he  among" 
us  who  would  renounce  his  birthright  as  a  man, 
to  return  to  the  condition  of  the  brute,  under 
the  yoke  of  tyrants  ?  The  very  idea  fills  us 
with  horror,  and  makes  the  breast  to  heave  with 
indignation !  .  .  .  .  They  may  frame  new  plots, 
they  may  metamorphose  themselves  in  a  thou- 
sand shapes ;  no  Haytians,  no,  never  will  we 
fall  into  the  snares  which  they  may  spread 
for  us ! 

Haytians !  we  have  not  to  labour  for  our 
own  happiness  alone,  we  labour  still  for  our 
posterity.  Let  us  impress  our  minds  with  the 
sacred  duties  we  have  to  discharge  towards 
ourselves,  and  those  in  like  situations;  we  have 
given  our  enemies  the  most  striking  proofs  of 
resolution,  energy,  and  courage ;  but  this  is 
not  enough,  we  have  another  species  of  con- 
test to  wage  with  them.  Henceforth,  it  is  by 
the  wisdom  of  our  laws,  the  purity  of  our 
manners,  our  virtues,  the  security  of  our  com- 
merce, our  constant  efforts  and  laborious  toils 


214 

for  the  prosperity  of  our  country,  that  we  will 
prove  to  them  we  are  worthy  of  Liberty  and 
Independence ! 


I 
I 


I 


Libert/y  for  ever ! 
Independence  for  ever  i 

Given  in  our  Royal  Palace  of  Sans-Souci,  the 
1st  January,  1816.  The  thirteenth  year  of  inde- 
pendence, and  of  our  reign  the  fifth. 

Henry. 
By  the  King,  the  Secretary  of  State, 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 

Count  Limonad^ 


REFLECTIONS 


ABOLITION  OF  THE  SLAVE  TRADE, 


Among  the  great  events  that  tend  to  adorn  the 
Calendar  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  Aboli- 
tion of  the  Slave  Trade,  that  odious  and  bipod- 
stained  traffic,  deserves  to  rank  the  first  in 
history,  while  the  names  of  those  generous  cha- 
racters who  have  effected  it,  will  be  handed 
down  to  posterity  as  the  benefactors  of  the 
human  race ! 

God,  whose  infinite  wisdom  governs  all 
earthly  things  by  decrees  that  are  to  us  in- 
scrutable, for  the  accomplishment  of  his  all- 
wise  purposes,  raised  up  that  terrible  Revolu- 
tion which  shook  the  Universe;  he  laid  the 
weight  of  his  mighty  hand  over  Potentates 
and  nations  to  punish  the  inconsiderateness  of 
their  hearts.     Established  thrones  were  over- 


I 


1 

■ 


216 

turned,  others  endangered,  while  Monarchs 
were  led  into  captivity,  or  compelled  as  exiles 
to  fly  for  security  to  a  foreign  land,  and  not 
even  the  Head  of  the  Catholic  Church  was  ex- 
empt. Europe,  the  oppressor  of  Africa  and 
America,  saw  itself  in  turn  covered  with  crimes 
and  inundated  with  the  blood  of  her  own 
Sons. 

Of  this  Revolution,  a  terrible  dispensation 
of  Divine  Providence,  undertaken  by  men  with 
very  different  designs,  what  is  now  the  result  ? 
The  freedom  of  nations  ! 

When  the  French  coalition  operated  with 
so  much  zeal  for  the  destruction  of  England, 
could  it  ever  have  imagined  that  it  was  only 
the  instrument  of  her  glory  and  prosperity  ? 

The  supreme  Arbiter  of  the  Universe  had 
decreed  in  his  immutable  judgments,  that  the 
powerful  and  generous  nation  which  was  to 
stem  in  its  course  the  torrent  that  was  devas- 
tating Europe,  and  to  rescue  her  from  the  brink 
of  the  precipice,  was  also  to  be  the  first  to 
stretch  its  succouring  and  protecting  hand  to 
the  oppressed  people  of  Africa  and  America. 

Noble  and  generous  England,  by  the  wis- 


'.tmnriirUM  u 


217 

dom  of  its  government  is  become  the  mediatrix 
of  the  world,  and  the  common  tie  which  is  to 
unite  all  nations ! 

Moreover,  this  great  country  enjoys  eternal 
glory,  as  the  reward  of  the  services  she  has 
rendered  to  the  human  race,  whilst  other  na- 
tions who  have  persisted  in  closing  their  hearts 
to  every  claim  of  justice  and  humanity,  are 
stamped  with  signs  of  degeneracy,  and  cala- 
mities of  every  kind  are  afflicting  their  terri- 
tories. 

How  many  favours  do  we  owe  to  the  magna- 
nimous and  illustrious  Sovereigns  of  England, 
of  Russia,  and  of  Germany,  for  their  having 
insisted  upon  the  abolition  of  that  traffic  ! 

How  many  acknowledgements  does  every 
man  of  Black  origin  owe  to  those  venerable 
and  illustrious  philanthropists  of  The  African 
Institution!  Never  did  any  society  devote 
itself  to  the  protection  of  a  cause  more  holy  and 
more  just;  never  have  true  Christians  de- 
fended, more  charitably,  more  benignantly,  and 
at  the  same  time  more  zealously  for  humanity, 
the  cause  of  mankind,  than  our  distinguished 
patrons   have    done ;    how   many    crimes   and 


s  ^ 


I 


I 
■ 


218 

transgressions  are  about  to  be  banished  from 
the  earth,  through  the  intervention,  the  vigi- 
lance, and  laborious  exertions  of  these  generous 
men  !  Desolated  Africa  will  no  longer  see  her 
unhappy  sons  carried  off  from  her  shores  :  no 
longer  shall  they  be  torn  from  the  embraces 
of  their  family,  by  all  kinds  of  artifices,  or  of 
crimes  to  be  doomed  to  perpetual  slavery  on  a 
foreign  soil  !  The  Brokes,  those  infernal  slave 
ships,  shall  exist  no  more  ;  we  shall  no  more  be- 
hold those  receptacles  of  sin,  of  which  the 
very  sight  fills  one  with  horror,  and  speaks  to 
the  heart  more  than  the  eloquence  of  volumes 
could  convey !  No  longer  shall  our  brethren  be 
heaped  up  in  those  moving  dungeons,  loaded 
with  chains,  and  overwhelmed  with  grief — I 
stop :  let  me  pause  to  recover  myself.  Senti- 
ments of  indignation  crowd  upon  me;  tears  of 
pity  and  acknowledgment  flow  from  the  re- 
cital !  Worthy  and  benevolent  men  !  Continue 
that  task  you  have  so  nobly  undertaken,  and 
you  will  carry  in  your  own  hearts  the  recom- 
pence  of  your  good  deeds. 

A  new  asra  arises  for  Africa  under  the  pro- 
tecting shield  of  philanthropic  men  :  its  inha- 


'«AMAflAU  Li  u> 


219 

bitants  may  breathe  in  the  bosom  of  their 
country  the  pure  air  of  liberty  ;  they  may  enjoy 
the  sweets  and  advantages  of  civilization  in 
devoting  themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  the 
earth,  to  the  pursuits  of  commerce,  of  science, 
and  of  art:  we  even  indulge  the  hope  that,  one 
day  or  other,  they  may  revive,  by  their  labours, 
the  recollection  of  our  illustrious  ancestors. 

In  the  irresistible  march  of  the  affairs  of 
this  world,  every  thing  paints  the  instability 
of  sublunary  concerns:  empires  rise  and  fall, 
flourish  and  decay.  The  light  of  know- 
ledge follows  the  impulse  of  revolutions,  and 
travels,  successively,  over  the  surface  of  the 
globe.  Greece,  Germany,  and  Gaul,  were  not 
originally  the  seats  of  learning.  Our  traducers 
pretend  to  have  forgotten  what  the  Egyptians 
and  Ethiopians,  our  ancestors,  were  :  the  Tha- 
raca  of  Scripture,  that  mighty  monarch  who 
was  the  dread  of  the  Assyrians,  came  from  the 
interior  of  Africa,  as  far  as  the  columns  of 
Hercules,  the  records  that  attest  their  works, 
still  remain :  the  testimony  of  Herodotus,  of 
Strabo,  and  of  other  historians  of  antiquity, 
confirm  these  facts.     More  recent  proofs  bear 


■ 
I 

■ 


220 

evidence  in  our  favour,  and  yet  our  enemies, 
with  signal  incredulity,  feign  to  doubt  all  this, 
in  order  to  preserve  to  themselves  the  odious 
privilege  of  torturing,  and  persecuting,  accord- 
ing to  their  own  will,  one  portion  of  the  human 
race. 

These  false  Christians,  foes  to  God  and  to 
humanity,  assert  that  we  are  of  a  lower  scale 
of  being  than  the  whites :  many  among  them 
have  been  so  impious  as  to  deny  the  identity 
of  the  human  species,  and  absurd  enough  to 
affirm  that  we  are  on  a  level  with  the  brutes, 
deprived  of  moral  and  intellectual  faculties. 

Our  friends,  the  true  Christians,  maintain 
that  we  are  endowed  with  intellect,  that  our 
natural  capacities  are  good,  and  that  they  would 
be  equal  to  those  of  Europeans  if  we  had  the 
same  advantages  :  they  regard  us  as  their  bre- 
thren, for  the  Deity  hath  created,  of  one  blood, 
the  whole  human  race,  to  dwell  over  every  part 
of  the  earth. 

It  were  easy  for  us  to  reply  to  our  traducers, 
and  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  assertions  ad- 
vanced by  our  patrons.  In  all  ages  of  the 
world   there  have  existed  impious  and  sophis- 


MrMlAriALi: 


221 

tical  men;  sceptics  too,  who  deny  the  exist- 
ence of  God,  and  of  free  agency;  to  answer 
whom  philosophers  have  only  to  change  places ; 
Ave  may  do  the  same,  and  so  reply  to  our  ene- 
mies as  victoriously. 

Let  us  devote  ourselves  to  the  cultivation 
of  letters,  of  arts  and  sciences,  which  deve- 
lope  intellect;  let  us  store  our  minds  with  prin- 
ciples of  morality  and  wisdom  ;  let  us  redouble 
our  zeal  and  ardour  to  annihilate  calumny,  and 
dispel  the  prejudices  that  hover  over  us ;  and 
soon  shall  we  have,  like  other  nations,  by  our 
liberal  endeavours,  our  senate  house,  our  heroes, 
our  legislators,  our  historians,  our  poets,  our 
painters,  our  sculptors,  and  our  learned  men. 

Placed  by  Divine  Providence  in  a  situation, 
and  amid  circumstances  more  favourable  than 
our  ancestors,  we  can  more  easily  than  they 
make  rapid  strides  in  the  career  of  civilization  : 
let  us  then  always  bear  in  mind,  that  we  are 
the  elect,  whom  God  hath  chosen  from  among- 
so  many  of  our  brethren  who  groan  in  slavery, 
to  manifest  to  mankind,  by  living  examples, 
that  the  Blacks  are,  like  the  Whites,  the  work 
of  his  hands,  and  Almighty  Power. 


*4\j 


222 


■ 

I 
I 


■ 
F? 


We  should  understand  that  we  labour  for 
the  benefit  of  the  human  race  generally,  for 
the  Black  equally  as  for  the  White  ;  for  we  are 
all  brethren  :  let  us  recollect  that  African  blood 
flows  in  our  veins,  and  that  we  are  under  the 
necessity  of  exerting  our  utmost  efforts  to  live 
in  the  great  practice  of  society  ;  our  progress 
more  or  less  influencing  the  opinions  that  the 
Europeans  will  form  of  us  ! 

We  should  understand  that  Ave  are  still  sur- 
rounded with  quicksands ;  that  there  are  no 
intrigues,  or  schemes,  or  artifices  which  the 
French  Ex- colonists  or  their  partisans  will 
leave  unemployed  to  obstruct  the  bark  of  li- 
berty and  independence  on  its  arrival  at  the 
destined  haven  :  there  are  no  subtleties  or  abo- 
minations which  they  will  omit  in  order  to 
fetter  its  progress.  O  horrible  criminality  !  they 
were  not  ashamed  to  propose  sending  Catholic 
Priests,  Apostolics,  and  Romans,  in  order  first  to 
seduce,  under  the.  venerable  garb  of  religion,  our 
population,  and  then  to  sink  it  by  degrees  into 
the  horrors  of  slavery  !  O  abomination  !  O  sa- 
crilegious conduct !  The  ministers  of  the  God 
of  peace  and  of  charity  have  dared  to  become 


-riAH/SfiALi.tibi 


223 

the  willing  instruments  of  the  passions,  the 
vengeance  and  harbarity  of  French  Ex-co- 
lonists ! !  Descendants  of  Africans,  my  bre- 
thren, the  friends  of  humanity  have  asserted 
that  we  are  susceptible  of  improvement  like  the 
Whites  ;  our  traducers  affirm  the  contrary;  it  is 
for  us  to  decide  the  question  ;  it  is  by  the  wis- 
dom of  our  conduct,  our  success  in  the  arts  and 
sciences,  that  we  shall  secure  the  triumph  of  our 
respected  and  illustrious  patrons,  and  confound, 
forever,  the  malice  and  unfounded  assertions  of 
our  implacable  enemies. 

The  Deity  hath  granted  us  all  that  is  wanting 
to  accomplish  this  generous  design,  in  bavins 
rendered  us  free  and  independent,  and  in  be- 
stowing upon  us  a  wise  and  liberal  Monarch, 
who  is  ever  vigilant  to  administer  to  our 
wants.  We  are  aware  of  his  great  and  good  in- 
tentions; he  has  always  manifested  them  to- 
wards us  :  what  he  has  already  effected  is  the 
sure  guarantee  of  what  he  can  still  do  for  the 
happiness  and  glory  of  the  people.  Ah  !  what 
might  he  not  have  done,  had  he  been  seconded 
by  the  generality  of  Haytians?  Why  will 
one  portion  of  our  fellow-citizens  be  deceived  by 


224 


the  seduction  of  a  hypocrite,  a  traitor  won  over 
to  their  purposes  by  the  Ex-colonists,  endeavour- 
ino-  to  demoralize  the  nation,  in  order  to  render 
it  subservient  to  the  cause  of  our  tyrants,  and 
finally  to  succeed  in  plunging  it  into  an  abyss 
of  evils?  The  very  idea  makes  the  heart  to 
bleed,  and  fills  our  souls  with  bitterness  :  let  us 
hope  that  our  brethren  will  become  sensible  of 
their  errors,  and  that  they  will  return  to  their 
true  interests,  to  labour  with  us  in  promoting 
the  triumph  of  the  great  cause  of  humanity  and 
of  religion. 

In  concluding  our  reflections  on  the  Aboli- 
tion of  the  Slave  Trade,  we  acquit  ourselves  of 
adutyin  consecrating  here  the  names  of  the  illus- 
trious members  of  the  African  Institution-, 
who  have  mainly  contributed  to  effect  the  abo- 
lition of  this  inhuman,  crimiual,  and  blood- 
stained traffic  !  It  is  a  feeble  homage  we  pay 
to  their  immortal  labours  !  May  the  names  of 
these  generous  and  benevolent  characters  be 
engraven  on  the  heart  of  every  Haytian,  to  be 
perpetuated  from  age  to  age  in  the  recollec- 
tion of  onr  offspring  and  of  the  remotest 
posterity  ! 


225 


PATRON  AND  PRESIDENT, 

His  Highness  the  Duke  of  Gloucester. 


ight  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Bristol, 
ight  Honourable  Earl  Spencer, 
ight  Honourable  Earl  Grosvenor. 


VICE  PRESIDENTS. 

His  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 
The  Most  Honourable  the  Marquis  of  Lansdown. 
TheRi 
TheRi 
The  Ri 

The  Right  Honourable  Earl  of  Rossyln. 
The  Right  Honourable  Earl  Grey. 
The  Right  Honourable  Earl  Moira. 
The  Right  Honourable  Earl  of  Selkirk. 
The  Right  Honourable  Earl  of  Caledon. 
The  Right  Honourable  Viscount  Milton. 
The  Right  Honourable  Viscount  Valentiai 
The  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham. 
The  Lord  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells. 
The  Lord  Bishop  of  St.  David's. 
The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Holland. 
The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Grenville. 
The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Calthorpe. 

Q 


226 

The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Erskine. 

The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Gambier. 

The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Headley. 

The  Right  Honourable  Lord  Teignmouth. 

The  Right  Honourable  George  Canning,  M.  P. 

The  Right  Honourable  J.  C.  Villiers. 

The  Right  HonourableNicholasVansittart,M.P. 

Sir  Samuel  Romilly,  M.  P. 

William  Wilberforce,  Esq.  M.  P. 


DIRECTORS. 

The  Honourable  Capt.  F.  P.  Irby,  R.  N. 

The  Honourable  George  Vernon. 

Sir  Thomas  Bernard,   Bart. 

Sir  John  Cradock,   K.  B. 

Sir  James  Mackintosh,  M.  P. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson,  K.  M.  T. 

William  Allen,  Esq. 

Thomas  Babington,  Esq.  M.  P. 

Charles  Barclay,  Esq..  M.  P. 

William  Blake,  Esq. 

Henry  Brougham,    Esq.   M.  P. 

Thomas  Clarkson,  Esq. 

Colonel  Dalton. 

Rev.  William  Dealtry. 


228 


AUDITORS. 


I 


■ 
I 


Thomas  Barnett,  Esq. 
John  Moftlock,  Esq. 
B.  M.  Forster,  Esq. 
John  Thornton,   Esq.  Treasurer, 
Mr.  Robert  Stokes,   Clerk. 
Thomas  Harrison,   Esq.  Secretary. 
Messrs.  Lambert  and  Son,  Solicitors. 
Mr.  Abraham  Tattet,  Collector. 
Charles  Bala,   Messenger. 


T.  Bensley  and  Son, 
B(,lt  Cuuit,  Fleet  Strcsl,  London. 


.! 


