t99 


X 


A  BY 


('THE  REV*  PETER  .JONES.} 


IflnamJL3Oennet    S.EiakjpBaie  "ViBShout. 


HISTORY 


OF  TEE 


OJEBWAY 


WITH  ESPECIAL  REFERENCE   TO  THEIR 


CONVERSION  TO  CHRISTIANITY. 


REV.   PETER    JONES, 

(K  AHKEWA  QUONAB  Y, ) 

INDIAN  MISSIONARY. 

WITH   A  BRIEF 

MEMOIR    OF     THE    WRITER; 

AND 
I 

INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE    BY    THE    REV.    G.    OSBORN,    D.D, 

SECRETARY  OF   THE  WESLEYAN   METHODIST 
MISSIONARY   SOCIETY. 


LONDON: 

A.  W.  BENNETT,  5,  BISHOP3GATE  STREET  WITHOUT. 
HOULSTON  AND  WRIGHT,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 

1861. 


CASE 


PKEPACE, 


ERRATUM. 

Dr.  STINSON  is  the  author  of  the  Introduction  to  this  work.     By 
some  oversight  the  English  Editor  has  improperly  attributed  it  to 

E.  CAREY. 


pieteu  uy  ins  own  nuiiu.  j.u  uic  IUYCJ.O  vx  ^nii^iw^j,  «.n*«. 
to  all  who  take  an  interest  in  these  remarkable  people, 
his  brief  account  of  the  different  languages  in  use  among 
the  various  tribes  will  possess  great  interest.  The  sketch 
of  his  life  is  drawn  up  by  his  widow,  with  whom  he  left 
his  many  interesting  MSS. 

The  publisher  has  the  pleasure  of  appending  the  follow 
ing  letter  from  the  Rev.  G.  Osborn,  D.D.,  Secretary 
of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Missionary  Society : — 

"  Sir, — I  have  read  with  much  interest  the  proof-sheets 
you  were  kind  enough  to  send  me,  of  a  posthumous  work 
by  the  late  Rev.  Peter  Jones,  formerly  a  missionary  in 
connexion  with  this  Society,  among  the  Chippeway — or,  as 

it  is  now  written,  Oiebway  Indians,  in  Upper  Canada. 
T  >o*N  r~~  <r>i<*"< 

989507 


CAS. 
B 


PREFACE. 


THE  name  of  the  Rev.  Peter  Jones  will  still  be  familiar  to 
many  who  recollect  his  visit  to  this  country  in  1831,  for 
the  purpose  of  urging  upon  the  Government  the  territorial 
rights  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  There  is  probably  no  one 
who  can  speak  with  more  authority  than  he,  on  the  past 
state  of  the  North  American  Indians,  probably  of  the 
Ojebway  nation,  to  which  he  himself  belonged  ;  and  of  the 
amelioration  of  their  condition  consequent  on  their  conver 
sion  to  Christianity.  It  must  ever  be  a  matter  of  regret 
that  his  graphic  and  interesting  narrative  was  never  com 
pleted  by  his  own  hand.  To  the  lovers  of  philology,  and 
to  all  who  take  an  interest  in  these  remarkable  people, 
his  brief  account  of  the  different  languages  in  use  among 
the  various  tribes  will  possess  great  interest.  The  sketch 
of  his  life  is  drawn  up  by  his  widow,  with  whom  he  left 
his  many  interesting  MSS. 

The  publisher  has  the  pleasure  of  appending  the  follow 
ing  letter  from  the  Rev.  G.  Osborn,  D.D.,  Secretary 
of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Missionary  Society : — 

"  Sir, — I  have  read  with  much  interest  the  proof-sheets 
you  were  kind  enough  to  send  me,  of  a  posthumous  work 
by  the  late  Rev.  Peter  Jones,  formerly  a  missionary  in 
connexion  with  this  Society,  among  the  Chippeway — or,  as 

it  is  now  written,  Oiebway  Indians,  in  Upper  Canada. 
tf'\c~)f\  |—  <r>'*»4 


V  PKEFACE. 

Mr.  Jones  was  a  man  of  sterling  piety,  with  much  natural 
good  sense  and  shrewdness ;  and  had  evidently  taken  great 
pains  in  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of  his  mind. 
His  appearances  in  this  country,  on  two  successive  visits, 
afforded  high  and  just  gratification  to  immense  numbers 
of  persons,  who  saw  in  him  an  undeniable  proof,  both  of 
the  capacities  of  his  countrymen,  and  of  the  power  of 
Christianity  to  reclaim  and  elevate  those  who  were  at 
the  utmost  distance  from  European  civilization. 

"Mr.  Jones's  researches  into  the  antiquities,  customs, 
and  language  of  his  nation,  will  doubtless  be  duly  appre 
ciated  by  students  in  philology  and  ethnology,  &c. ;  while 
the  philanthropist  will  have  his  sympathies  excited  on 
behalf  of  an  aboriginal  people  struggling  to  maintain 
themselves  against  those  destructive  forces  which  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  '  white  man'  appears  to  generate 
wherever  he  goes.  But  for  the  influence  of  '  the  glorious 
Gospel  of  the  blessed  God/  the  progress  of  their  decay 
would  have  been  more  rapid,  if  indeed  they  would  not 
ere  now  have  become  extinct ;  but  we  may  hope  that 
under  its  influence  they  may  yet  be  preserved,  and  prosper. 
The  fatal  '  fire-water ' — supplied,  alas  !  by  those  who  bear 
the  Christian  name, — appears  to  have  been  regarded  by  Mr. 
Jones  as  their  worst  foe,  and  his  estimate  is  probably 
correct. 

"  The  book  would  doubtless  have  been  more  complete, 
had  Mr.  Jones  lived  to  publish  it  himself;  but  as  it  is,  it 
well  deserves  a  wide  circulation,  and  a  careful  reading ; 
and  wishing  it  may  obtain  both,  I  remain,  sir, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  G.  OSBORN." 


INDEX. 


PAGE, 

LIFE  or  THE  AUTHOR 1 

CHAPTER  I. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS  25 

CHAPTER  II. 
IDEAS  OF  THEIR  ORIGIN 31 

CHAPTER  III. 
INDIAN  LOCALITIES  39 

CHAPTER  IV. 
GENERAL  CHARACTER  57 

CHAPTER  V. 
MODE  OF  LIFE 71 

CHAPTER  VI. 
COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE 78 

CHAPTER  VII. 
THEIR  RELIGION    83 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
RELIGIOUS  FEASTS  AND  SACRIFICES 94 

CHAPTER  IX. 
COUNCILS    105 


VI  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  X. 
WAR    HI 

CHAPTER  XI. 
AMUSEMENTS,  ETC 134 

CHAPTER  XII. 
DISEASES    141 

CHAPTER  XIII. 
INDIAN  NAMES 156 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
CONNECTION  WITH  THE  WHITES,  AND  EVILS  INTRODUCED  165 

CHAPTER  XV. 
WHISKY  AND  THE  INDIANS 173 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
THE  INDIAN  LANGUAGES 178 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
CAPACITY  OF  THE  INDIANS  FOR  RECEIVING  INSTRUCTION 191 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
OPINION   OF   THE   INDIANS   RESPECTING    THE   SOVEREIGN   AND 

PEOPLE  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN    207 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
INDIAN  ANECDOTES  223 

CHAPTER  XX. 
PRESENT  STATE  AND  FUTURE  PROSPECTS  OF  THE  NORTH  AMERICAN 

INDIANS 235 


APPENDIX  247 


LIST   OF   ILLTJSTBATIONS. 


1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 

PORTRAIT  OP  THE  AUTHOR  f 

Co  face  Title- 
„    page 
P- 

»        P- 

P. 

page 
25 
57 
73 
83 
85 
95 
97 
99 
131 
135 
145 
161 
209 
213 
217 

PORTRAIT  OF  NATAWASH  

PORTRAIT  OP  RIPPLING  STREAM  

ANCIENT  DOMESTIC  IMPLEMENTS  

MUNCEY  IDOLS  

PABOOKOWAIH 

P- 
»        P. 
»        P- 
»       P- 
»        P- 
P- 
»»        P- 

51              P' 

p. 

»              P- 
»              P- 

NAHNEETIS,  GODDESS  OP  HEALTH  

ANNUAL  PRESENTS  TO  NAHNEETIS 

HEATHEN  GRAVES  AT  MUNCEY  TOWN  
WEAPONS  OP   WAR    

ILLUSTRATIONS  OP  DIFFERENT  GAMES  

INSTRUMENTS  USED  IN  WITCHCRAFT,  &c. 

PORTRAIT  OF  MESCOCOMON  CHIEF   

MOHAWK  CHURCH  AT  GRAND  RIVER 

CAPTAIN  BRANT'S  HOUSE  AT  WELLINGTON    
CHIEF'S  MEDAL;  PRESENTED  'BY  GOVERNMENT... 

A   BRIEF   SKETCH 


THE   LIFE    OF   THE   AUTHOR. 


IN  the  annals  of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church  in 
Canada,  as  in  those  of  the  church  of  God  in  general,  we 
constantly  find  noble  examples  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel 
to  rescue  our  fellow  men  from  the  dominion  of  error  and 
sin,  and  to  make  them  wise  unto  salvation  through  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  We  record  the  holy  lives  and  the  happy 
deaths  of  such  men ;  not  for  the  purpose  of  eulogising  them — 
they  are  now  alike  unaffected  by  our  praise  or  our  censure 
—but  for  the  purpose  of  magnifying  the  name"  and  the  work 
of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master,  from  whom  all  wise  coun 
sels,  all  holy  desires,  all  moral  excellences  proceed.  In  those 
beloved  disciples  of  Christ,  those  witnesses  of  truth,  we  see 
the  grace  of  God  and  are  glad.  In  their  happy  experience 
we  find  delightful  proof  that  wisdom's  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace  :  in  their  upright 
and  useful  deportment  we  see  that  good  men  are  not  only 
blessed,  but  are  made  a  blessing — that  as  trees  planted  by 
rivers  of  water,  they  bring  forth  their  fruit  in  season ; 
and  assured  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  that 
what  His  grace  does  for  one  it  can  do  for  all,  we  are  en- 

B 


2  A   BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

couraged  to  seek  that  grace,  and  thus  participate  in  the 
present  and  eternal  advantages  of  common  salvation.  We 
greatly  need  such  encouragement.  The  inroads  of  death 
upon  the  ranks  of  our  church  have,  during  the  past  few 
years,  been  painfully  frequent  and  sudden  ;  our  fathers  in 
the  ministry,  our  companions  and  fellow-labourers  in  the 
Lord's  vineyard,  have  been  cut  down  by  our  side,  have 
been  swept  away  from  the  midst  of  us  ;  we  look  for  them, 
but  they  are  not — their  bodies  sleep  in  the  dust,  their 
spirits  have  .returned  to  God.  We  mourn  over  their  de 
parture  ;  but  "we  sorrow  not  as  those  who  have  no  hope ; 
*bii  if  :we.  ;beiiev,e  tjiat  Jetus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so 
them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him." 
"  For  the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from 
heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God ;  and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise 
first ;  then  we  which  are  alive,  and  remain,  shall  be  caught. 
up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in 
the  air;  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  Most  thankful 
ought  we  to  be,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  we  may  so  live 
in  this  world,  as  to  be  prepared  for,  and  secure,  unending 
happiness  in  the  world  to  come.  The  possibility  of  our 
realising  this  blessedness  is  assured  to  us  not  only  by  Divine 
teaching,  but  by  human  example — by  a  great  cloud  of  wit 
nesses  who  have  run  the  <race,  reached  the  goal,  won  the 
prize,  and  received  the  crown  of  life  which  fadeth  not  away. 
To  find  such  examples  of  victorious  piety,  we  have  not  to 
go  back  to  the  remote  ages  of  antiquity,  they  are  to  be 
found  amongst  those  who  were  once  our  own  cotempo- 
raries — brethren  beloved,  with  whom  we  have  taken  sweet 
counsel,  who  have  walked  with  us  to  the  house  of  God, 
whose  faith  we  are  to  follow,  considering  the  end  of  their 
conversation,  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE  AUTHOR.  3 

for  ever.  The  moral  government  which  the  Divine  Ruler 
of  the  universe  exercises  over  the  world,  and  over  the 
church,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting,  instructive,  and 
cheering  subjects  of  human  investigation.  So  far  as  we 
can  understand  that  government,  we  feel  assured  that  the 
Lord  reigneth,  and  though  clouds  and  darkness  are  about 
Him,  justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His 
throne,  mercy  and  truth  go  before  His  face.  The  care 
which  God  takes  of  His  church  is  strikingly  exhibited  in 
the  agents,  which,  from  time  to  time,  he  raises  up  and 
sends  forth  to  vindicate  His  sacred  cause,  and  to  extend 
the  triumphs  of  His  blessed  truth  in  our  benighted  and 
ruined  world.  All  those  agents  were  vessels  of  honour, 
sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use ;  many  of  them 
were  stars  of  the  first  magnitude  ;  Christ  held  them  in  His 
own  right  hand;  Christ  gave  them  all  their  lustre — He 
appointed  their  orbit — He  upheld  them  in  their  course  ;  — 

"  As  giants  they  ran  their  race, 

Exulting  in  their  might ; 
As  burning  luminaries  chased 
The  gloom  of  hellish  night." 

In  the  simplicity  and  depth  of  their  piety,  in  the  vigour  of 
their  faith  and  the  ardour  of  their  zeal,  in  their  diligence 
in  acquiring  knowledge,  and  in  their  aptitude  to  commu 
nicate  it,  in  their  courage  and  self-denial,  in-  their  deadness 
to  the  world  and  their  entire  devotion  to  God,  we  see  that 
He  laid  His  hand  upon  them,  He  endowed  them  with  their 

varied  gifts  and  graces He  made  them  able 

ministers  of  the  New  Testament.  Such  an  example  of  the 
power  and  the  goodness  of  God  was  Kalikewaquonaby — 
Peter  Jones.  About  thirty-six  years  ago  he  and  his  tribe 
in  Canada  were  nearly  all  pagans.  They  knew  not  the 
true  and  living  God.  They  worshipped  the  sun,  the  moon, 

B  2 


4  A  BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

and  the  stars,  thunder,  serpents,  beasts,  and  birds,  with  a 
great  many  other  imaginary  gods.  Their  physical,  intel 
lectual,  and  moral  condition  at  that  time  was  extremely  low 
and  miserable  ;  darkness  covered  their  minds ;  hunger  and 
whisky  destroyed  their  health ;  wicked  and  designing  men 
took  advantage  of  their  ignorance  and  their  weaknesses, 
and  they  were  fast  dying  off  from  the  face  of  that  mag 
nificent  country  which  their  forefathers  once  proudly  called 
their  own.  In  the  year  1823,  the  Lord,  in  His  tender 
compassion,  visited  them  ;  He  enabled  some  of  them  to  see 
the  vanity  of  idol  worship,  and  the  sinfulness  and  wretch 
edness  of  their  own  moral  condition.  They  listened  with 
deep  interest  and  solemn  attention  to  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel — the  word  came  to  them  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit,  and  with  power ;  they  were  pricked  in  their  heart ; 
they  cried  aloud  for  mercy  and  salvation;  and  He  who 
made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  that  dwell  upon  the  face 
of  the  earth ;  who  sent  His  Son  to  seek  and  save  the  lost ; 
who  commanded  His  ministers  to  beseech  a  rebel  world  to 
be  reconciled  to  Him — heard  the  poor  Indians'  penitential 
cries,  and  appointed  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of 
joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garments  of  praise  for  the  spirit 
of  heaviness. 

The  word  of  the  Lord  spread  very  rapidly  from  one  tribe 
to  another;  so 'much  so,  tkat  within  a  very  few  years  fifteen 
Christian  settlements  were  formed  among  those  very  people 
who  used  to  worship  stocks  and  stones  ;  some  hundreds  of 
whom  were  turned  from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true 
God.  The  real  test  of  all  religious  profession  is — "by 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them  :"  apply  this  test  to  those 
Indian  converts,  and  it  will  be  found  that  in  works  of 
faith,  in  labours  of  love,  and  in  the  patience  of  hope,  they 
were  examples  to  many  of  their  more  highly  favoured 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  5 

white  brethren.  Peter  Jones  was  one  of  the  first-fruits  of 
this  good  work  among  the  red  men  of  the  wilderness. 
He  was  born  in  the  woods,  on  a  prominent  tract  of  land 
called  Burlington  heights,  in  the  year  1831.  He  spent  ten 
years  in  wandering  about  with  his  own  tribe,  and  grew  up 
under  the  influence  of  the  heathen  notions  and  habits  of 
his  own  nation.  At  the  age  of  sixteen,  his  father,  of  Welsh 
descent,  and  a  government  surveyor,  got  him  baptized  by 
the  Rev.  Ralph  Leeming,  English  Episcopal  minister,  at  the 
Mohawk  Church,  on  the  Grand  River  near  Brantford.  This 
outward  profession  of  Christianity  imposed  some  restraint 
upon  his  conduct,  but  left  him  still  under  the  powerful 
influence  of  his  pagan  prejudices  and  practices.  About 
three  years  after  his  baptism,  he  was  truly  converted  to 
God.  A  camp  meeting  was  being  held  near  Ancaster,  to 
which  he  and  one  of  his  sisters  resorted.  His  own  account 
of  this  important  crisis  in  his  life  is  deeply  interesting;  He 
says  that  he  was  tempted  byt  curiosity  to  go  and  see  how 
the  Methodists  worshipped  the  Great  Spirit  in  the  wilder 
ness.  "  On  arriving  at  the  encampment,"  he  says,  "  I  was 
immediately  struck  with  the  solemnity  of  the  people, 
several  of  whom  were  engaged  in  singing  and  prayer. 
Some  strange  feeling  came  over  my  mind,  and  I  was  led  to 
believe  that  the  Supreme  Being  was  in  the  midst  of  the 
people  who  were  engaged  in  worshipping  him.  The  en 
campment  contained  about  two  acres,  enclosed  by  a  bush 
fence.  The  tents  were  pitched  within  this  circle  ;  all  the 
under-brush  was  taken  away,  while  the  large  trees  were  left 
standing,  and  formed  a  most  beautiful  shade.  There  were 
three  gates  leading  into  the  encampment.  During  the 
night  the  whole  place  was  illumined  with  fire  stands,  which 
had  a  very  imposing  appearance  among  the  branches  and 
leaves  of  the  various  trees.  The  people  came  in  their 


b  A   BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

waggons  from  various  parts  of  the  country,  bringing  their 
sons  and  daughters  with  them  for  the  purpose  of  present 
ing  them  to  the  Lord.     I  should  judge  that  there  were 
about  a  thousand  persons  present.  The  Rev.  William  Case, 
the  presiding  elder,  had  the  general  oversight  of  the  en 
campment  and  the  religious  services.  There  were  a  number 
of  ministers  present,  who   alternately  delivered  powerful 
discourses  to  the  listening  multitude.     After  each  sermon 
a  prayer  meeting  was  held,  in  which  any  one  was  at  liberty 
to  exhort  the  penitents  and  unite  in  prayer  for  the  divine 
blessing.     On  the  Sabbath,  the  3rd  of  June,  there  was  a 
vast  concourse  of  people,  several  sermons  were  preached, 
and  prayer  meetings  were  held  during  the  intervals.     By 
this  time  I  began  to  feel  very  sick  in  my  heart,  but  I  did 
not  make  my  feelings  known.    Some  of  the  sermons  deeply 
impressed  my  mind ;  I  understood  a  good  deal  of  what  was 
said ;  I  thought  the  black  coats  understood  all  that  was  in 
my  heart,  and  that  I  was  the  person  to  whom  they  were 
speaking.     The  burden  on  my  soul  began  to  increase,  and 
my  heart  said — what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?    I  saw  myself 
in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity.     The 
more  I  understood  the  plan  of  salvation,  the  more  I  was 
convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  felt 
my  need  of  its  blessings.     In  spite  of  my  old  Indian  heart, 
tears  flowed  down  my  cheeks  at  the  remembrance  of  my 
sins.  I  saw  many  of  the  white  people  powerfully  awakened, 
and  heard  them  cry  aloud  for  mercy ;  while  others  stood 
and  gazed,  and  some  even  laughed.      My  elder  brother 
John  was  at  that  time  studying  the  art  of  surveying  at 
Hamilton.     He  came  to  the  meeting  on  the  Sabbath,  but 
appeared  quite  indifferent  about  religion ;  so  much  so,  that 
I  reproved  him  for  speaking  lightly  of  these  people,  and 
told  him  I  believed  they  were  sincere — that  they  were  the 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  7 

true  worshippers  of  the  Great  Spirit.  "  Oh,"  said  he,  "  I 
see  you  will  yet  become  a  Methodist !"  The  meeting  con 
tinued  all  Monday,  and  several  discourses  were  delivered 
from  the  stand.  My  convictions  became  more  deep  and 
powerful  during  the  preaching :  I  wept  much ;  this,  how 
ever,  I  endeavoured  to  conceal  by  holding  down  my  head 
behind  the  shoulders  of  the  people.  I  felt  anxious  that  no 
one  might  see  me  weeping  like  an  old  woman,  as  all  my 
countrymen  say  that  weeping  is  a  sign  of  weakness,  which 
is  beneath  the  dignity  of  an  Indian  brave.  In  the  after 
noon  of  this  day  my  sorrow  and  anguish  of  soul  greatly 
increased,  and  I  felt  as  if  I  should  sink  down  into  hell  for 
my  sins ;  which  I  now  saw  to  be  very  many,  and  exceed 
ingly  offensive  to  the  Great  Spirit.  I  was  fully  convinced 
that  if  I  did  not  find  mercy  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  of  whom 
I  heard  so  much,  I  certainly  would  be  lost  for  ever.  I 
thought  if  I  could  only  get  the  good  people  to  pray  for  me 
at  their  prayer  meeting,  I  should  soon  find  relief  to  my 
mind,  but  I  had  not  sufficient  courage  to  make  my  desires 
known.  Oh !  what  a  mercy  it  was,  that  Christ  did  not 
forsake  me  when  my  heart  was  so  slow^to  acknowledge  him 
as  my  Lord  and  Saviour.  Towards  evening,  I  retired  into 
the  solitary  wilderness  to  try  to  pray  to  the  Great  Spirit. 
I  knelt  down  by  the  side  of  a  fallen  tree — the  rushing  of 
the  leaves  over  my  head  made  me  uneasy.  I  retired 
further  back  into  the  woods,  and  there  wrestled  with  God 
in  prayer.  I  resolved  to  go  back  to  the  camp  and  get  the 
people  of  God  to  pray  with  me ;  but  when  I  got  to  the 
meeting  my  fearful  heart  again  began  to  hesitate.  I  stood 
by  the  side  of  a  tree,  considering  what  I  must  do — whether 
I  should  give  up  seeking  the  Lord  or  not.  It  was  now  about 
dusk,  and  while  I  was  thus  halting  between  two  opinions, 
a  good  old  man  named  Reynolds  came  up  to  me  and  said 


8  A   BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

— "  Do  you  wish  to  obtain  religion  and  serve  the  Lord  ?"  I 
replied,  "  Yes."  He  then  said — "  Do  you  desire  the  people 
of  God  to  pray  for  you?"  I  told  him  that  was  what  I 
desired.  He  then  led  me  into  the  prayer  meeting.  I  fell 
upon  my  knees,  and  began  as  well  as  I  could  to  call  upon 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  old  man  prayed 
for  me,  and  exhorted  me  to  believe  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  to  trust  in  the  atonement  of  Him  who  gave  himself 
a  ransom  for  all — for  Indians  as  well  as  white  people. 
Several  of  the  ministers  prayed  for  me.  When  I  first  began 
to  pray  my  heart  was  soft  and  tender,  and  I  shed  many 
tears ;  but,  strange  to  say,  some  time  after,  my  heart  got 
as  hard  as  a  stone.  I  tried  to  look  up,  but  the  heavens 
seemed  like  brass.  I  then  began  to  say  to  myself,  there  is 
no  mercy  for  poor  Indians :  I  felt  myself  an  outcast,  a  sinner 
bound  for  hell.  About  midnight  I  got  so  fatigued  and  dis 
couraged  that  I  retired  from  the  prayer  meeting,  and  went 
to  our  tent,  where  I  immediately  fell  asleep.  I  know  not 
how  long  I  had  slept,  when  I  was  awakened  by  the  Rev. 
Edmund  Stoney  and  the  Rev.  George  Furguson,  who, 
having  missed  me  at  the  prayer  meeting,  came  with  a  light 
to  search  for  me.  Mr.  Stoney  said  to  me,  "  Arise,  Peter,  and 
go  with  us  to  the  prayer  meeting  and  get  your  soul  con 
verted  ;  your  sister  Mary  has  already  obtained  the  spirit  of 
adoption,  and  you  must  also  seek  the  same  blessing."  When 
I  heard  that  my  sister  was  converted  and  had  found  peace, 
not  knowing  before  that  she  was  seeking  the  Lord,  I 
sprung  up  and  went  with  the  good  men,  determined  that  if 
there  was  still  mercy  left  for  me,  I  would  seek  until  I  found 
it.  On  arriving  at  the  prayer  meeting,  I  saw  my  sister 
apparently  as  happy  as  she  could  be.  She  came  to  me,  and 
began  to  weep  over  me,  and  exhorted  me  to  give  my  heart 
to  God,  and  told  me  how  she  had  found  the  Lord.  Her 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  9 

words  came  with  power  to  my  sinking  heart,  and  I  fell 
upon  my  knees,  and  called  upon  God  for  mercy.  My  sister 
and  others  prayed  for  me,  especially  Mr.  Stoney,  whose 
zeal  for  my  salvation  I  shall  never  forget.  At  the  dawning 
of  the  day  I  was  enabled  to  cast  myself  wholly  on  the 
Lord,  and  to  claim  an  interest  in  the  atoning  blood  of  my 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  bore  my  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree  ;  and  when  I  received  Him  unspeakable  joy  filled 
my  heart,  and  I  could  say,  "  Abba  Father."  The  love  of 
God  being  now  shed  abroad  in  my  heart,  I  loved  him 
intensely,  and  praised  Him  in  the  midst  of  the  people. 
Every  thing  now  appeared  to  me  in  a  new  light,  and  all 
the  works  of  God  seemed  to  unite  with  me  in  uttering  the 
praises  of  the  Lord.  There  was  a  time  when  I  thought 
that  the  white  man's  God  was  never  intended  to  be  our 
God ;  that  the  white  man's  religion  was  never  intended  to 
be  the  red  man's  religion ;  that  the'  Great  Spirit  gave  us 
our  way  of  worship,  and  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  put  away 
that  mode  of  worship  and  take  to  the  white  man's  mode  of 
worship.  But  I  and  my  people  now  found  that  there  is  but 
one  true  religion,  and  that  the  true  religion  is  the  religion  of 
the  Bible.  Christianity  has  found  us,  and  has  lifted  us  up  out 
of  a  horrible  pit,  and  out  of  the  miry  clay;  it  has  placed  our 
feet  upon  a  rock ;  it  has  established  our  goings,  and  has 
put  a  new  song  into  our  mouths,  even  praise  unto  our  God." 
It  belongs  to  a  more  extended  history  of  his  life  to  nar 
rate  his  now  commenced  public  career — his  prayers  and 
exhortations — his  travels,  labours,  success — the  conversion 
of  his  own  and  kindred  tribes — his  transatlantic  voyages 
and  ministrations — his  appointments  to  Indian  missions, 
missionary  tours,  and  usefulness  in  regard  to  both  the  tem 
poral  and  spiritual  interests  of  his  countrymen,  during 
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century. 


10  A  BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

Having  furnished  satisfactory  evidence  to  the  fathers 
and  brethren  of  the  Wesleyan  church  that  he  was  called 
by  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  to  the  office  of  a  Christian 
minister,  he  was  solemnly  set  apart  to  that  work  as  deacon, 
by  the  imposition  of  hands,  at  the  Kingston  Conference, 
by  the  Rev.  Bishop  Hedding,  in  1830 ;  and  as  priest,  at 
the  Toronto  Conference,  in  1833,  by  the  Rev.  George 
Madden. 

During  the  following  twenty-three  years  of  his  valuable 
life  he  continued  to  labour  among  his  Indian  brethren,  in 
word  and  doctrine,  with  encouraging  success.  He  often 
wrent  forth  bearing  precious  seed,  and  sowed  that  seed  in 
tears ;  but  in  due  season  he  reaped  in  joy.  He  was  instru 
mental  in  turning  hundreds  of  Pagan  idolaters  from  the 
error  of  their  ways,  and  of  bringing  the  poor  lost  wanderers 
into  the  fold  of  the  good  Shepherd.  Whenever  sinners 
were  converted  under  Ais  ministry  he  evinced  the  deepest 
emotion,  and  rejoiced  over  them  as  one  who  had  found 
great  spoil.  He  was  not  satisfied  by  merely  holding  so 
many  religious  services ;  he  longed  to  see  the  end  of  all 
preaching  answered  in  the  salvation  of  those  who  heard 
him,  and  in  the  building  up  of  believers  on  their  most  holy 
faith.  He  not  only  brought  considerable  numbers  of  his 
own  people  to  the  knowlo4ge  of  the  truth  and  into  fellow 
ship  with  the  church  of  Christ,  but  he  watched  over  them 
with  unceasing  vigilance  and  tender  solicitude.  Upon  him, 
in  a  special  degree,  rested  the  care  of  the  Indian  churches. 
His  position  as  a  Christian  pastor  and  a  ruling  chief  of  his 
tribe,  gave  him  great  influence,  not  only  among  his  own 
people,  but  among  all  the  tribes  of  the  Ojebway  nation, 
with  whom  he  had  an  opportunity  of  holding  personal 
intercourse.  That  influence  for  the  good  of  the  red  men 
generally  would  have  been  greatly  increased,  had  the  oft- 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  11 

expressed  wishes  of  the  Indians,  that  he  should  be  made  a 
general  Indian  agent,  been  granted.  For  that  responsible 
and  somewhat  delicate  office  he  was,  by  his  education,  his 
prudence,  and  his  piety,  well  qualified ;  and  not  a  few  of 
the  best  friends  of  the  Indian  were  deeply  grieved  because 
his  claims  to  that  distinction  were,  as  they  thought,  unjustly 
ignored.  Disappointments  of  this  kind,  however,  neither 
altered  his  character,  nor  turned  his  attention  from  "the 
grand  and  main  object  of  his  life  ; — he  ever  sought  to  pro 
mote  the  glory  of  God  and  the  well-being  of  his  fellow 
men;  generally  and  especially  the  improvement  of  the 
intellectual,  the  moral,  and  the  physical  condition  of  his 
own  people.  He  evinced  his  great  zeal  in  the  promotion 
of  these  objects,  by  his  abundant  labours  in  Canada,  in  the 
United  States  of  America,  and  in  the  British  Islands.  In 
public  meetings  and  in  private  intercourse  with  the  people 
of  these  countries,  he  made  many  effective  appeals  to  their 
Christian  sympathy  and  charity,  and  obtained  the  means  of 
originating  and  sustaining  some  of  the  best  schools  and 
churches,  which  are,  even  now,  exercising  a  beneficial  in 
fluence  over  the  destiny  of  the  red  men  of  the  wilderness. 
All  his  public  appeals,  both  in  the  pulpit  and  on  the  plat 
form,  were  marked  by  great  clearness,  simplicity,  and 
pathos;  and  no  one  could  listen  %  to  him  without  feeling 
that  he  was  speaking  the  truth  in  love  and  with  earnestness 
of  purpose. 

The  following  sketch  of  his  character,  drawn  by  a  master 
hand — a  hand,  alas !  which  has  long  lost  its  cunning — 
evinces  a  just  appreciation  of  the  distinguishing  excellences 
of  the  beloved  and  lamented  Peter  Jones  : — "  Previously 
to  that  important  epoch  which  was  connected  with  the 
conversion  of  his  soul,  he  was  brought  up  in  all  the  ways 
and  customs  of  his  own  pagan  and  nomade  tribe  ;  inured 


12  A  BEIEF   SKETCH   OF 

to  the  same  forest  life,  and  covered  with  the  same  thick 
darkness  of  superstition  and  idolatry.  But  his  spirit  was 
now  emancipated  from  that  debasing  enthralment.  He 
was  roused  from  the  apathy  which  would  otherwise  have 
stolen  over  him,  and  paralyzed  his  naturally  good  abilities. 
He  began  to  thirst  for  knowledge,  and*  happily  for  him,  he 
found  the  means  of  satisfying  that  thirst.  He  obtained  a 
verf-  fair  English  education,  and  made  considerable  pro 
gress  in  the  cultivation  of  his  intellectual  faculties ;  while 
by  habitual  study  of  the  word  of  God,  and  attention  to  the 
ordinances  of  religion,  he  sought  to  abound  in  divine  know 
ledge  yet  more  and  more,  to  approve  things  which  are 
excellent,  to  be  sincere  and  without  offence  until  the  day 
of  Christ,  and  to  be  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteousness 
which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  glory  and  the  praise  of 
God.  His  whole  intellect  and  demeanour,  though  some 
what  marked  by  his  'English  education  and  intercourse 
with  different  classes  of  society,  were  essentially  of  the 
Indian  caste,  and  it  was  his  being  so  striking  a  represen 
tative  of  the  Indian  race,  elevated  and  beautified  by  the 
influence  of  Christianity,  that  caused  him  to  be  regarded 
with  such  lively  interest  by  wise  and  good  men  in  his  own 
and  other  lands.  His  still  and  sombre  countenance,  when 
in  a  state  of  repose  ;  or,'if  kindled  by  any  incident  or  feel 
ing,  the  flashes  of  his  dark  and  lustrous  eye ;  brought  vividly 
before  the  imagination  what  tale  or  history  has  told  of  the 
solemn  and  stately  manners,  the  freedom  and  unshackled 
fortitude,  and  the  once  tameless  spirit,  of  the  man  of  the 
wilderness."  What  a  striking  and  lovely  example  was  he 
of  the  saving  power  and  the  transforming  and  elevating 
influence  of  the  Gospel !  He,  who  in  his  infancy  had  been 
dedicated  by  his  pagan  mother  to  the  eagle, — i.  e.,  the 
thunder  god, — now  dedicated  himself,  unreservedly,  to  the 


THE   LIFE   OF  THE  AUTHOR.  13 

living  and  true  God,  and  recognizing  the  claims  of  his  re 
deeming  Lord,  glorified  him  in  his  body  and  spirit,  which 
were  his.  He,  who  on  the  day  of  his  heathen  baptism  was 
presented  with  a  war-club  and  a  bunch  of  eagle  feathers,  as 
the  insignia  of  his  future  office  as  an  Indian  chief  and  warrior, 
on  the  day  of  his  spiritual  baptism  took  unto  himself  the 
whole  armour  of  God,  determined  to  fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith,  and  to  win  the  crown  of  life,  which  fadeth  not  afaay. 

From  the  day  of  his  conversion  to  Christianity  until  the 
day  of  his  death,  he  maintained  his  religious  integrity,  and 
adorned  the  doctrine  of  God  his  Saviour  in  all  things. 
He  was  humble,  calm,  and  earnest  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duty ;  and  in  works  of  faith,  in  labours  of  love,  and  in  the 
patience  of  hope,  he  was  a  living  epistle,  known  and  read 
of  all  men. 

At  length,  his  never  very  vigorous  constitution  began  to 
yield  to  excessive  exposures,  colds,  and  fevers.  In  the 
spring  of  1850  he  had  so  severe  a  fit  of  sickness  that  few 
who  saw  him  had  any  expectation  of  his  recovery.  But 
many  prayers  continued  to  be  offered  up  by  both  Indians 
and  whites  for  the  blessing  of  God  upon  the  means  em 
ployed  for  his  recovery,  and  his  valuable  life  was  prolonged 
a  few  years. 

On  his  recovery,  he  said,  "The  prayers  of  the  good 
-people  have  kept  me  out  of  heaven."  In  the  autumn  of 
the  same  year  he  experienced  a  very  severe  trial,  in  the 
death  of  a  beloved  and  promising  boy ;  but  his  sweet  resig 
nation  under  so  heavy  a  blow  exemplified  the  supporting 
grace  of  God  to  the  heart  of  a  true  Christian.  At  length, 
from  his  failing  and  precarious  health,  and  by  the  advice 
of  his  physician,  it  was  not  deemed  advisable  for  him  to 
.attempt  to  continue  any  longer  in  charge  of  a  mission 
station ;  he  was  therefore  superannuated. 


14  A  BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

At  the  same  time,  whenever  health  permitted,  he  was 
ready  to  go  forth  and  preach  the  Gospel,  or  attend  mis 
sionary  meetings.  He  often  journeyed  to  the  New  Credit 
settlement,  where  he  attended  both  to  the  spiritual  and 
temporal  concerns  of  his  tribe — settling  their  accounts, 
attending  frequent  councils,  communicating  with  the  Indian 
department,  &c.,  &c. 

Inuring  the  summer  of  1853,  while  on  a  visit  to  New 
York,  he  experienced  a  great  deepening  of  the  work  of 
grace  in  his  heart — a  fresh  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit — 
even  that  "perfect  love  that  casteth  out  all  fear."  His 
own  account  of  this  experience  is  as  follows,  in  a  letter  to 
his  wife  :  "On  Tuesday  afternoon  I  attended  one  of  Mrs. 
Palmer's  meetings  in  her  house.  Dr.  Bangs,  and  about 
forty  others,  were  present.  These  meetings  are  held  for 
the  special  purpose  of  promoting  holiness  of  heart.  Several 
rose  and  declared  that  the  blood  of  Christ  had  cleansed 
them  from  all  sin.  Among  those  who  spoke  was  a  sailor, 
who  said  that  the  Lord  had  enabled  him  to  enjoy  this 
blessing  on  board  his  ship.  My  own  soul  was  greatly 
blessed.  Glory  be  to  God  for  what  I  enjoy !  My  soul  is 
happy.  Of  a  truth  God  is  love.  I  know  that  the  precious 
blood  of  my  dear  Saviour  cleanseth  my  poor  heart  from  all 
sin.  Join  with  me  in  prising  God  for  what  he  hath  done 
for  my  soul.  My  heart  is  full  of  Jesus.  Little  did  I  think 
when  I  came  to  this  bustling  city  that  I  was  going  to  ob 
tain  such  a  baptism  from  above.  Continue  to  pray  for  me, 
that  I  may  retain  this  simple  power  to  believe  what  God 
has  promised  in  his  holy  word."  This  deeper  work  of 
grace  continued  to  strengthen  and  mature ;  and  the  effect 
of  it  was  manifest  in  his  increasing  deadness  to  the  world, 
his  simple  faith  in  the  promises  of  Christ,  and  his  fervent 
appeals  to  the  consciences  of  his  hearers. 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOB.  15 

In  December,  1855,  he  rode  in  a  lumber-waggon  over 
bad  roads  to  the  New  Credit  Settlement  of  his  tribe,  a  dis 
tance  of  about  twenty  miles ;  sat  in  council  all  the  next 
day,  feeling  very  unwell ;  and  then  returned  home  through 
a  drizzling  rain.  No  sooner  did  he  reach  his  own  house, 
than  he  was  obliged  to  lie  down.  The  next  day  medical 
aid  was  called  in.  Until  the  2nd  of  January,  1856,  he  was 
able  to  sit  up  part  of  the  time.  The  following  month  he 
was  entirely  confined  to  his  bed — at  times  sickness  at  the 
stomach,  attended  with  extreme  general  prostration,  re 
ducing  him  so  low  that  the  effort  to  move  him  often  pro 
duced  faintness.  About  the  beginning  of  March  he  appeared 
to  rally  a  little.  On  the  24th  of  April,  accompanied  by  his 
wife,  he  went  to  St.  Catharine's,  to  try  the  effect  of  the 
celebrated  waters,  but  was  disappointed ;  the  medical  advice 
sought  there  communicating  the  sad  tidings  that  his  case- 
was  beyond  all  human  power — that  to  alleviate  his  sufferings 
was  all  that  could  be  done.  He  took  leave  of  his  kind  and 
sympathising  friends  at  St.  Catharine's,  amidst  their  tears 
and  prayers  that  the  Lord  would  still  spare  his  valuable 
life.  Medical  gentlemen  at  St.  Catharine's  having  recom 
mended  him  to  consult  Dr.  Bovel  of  Toronto,  he  left  home 
for  that  purpose  on  the  20th  of  May,  hoping  at  the  same 
time  that  he  might  be  able  to  attend  to  some  business  with 
the  Indian  department  in  behalf  of  his  people ;  but  the  dis 
interested  and  kind  medical  aid  received  here  could  only 
mitigate  suffering ;  and  medical  consultation  only  confirmed 
previous  apprehensions. 

"  During  his  stay  of  seven  weeks  in  Toronto,"  said  his 
kind  host,  Dr.  Ryerson,  "  I  had  the  melancholy  pleasure 
of  entertaining  him,  and  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  his 
calm  resignation,  his  simple  faith,  his  devout  gratitude,  his 
ardent  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  his  people,  his  enlightened 


16  A  BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

and  exalted  views  of  Christian  truth  and  privilege,  and  his 
tender  affection  for  his  family.  After  two  days  he  was 
entirely  confined  to  his  bed.  Among  other  ministers  who 
visited  him  was  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hannah  (Representative  of 
the  British  Conference),  who,  at  his  request,  administered 
to  him  and  others  present  the  memorials  of  the  broken 
body  and  shed  blood  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  It  was  a 
deeply  affecting  solemnity.  Seeing  he  grew  rapidly  worse, 
medical  advice  was  taken  as  to  the  practicability  of  re 
moving  him  home,  where  he  so  much  desired  to  be.  He 
was  conveyed  on  a  litter  to  the  railroad,  where  a  room 
was  kindly  allotted  to  him  and  his  friends.  He  reached 
home  the  same  evening,  being  carried  by  kind  friends  from 
the  rail-car  to  his  own  house,  a  distance  of  about  half  a 
mile.  Many  tears  were  shed  when  those  who  awaited  his 
arrival  witnessed  the  sad  change  that  so  short  a  time  had 
made ;  but  a  song  of  thankfulness  was  in  his  heart,  that 
he  was  permitted  to  see  his  dear  children,  and  enter  once 
more  his  much-loved  home.  This  was  on  the  18th  of  June, 
from  which  time  he  became  rapidly  worse,  being  unable 
to  retain  any  nourishment  on  his  stomach,  and  discharging 
little  else  than  blood  the  last  week.  But  he  uttered  not  a 
murmuring  word. 

The  Rev.  John  Ryersjpn  (happening  to  be  in  Brantford 
a  day  or  two)  visited  him,  and  was  much  affected  at  his 
emaciated  appearance;  but  he  said,  "  Not  a  wave  of  trouble 
has  crossed  my  breast ;  I  feel  resting  on  the  Rock  of  Ages." 
When  the  Indians  of  the  New  Credit  came,  much  sorrow 
filled  their  hearts  to  see  their  best  earthly  friend  so  low, 
that  they  proposed,  at  their  own  expense,  to  despatch  a 
messenger  to  Rice  Lake  for  a  noted  Indian  doctor,  and 
they  assembled  several  times  a  day  in  an  adjoining  room, 
when  they  prayed,  and  sang,  and  wept  aloud  ! 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  17 

The  following  particulars  of  his  last  hours  are  given  by 
an  eye-witness : — 

"Many  friends  came  from   day  to  day  to  see  him;  to 
^each  of  whom,    as   long  as  he   was  able,  he   addressed 
a  few  appropriate  words.     To  one,  pressing  both  his  hands 
in  his,  he  said:  '  I  am  going  home — going  to  my  Father's 
house  above ;  all  is  well ;  meet  me  there.'     To  the  doctor 
(Griffin)  he  said :   '  I  thank  you  for  all  your  kind  atten 
tions.    You  have  done  all  you  could  ;  but  it  is  the  will  of 
God  to  take  me  home.     I  hope  you  will  give  God  all  your 
heart,  and  meet  me  in  a  better  world.'     To  others  he  said : 
'  God  bless  you ;  be   faithful  unto   death,  and  you  shall 
receive  a  crown  of  glory.'     Hearing  him  say,  '  Blessed 
Redeemer  ! '  it  was  remarked,  l  You  can  say,  I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth.'     (  O  yes,'  he  replied,  '  I  could  say 
that  all  the  time.'     On  Friday  he  took  leave  of  his  dear 
children,  presenting  the  three  elder  Ones  with  the  bibles  he 
had  long  used,  and  the  youngest  with  his  Wesleyan  hymn 
book,  with  other  appropriate  tokens  of  remembrance.     He 
put  his  dying  hands  upon  each  of  their  heads,  saying :  '  God 
bless  you,  my  dear  boys.  Be  good  children.    Be  affectionate 
and  obedient  to  your  dear  mother.     Be  kind  and  loving  to 
each  other.     Give  God  your  hearts,  and  meet  me  in  a 
better  world.'     He  then  took  th$  hand  of  his  dear  wife, 
saying :  '  I  leave  these  dear  boys  to  the  care  of  their  hea 
venly  Father,  and  yours,  for  you  to  train  them  and  teach 
them  the  good  way.     God  bless  you  all ! '     On  Saturday 
he  continued  to  sink,  and  knowing  that  his  death  was  fast 
approaching,  and  being  in  the  full  possession  of  his  mental 
faculties,  he  gave,  with  the  greatest  composure,  several  in 
structions  as  to  what  he  wished  done.      His  voice  soon 
became  inaudible.      The  last  intelligible  words  were  (ad 
dressing  his  sorrowing  partner) :  '  God  bless  you,  dear. 

c 


18  A   BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

About  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  weary  wheels  of  life 
seemed  about  standing  still,  and  the  happy  spirit  waiting 
for  the  welcome  message — '  Come  up  hither/  Surrounded 
by  his  weeping  wife  and  children,  friends  and  Indians, 
his  sister  and  aged  mother,  who  had  been  converted 
by  his  instrumentality,  the  solemnity  and  affecting  cha 
racter  of  the  scene  can  be  better  conceived  than  de 
scried.  The  contest  between  spirit  and  flesh  seemed  long. 
At  length,  a  little  after  two  o'clock  on  sabbath  morning, 
June  29th,  1856,  the  deep  breathing  gave  way,  and  be 
coming  fainter  and  yet  lower  still,  the  last  quiver  of  the  lips 
told  that  all  was  over.  '  Victory !  victory !  O  death,  where 
is  thy  sting  ?  O  grave,  wiiere  is  thy  victory  ?' 

"  On  Tuesday,  July  1st,  his  precious  remains  were  con 
veyed  from  their  late  happy  home  to  an  adjoining  grave, 
where  the  Rev.  Dr.  Ryerson,  from  Toronto,  delivered 
an  address  founded  bn  Acts  xi.  24 ;  and  from  thence 
to  the  cemetery  at  Brantford,  followed  by  upwards  of 
eighty  carriages,  and  great  numbers  of  white  people  and 
Indians  on  foot.  At  the  grave,  into  which  many  flowers 
were  thrown,  the  beautiful  burial  service  was  read  by  the 
Rev.  T.  B.  Howard." 

Dr.  Ryerson  adds :  "  Mr.  Jones  was  a  man  of  athletic 
frame  as  well  as  of  masculine  intellect ;  a  man  of  clear 
perception,  good  judgment,  great  decision  of  character  ;  a 
sound  preacher,  fervent  and  powerful  in  his  appeals  ;  very 
well  informed  on  general  subjects,  extensively  acquainted 
with  men  and  things,  serious  without  gloom,  cheerful 
without  levity,  dignified  and  agreeable  in  his  manners  ;  a 
faithful  friend,  a  true  patriot,  a  persevering  philanthropist ; 
a  noble  specimen  of  what  Christianity  can  do  for  the 
Indian  Gentiles  of  Canada,  and  therefore  for  the  Gentiles 
of  the  whole  world.  Mr.  Jones  died  at  the  age  of  fifty- 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  19 

four  years,  leaving  a  widow  and  four  sons  to  mourn  their 
loss,  but  '  not  as  those  who  have  no  hope.7" 

On  the  1st  of  July,  1857, — a  year  from  the  day  on  which 
the  remains  of  this  exemplary  Christian  and  zealous  min 
ister  were  committed  to  their  final  resting-place, — a  hand 
some  marble  monument  was  raised  to  his  memory  in  the 
cemetery  at  Brantford.  There  were  present  at  this  in 
auguration  several  ministers  of  the  town,  a  large  nuiAber 
of  the  inhabitants,  D.  Thorburne,  Esq.,  Indian  Commis 
sioner,  and  Indians  from  the  Credit  and  Mohawk. 

Mr.  Thorburne  remarked  that  he  was  present  at  the 
inauguration  of  a  monument  raised  to  the  memory  of  Brant, 
and  he  felt  extremely  happy  now  in  being  present  to  do 
honour  to  the  memory  of  one  of  the  most  illustrious  soldiers 
in  the  service  of  Christ ;  one  who  had  been  a  burning  and  a 
shining  light,  working  good  wherever  his  duties  called  him, 
and  who  was  esteemed  by  all  who  h&d  ever  been  acquainted 
with  him. 

The  Rev.  T.  B.  Howard  (Wesleyan  minister)  said,  he 
felt  this  to  be  a  solemn  occasion.  He  deemed  it  a  privilege 
to  be  present  to  give  his  testimony  to  the  great  worth  of 
him  who  now  sleeps  beneath  the  sod.  He  had  been 
acquainted  with  Peter  Jones  for  many  years,  had  journeyed 
with  him  in  the  prosecution  of  >  his  great  work  of  mis 
sionary  labours,  and  had  always  esteemed  him  most  highly 
as  a  Christian  and  a  gentleman.  "It  was,"  he  said,  "a 
strong  proof  of  magnanimity  and  affection  on  the  part  of 
the  red  men,  who, -out  of  their  poverty,  have  raised  this 
monument  to  the  memory  of  their  beloved  chief.  The 
stone  on  which  we  now  see  his  name  engraved  will  in  the 
course  of  time  perish,  and  be  lost  to  view ;  but  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  Life  it  is  written  in  characters  that  will 
never  be  effaced.  He  prayed  that  God  would  perpetuate  the 

c2 


20  A  BRIEF   SKETCH   OF 

good  work  commenced  by  our  departed  friend  among  the 
natives  of  the  country,  and  bless  his  widow  and  family." 

The  Rev.  J.  C.  Usher  (Church  of  England  minister) 
expressed  himself  as  having  felt  a  deep  interest  in  the  wel 
fare  of  the  Indians  for  the  last  twenty  years.  With  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Jones  he  had  not  had  much  personal  acquaint 
ance  ;  but,  from  what  he  had  heard  from  those  intimately 
•acquainted  with  him,  he  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
was  really  a  good  and  a  great  man ;  and  from  personal 
observation  he  always  saw  something  which  stamped  him 
to  be  first-class.  He  was  happy  at  being  unexpectedly 
present  on  this  occasion,  and  concluded  by  wishing  pros 
perity,  temporal  and  spiritual,  to  the  widow  and  children 
of  the  late  Mr.  Jones. 

Mr.  G.  H.  M.  Johnson  (Indian  chief  of  Six  Nations)  said 
he  had  known  Mr.  Jones  for  thirty  years,  had  greatly  pro 
fited  by  his  example  and  advice,  and  his  loss  was  deeply 
felt  by  the  Indian  tribes.  He  died  in  his  arms.  Almost 
the  last  words  he  said  were — That  God  would  bless  his 
people.  He  had  done  much  to  convert  the  Indian,  and 
was  ever  a  regular  visitor  to  all  the  Indian  stations  in  the 
country. 

A  venerable  chief  (Sawyer)  of  the  Mississauga  tribe, 
returned  his  sincere  thanks  to  all  for  their  attendance  on 
that  solemn  occasion. 

Lewis  Bunnell,  Esq.,  said  he  had  been  acquainted  with 
Peter  Jones  since  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age.  He  was  in 
youth  an  exemplary  person ;  and  a  great  portion  of  the 
good  he  had  accomplished  will  never  be  known  till  the  con 
summation  of  all  things.  He  prayed  that  God  would  bless 
all  his  people,  and  bring  them  to  His  eternal  kingdom. 

Dr.  Digby  said  there  was  no  stain  on  the  life  of  the  good 
Peter  Jones,  whose  piety,  he  blessed  God  that  he  (Dr.  D.) 
was  now  striving  to  imitate. 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  21 

Mr.  Matthews  being  called  on,  said  he  had  long  known 
and  respected  Peter  Jones.  He  was  present  when  he  was 
ordained  in  Kingston  by  Bishop  Hedding,  from  which  time 
a  great  work  had  been  carried  on  by  him.  His  after-life 
had  borne  out  all  the  expectations  raised  at  his  conversion. 
He  concluded  by  expressing  himself  happy  at  having  had 
an  opportunity  of  giving  testimony  to  the  worth  of  the  Jate 
Kev.  Peter  Jones. 

Mr.  Thorburne  then  called  on  the  Rev.  James  Usher  to 
pronounce  the  benediction,  when  the  assembly  dispersed. 

The  following  inscription,  from  the  pen  of  the  Rev.  ,Dr. 
Ryerson,  is  a  beautiful  epitome  of  his  excellent  character  : 


OJIBEWAY     AND     OTHER     INDIAN     TRIBES, 
TO   THEIR  REVERED   AND   BELOVED   CHIEF, 

KAHKEWAQUONABY, 

(THE  REV.  PETER  JONES), 
Died  June  the  29M,  1856.     Aged  54  years. 

He  was  a  man  of  deep  piety  and  catholic  spirit  ;  an  able  Minister,  and 
powerful  advocate  of  Christian  missions. 

A  true  Patriot,  an  affectionate  Husband,  Father,  and  Friend.     He  was 

the  means  of  promoting,  in  the  highest  degree,  the 

spiritual  and  temporal  good  of  his  race. 

Sinking  under  excessive  attacks  of  disease,  caused  by  exposures  and 

labours  in  the  Missionary  work,  he  died,  triumphing  in  the 

faith  which  he  preached  during  his  memorable 

ministry  of  thirty-one  years  in  the 

Wesleyan  Methodist  Church. 

A  Tablet  is  also  raised  to  his  memory  by  his  bereaved 


22  A  BKIEF   SKETCH   OF 

family,  in  the  Indian  Church,  at  the  New  Credit  Settle 
ment  ;  on  which  is  the  following  fitting  inscription  :  — 


n 

KAHKEWAQUONABY, 

(PETER  JONES), 

ffHE  FAITHFUL  AND  HEKOIC  OJIBEWAT  MISSIONARY  AND  CHIEF  ; 

THE  GUIDE,  ADVISER,  AND  BENEFACTOR  OF  HIS  PEOPLE. 

Born  January  1st,  1802. 

Died  June  29*7*,  1856. 

,  HIS    GOOD    WORKS    LIVE    AFTER    HIM, 

AND   HIS   MEMORY   IS   EMBALMED   IN   MANY   GRATEFUL   HEARTS. 

The  editor  cannot  withhold  the  observations  of  the  late 
Mrs.  James  Wood,  of  Bristol,  England,  respecting  her  late 
excellent  husband,  during  his  visit  at  her  house,  in  the 
summer  of  1831  .....  "  My  weakness  prevents  my 
giving  a  particular  account  of  Mr.  Jones,  further  than  that 
he  is  a  converted  North  American  Indian  Chief,  come  over 
to  England  on  business  concerning  his  nation.  What  I 
wish  to  record  of  him  is,  that  he  is  an  exemplary  Christian, 
a  man  of  deep  piety,  grea"t  humility  and  simplicity,  walking 
closely  with  God—  in  short,  he  is  a  Bible  Christian.  The 
above  traits  of  character  have  also  been  eminently  ex 
hibited  under  our  roof  during  a  season  of  affliction  which 
put  to  the  test  all  his  graces. 

"  On  his  arrival  in  England,  he  took  cold  through  ex 
posure  to  a  severe  frosty  night  on  the  top  of  a  stage-coach 
from  Liverpool,  where  he  landed  April  30th,  on  his  way 
to  London. 

"  Pleasing  accounts  being  received  of  him  here,  Mr.  Wood 


THE   LIFE   OF   THE   AUTHOR.  23 

wrote,  requesting  him  to  come  to  our  Bristol  missionary 
meeting,  and  to  make  our  house  his  home.  He  did  so ; 
arriving  on  Saturday,  May  14th.  He  preached  twice  on 
Sunday,  and  gave  his  experience  in  the  evening  in  King 
Street  Chapel.  He  attended  the  missionary  meeting  at 
Downend,  where  he  increased  his  cold,  so  that  he  was 
entirely  laid  up.  His  presence  on  the  platform  had  been 
published  so  extensively,  that  it  was  thought  absolutely  need 
ful  that  he  should  appear  there.  He  was  conveyed  to  the 
meeting  in  a  car  just  before  it  was  time  for  him  to  speak. 
He  delivered  a  short  and  suitable  address  with  great  sim 
plicity.  The  audience  were  much  delighted,  but  expressed 
great  concern  to  see  his  debilitated  appearance.  He  re 
mained  on  the  platform  about  twenty  minutes,  returned  to 
our  house,  and  the  next  day  took  to  his  bed.  The  phy 
sician  and  surgeon  who  attended  him  had  considerable 
doubt  of  his  recovery.  After  being*  confined  to  his  bed  for 
three  weeks  he  is  now  slowly  convalescent.  Through  the 
whole  of  this  severe  affliction,  endured  in  a  foreign  land, 
among  strangers,  whose  customs  and  habits  differ  so  ma 
terially  from  his  own — with  a  probability  of  never  again 
visiting  his  native  country,  or  seeing  his  dearest  relatives 
or  connexions — he  manifested  the  utmost  submission  to 
the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father,  and  with  great  meekness 
of  spirit  passed  through  the  fiery  trial  unhurt.  He  has  so 
won  the  hearts  of  all  our  family  by  his  temper  and  affa 
bility  of  manners,  together  with  his  gratitude  for  all  that 
has  been  done  for  him,  that  the  name  of  Kahkewaquonaby 
will  always  be  remembered  by  us  with  respect  and  Chris 
tian  affection." 


NATAHWASH,MISCOCOMON       CHIEF. 


* 
I 


CHAPTER  I. 

GENERAL   INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS. 

The  former  and  present  condition  of  the  North  American  Indians/ 

As  the  continent  of  America  is  now  so  well  known,  I 
need*  not  attempt  to  give  a  general  description  of  it.  I 
shall,  therefore,  confine  my  remarks  principally  to  that 
part  of  the  new  world  occupied  by  my  countrymen. 

At  the  same  time  it  may  not  be  uninteresting  to  glance 
over  what  I  suppose  to  have  been  the  condition  of  our  fore 
fathers  long  before  the  European  planted  his  footsteps  on 
our  shores,  when  the  red  man  could. .cast  his  eye  from  the 
Atlantic  on  the  east  to  the  Pacific  ocean  on  the  west,  from 
the  frozen  regions  of  the  north  to  Cape  Horn  in  the  south, 
and,  viewing  the  immense  continent  in  its  length  and 
breadth,  exclaim, 

"  I  am  monarch  of  all  I  survey, 

My  right  there  is  none  to  dispute  ; 
From  the  centre  all  round  to  the  sea, 
I  am  lord  of  the  fowl-and  the  brute." 

Before  the  treacherous  Spaniard  made  his  appearance  in 
our  country  the  Indian  could  sleep  peacefully  in  his  wigwam 
without  fear  of  being  hunted  by  bloodhounds;*  as  if  the 
owners  of  the  soil  were  beasts  of  prey  rather  than  men  of 
like  passions  with  themselves ;  or  as  if  the  rich  mines  of 
Mexico  were  of  greater  value  than  the  lives  and  souls  of 
the  poor  aborigines,  whom  the  Good  Spirit  had  made  lords 
of  the  land  where  His  providence  had  seen  fit  to  place  them. 

*  Vide  Appendix  A. 


26  INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS. 

And  long  before  the  adventurer  from  Europe,  eager  to  get 
gain,  ever  thought  of  such  a  country  as  America,  the  red 
man  roamed  undisturbed  through  the  mighty  forest ; 
killing  the  buffalo,  the  deer,  and  the  bear ;  or,  when  travers 
ing  the  lakes  and  the  rivers,  partaking  the  pleasure  of  the 
fish  that  swam  in  their  waters. 

But  oh,  how  has  the  scene  changed  since  the  white  man 
discovered  our  country  !  Where  are  the  aborigines  who 
once  thronged  the  shores  of  the  lakes  and  rivers  on  which 
the  white  man  has  now  reared  his  dwelling  and  amassed 
his  wealth  ?  What  doleful  tales  do  those  bleaching  bones 
tell  which  the  husbandman  has  ploughed  up,  that  he  may 
sow  his  seed  and  reap  an  abundant  harvest !  Where  is  the 
pensive  mourner  who  was  once  seen  approaching  the 
graves  and  bones  of  his  departed  fathers  to  weep  there  ? 
He  is  gone  the  way  of  all  flesh,  and  his  bones  lie  by  the 
side  of  his  ancestors.  But  where  are  his  widow,  and  the 
fatherless  children  ? — are  none  left  to  weep  over  his  grave  ? 
The  red  man  is  gone,  and  a  strange  people  occupy  his 
place. 

This  solemn  fact  leads  me  to  inquire,  What  have  been  the 
causes  of  the  rapid  decrease  in  numbers  of  my  country 
men  ?  I  have  put  the  question  to  the  Indian  whose  head 
was  white  with  the  frost  of  many  winters,  and  who  has 
heard  the  expiring  wail  of  once  numerous  [and  powerful 
tribes  of  my  people.  In  reply,  he  has  given  me  the  follow 
ing  melancholy  picture : — 

"  Ah !  my  son,  my  heart  sickens  when  I  look  at  that 
which  has  happened  to  our  forefathers  since  the  pale  face 
came  amongst  us. 

"My  son,  before  the  white  man  landed  on  our  shores  the 
red  men  of  the  forest  were  numerous,  powerful,  wise,  and 
happy.  In  those  days  nothing  but  the  weight  of  many 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS.  27 

winters  bore  them  down  to  the  grave.  The  Indian  mother 
could  then  rear  a  large  family  of  healthy  and  happy 
children.  The  game  in  the  forest,  the  fish  in  the  waters, 
abundantly  supplied  their  wants.  The  Indian  corn  grew 
rank  and  tall,  and  brought  forth  much,  and  plenty  smiled 
upon  the  land.  The  old  men  made  their  feasts,  smoked 
their  pipes,  and  thought  upon  their  munedoos  (gods),  tjiey 
sang  and  beat  upon  the  tawaegun  (drum).  The  young  men 
and  women  danced.  The  pow-wows  (medicine  men)  visited 
the  sick,  sang  and  invoked  their  gods,  applied  their  medi 
cines  gathered  from  nature's  stores,  and  thus  drove  away 
the  grim  monster  Death.  These  were  happy  days  of  sun 
shine  and  calm  to  our  forefathers. 

"  My  son,  while  our  fathers  were  in  this  happy  state  they 
cast  their  eyes  towards  the  sun-setting,  and  beheld  a  big 
canoe  with  white  wings  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  to 
the  shore,  and  outbraving  the  waves  of  the  mighty  waters. 
A  strange  people  landed,  wise  as  the  gods,  powerful  as  the 
thunder,  with  faces  white  as  the  snow.  Our  fathers  held  out 
to  them  the  hand  of  friendship.  The  strangers  then  asked 
for  a  small  piece  of  land  on  which  they  might  pitch  their 
tents;  the  request  was  cheerfully  granted.  By  and  by 
they  begged  for  more,  and  more  was  given  them.  In  this 
way  they  have  continued  to  ask,  or  have  obtained  by  force 
or  fraud,  the  fairest  portions  of  our  territory.  As  the  white 
man  advanced  in  his  encroachments,  the  Indian  retired 
farther  back  to  make  room  for  him.  In  this  way  the  red 
men  have  gradually  been  stripped  of  their  hunting-grounds 
and  corn-fields,  and  been  driven  far  from  the  land  of  com 
fort  and  plenty.  Their  children  .began  to  cry  for  food, 
their  souls  fainted  for  want,  their  clothes  dropped  from 
their  shivering  backs,  the  fatal  small-pox  and  measles 
visited  them  for  the  first  time,  and  swept  away  the  poor 


28  INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS. 

Indians  by  thousands.  Goaded  to  despair,  they  clutched 
the  deadly  tomahawk,  and  sought  to  wield  it  against  the 
encroaching  whites;  but,  instead  of  conquering,  the  act 
only  afforded  to  the  calculating,  remorseless  foe,  a  pretext 
for  a  more  general  slaughter  of  the  defenceless  natives. 
Then,  as  if  disease  and  the  musket — both  imported  by  the 
whites — could  not  mow  down  the  Indian  fast  enough,  the 
fire-waters  crept  in  and  began  to  gnaw  their  very  vitals, 
debasing  their  morals,  lowering  their  dignity,  spreading 
contentions,  confusion  and  death  ! 

"  My  son,  these  are  the  causes  which  have  melted  away 
our  forefathers  like  snow  before  a  warm  sun.  The  Great 
Spirit  has  hidden  his  face  from  his  red  children,  on  account 
of  their  drunkenness  and  their  many  crooked  ways." 

I  have  often  heard  my  brethren,  both  in  public  and  in 
private,  give  utterance  to  the  sentiments  just  expressed ; 
and  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  they  were  much  better 
off  in  their  former  comparatively  happy  state,  when  they 
could  feast  unmolested  on  the  abundance  which  nature  had 
provided  for  them.  It  should  also  be  remembered  that 
the  pagan  ideas  of  bliss  are  almost  entirely  sensual,  and 
relate  to  the  unrestrained  indulgence  of  the  animal  appe 
tites.  Alas !  they  know  nothing  of  that  real  peace  which 
the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  From  expe 
rience  of  my  early  life,  I  can  truly  say,  that  their  imaginary 
bliss  is  so  mixed  up  with  everything  that  is  abominable 
and  cruel,  that  it  would  be  vain  to  look  for  real  happiness 
among  savage  tribes.  "  The  dark  places  of  the  earth  are 
full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty." 

When  I  consider  the  prevalence  of  intemperance  among 
my  people, — an  evil  formerly  not  confined  to  the  men,  for 
even  women  and  youth  were  addicted  to  it, — and  the  long 
catalogue  of  vices  and  diseases  which  follow  in  the  train  of 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS.  29 

the  monster,  I  am  not  surprised  at  the  appalling  decline  in 
number  of  my  countrymen. 

If  the  enlightened  and  polished  European  settlers  and 
their  descendants  had  no  means  of  staying  the  progress  of 
this  devastating  curse  among  themselves,  what  shield  or 
protection  had  the  rude  and  simple  natives  against  the 
same  insidious  foe  ? 

I  cannot  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  Supreme  Disposer 
has  decreed  that  the  doom  of  the  red  man  is  to  fall  and 
gradually  disappear,  like  the  mighty  wilderness,  before  the 
axe  of  the  European  settler. 

Some  persons  may  affect  to  ascribe  this  waste  of  life  to  a 
divine  decree,  in  order  to  screen  themselves  from  the  ter 
rible  responsibility  which  rests  upon  their  own  souls.  But 
that  the  Great  Spirit  never  determined  this  is  plainly  de 
clared  ;  for  He  hath  said,  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death 
of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and 
live."  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  be 
gotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  "  The  Son  of  man  came 
not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them."  May  we 
not  well  reply  to  such  infidelity,  "  Woe  unto  them  that  call 
evil  good,  and  good  evil ;  that  put  darkness  for  light,  and 
light  for  darkness." 

Oh,  what  an  awful  account  at  the  day  of  judgment  must 
the  unprincipled  white  man  give,  who  has  been  an  agent  of 
Satan  in  the  extermination  of  the  original  proprietors  of 
the  American  soil !  Will  not  the  blood  of  the  red  man  be 
required  at  Ids  hands,  who,  for  paltry  gain,  has  impaired 
the  minds,  corrupted  the  morals,  and  ruined  the  constitutions 
of  a  once  hardy  and  numerous  race  ? 

When  I  think  of  the  long  catalogue  of  evils  thus  entailed 
on  my  poor  unhappy  countrymen,  my  heart  bleeds,  not  only 


30  INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS. 

on  their  account,  but  also  for  their  destroyers,  who,  coming 
from  a  land  of  light  and  knowledge,  are  without  excuse. 
Poor  deluded  beings !  whatever  their  pretensions  to  Chris 
tianity  may  have  been,  it  is  evident  the  love  of  God  was 
not  in  their  hearts  ;  for  that  love  extends  to  all  mankind,, 
and  constrains  to  acts  of  mercy,  but  never  impels  to  deeds; 
of  death. 

Of  all  the  causes  which  have  contributed  to  the  rapid 
decrease  of  the  Indian  tribes,  the  abuse  of  ardent  spirits, 
while  following  their  native  mode  of  life,  is,  in  my  opinion, 
the  primary  and  most  important.  For  when  an  Indian  is 
intoxicated,  all  the  savage  passions  of  his  nature  assume 
the  entire  control,  often  leading  him  to  commit  the  most 
barbarous  acts  of  cruelty  and  even  murder.  This  is  the 
way  in  which  the  natives  have  been  continually  falling  one 
after  another,  like  the  tall  trees  before  the  rushing  blast ; 
and  thus  will  they  continue  to  fall  until  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  shines  into  their  hearts.  Then  the  lion 
will  be  changed  into  a  lamb,  and  every  fierce  passion  be 
hushed  into  peace.  "  O  Lord,  hasten  the  time  !  Come 
from  the  four  winds,  O  breath,  and  breathe  upon  these 
slain,  that  they  may  live." 


CHAPTER  II. 

IDEAS   OF   THEIR   ORIGIN. 

Tradition  of  Nanahbozhoo — My  own  opinion  as  to  their  origin — Eeasons  for 
not  supposing  them  descended  from  the  ten  lost  tribes  of  Israel — Desire 
that  this  subject  should  be  inquired  into. 

FOR  several  years  past  I  have  made  it  a  subject  of  in 
quiry  among  the  aged  sachems  of  the  Ojebway*  nation  of 
Indians, — What  are  the  opinions  entertained  by  them,  and 
transmitted  from  our  forefathers,  regarding  the  origin  of 
our  race  ?  All  the  information  I  have  been  able  to  gain  in 
relation  to  this  question  amounts  to  the  following : — That 
many,  many  winters  ago,  the  Great  Spirit,  whom  we  call 
in  Ojebway  KeeJie-munedoo,  or  Kezha-munedoo,  the  Bene 
volent  Spirit,  created  the  Indians,  and  placed  them  on  the 
continent  of  America, — that  every  nation  speaking  a  dif 
ferent  language  is  a  separate  creation ;  but  that  all  were 
made  by  the  same  Supreme  Being.  How  they  were  created 
is  not  known. 

They  say  that  when  the  Great  Spirit  made  the  different: 
nations  of  the  earth,  He  gave  them  various  languages,  com 
plexions,  and  religion,  as  well  as  divers  customs,  manners, 
and  modes  of  living.  When  He  gave  the  Ojebways  their 
religion,  He  told  them  how  they  were  to  act ;  and  with 
this  knowledge  they  think  it  would  be  wrong^  and  give 
great  offence  to  their  Creator,  to  forsake  the  old  ways  of 

their  forefathers. 

• 

*  Of  which  Chippeway  is  a  corruption, 


32  IDEAS   OF   THEIR   ORIGIN. 

The  different  tribes  of  the  Ojebway  nation  who  now  in 
habit  the  shores  of  Lakes  Ontario,  Erie,  Simcoe,  &c.,  have 
a  tradition  current  amongst  them,  that  they  originally  came 
from  the  great  western  lakes,'  Huron  and  Superior.  The 
former  tribes  who  resided  on  'the  shores  of  these  lakes  were 
called  Nahdoomays*  or  HuronSj  whom  the  Ojebways  dispos 
sessed  of  their  country  by  conquest,  and  the  mounds  that 
cover  their  bones  are  still  pointed  out  by  the  Ojebways  in 
different  locations.  After  this  the  Nahdooways,  acknow 
ledging  they  were  conquered,  freely  gave  up  their  country ; 
at  the  same  time  entering  into  a  treaty  of  friendship  with 
the  Ojebways,  both  agreeing  ever  after  to  call  each  other 
"  Brother ;"  which  treaty  is  still  observed  between  the  two 
nations,  f 

One  of  the  main  difficulties  which  the  Christian  mission 
ary  has  to  encounter  in  planting  the  gospel  amongst  the 
aborigines  of  North  America,  arises  from  their  unwilling 
ness  to  believe  what  is  taught  in  the  unerring  Word  of 
God,  that  the  whole  human  race  originally  sprang  from 
one  pair.  But  even  this  difficulty,  with  many  other  obsta 
cles  to  the  truth,  gives  way  when  the  light  of  the  gospel 
shines  into  the  heart.  Of  late  years  a  host  of  living  wit 
nesses  from  among  their  own  people  have  risen  up,  declaring 
that  "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,  to 
dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth  ; "  thus  proving,  in  their 
own  experience,  that  "  of  a  truth,  God  is  no  respecter  of 
persons:  but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and 
worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with  Him." 

Some  tribes  believe  that  a  great  man,  endued  with  the 
spirit*of  the  gods,  by  the  name  of  Nanalibozlioo  (the  mean 
ing  of  which  is  now  lost)  made  the  world  and  the  Indians 

*  This  word  is  also  applied  to  the  Six  Nations  Indians. 

't*  The  renewal  of  this  treaty  will  be  given  in  the  chapter  on  wars. 


OJEBWAY  TRADITION.  33 

in  America.  This  tradition,  as  preserved  by  the  Ojebways, 
is  the  following  : — 

Before  the  general  deluge,  there  lived  two  enormous 
creatures,  each  possessed  of  vast  power.  One  was  an 
animal,  with  a  great  horn  on  his  head ;  the  other  was  a 
huge  toad.  The  latter  had  the  whole  management  of  the 
waters,  keeping  them  secure  in  its  own  body,  and  emitting 
only  a  certain  quantity  for  the  watering  of  the  earth.  Be 
tween  these  two  creatures  there  arose  a  quarrel,  which 
terminated  in  a  fight.  The  toad  in  vain  tried  to  swallow 
its  antagonist,  but  the  latter  rushed  upon  it,  and  with  his 
horn  pierced  a  hole  in  its  side,  out  of  which  the  water 
gushed  in  floods,  and  soon  overflowed  the  face  of  the  earth. 
At  this  time  Nanahbozhoo  was  living  on  the  earth,  and  ob 
serving  the  water  rising  higher  and  higher,  he  fled  to  the 
loftiest  mountain  for  refuge.  Perceiving  that  even  this 
retreat  would  soon  be  inundated,  he  selected  a  large  cedar 
tree  which  he  purposed  to  ascend  should  the  waters  come 
up  to  him.  Before  they  reached  him  he  caught  a  number 
of  animals  and  fowls,  and  put  them  into  his  bosom.  At 
length  the  water  covered  the  mountain.  Nanahbozhoo 

O 

then  ascended  the  cedar  tree,  and  as  he  went  up,  he  plucked 
its  branches  and  stuck  them  in  the  belt  which  girdled  his 
waist.  When  he  reached  the  top  of  the  tree  he  sang,  and 
beat  the  tune  with  his  arrow  upon  his  bow,  and  as  he  sang 
the  tree  grew  and  kept  pace  with  the  water  for  a  long  time. 
At  length  he  abandoned  the  idea  of  remaining  any  longer 
on  the  tree,  and  took  the  branches  he  had  plucked,  and 
with  them  constructed  a  raft,  on  which  he  placed  himself 
with  the  animals  and  fowls.  On  this  raft  he  floated  about 
for  a  long  time,  till  all  the  mountains  were  covered,  and  all 
the  beasts  of  the  earth  and  fowls  of  the  air,  except  those  he 
had  with  him,  perished. 

D 


34  IDEAS   OF   THEIR   ORIGIN. 

At  length  Nanahbozhoo  thought  of  forming  a  new  world, 
but  how  to  accomplish  it  without  any  materials  he  knew 
not,  till  the  idea  occurred  to  him  that  if  he  could  only 
obtain  a  little  of  the  earth  which  was  then  under  the  water 
he  might  succeed  in  making  a  new  world  out  of  the  old 
one.  He  accordingly  employed  the  different  animals  he 
had  with  him  that  were  accustomed  to  diving. — First  he 
sent  the  loon*  down  into  the  water  in  order  to  bring  up 
some  of  the  old  earth ;  but  it  was  not  able  to  reach  the 
bottom,  and  after  remaining  in  the  water  some  time,  came 
up  dead.  Nanahbozhoo  then  took  it,  blew  upon  it,  and  it 
came  to  life  again.  He  next  sent  the  otter,  which  also 
failing  to  reach  the  bottom  came  up  dead,  and  was  restored 
to  life  in  the  same  manner  as  the  loon.  He  then  tried  the 
skill  of  the  beaver,  but  without  success.  Having  failed 
with  all  these  diving  animals,  he  last  of  all  took  the  musk 
rat  ;f  on  account  of  the  distance  it  had  to  go  to  reach  the 
bottom,  it  was  gone  a  long  time,  and  came  up  dead.  On 
taking  it  up,  Nanahbozhoo  found,  to  his  great  joy,  that  it 
had  reached  the  earth,  and  had  retained  some  of  the  soil  in 
each  of  its  paws  and  mouth.  He  then  blew  upon  it,  and 
brought  it  to  life  again,  at  the  same  time  pronouncing  many 
blessings  on  it,  saying,  that  as  long  as  the  world  he  was 
about  to  make  should  endure,  the  musk-rat  should  never 
become  extinct.  This  prediction  of  Nanahbozhoo  is  still 
spoken  of  by  the  Indians  when  referring  to  the  rapid 

*  The  loon  is  a  water  fowl  of  the  penguin  species,  about  the  size  of  a 
goose,  with  a  large  pointed  bill ;  the  feathers  cast  a  variety  of  colours  ;  there  is 
a  white  ring  round  the  neck,  the  back  and  neck  are  also  spotted  with  white. 
Their  skins  are  used  by  the  natives  as  pouches  ;  they  also  make  pretty  bags. ' 
The  loon  lives  on  small  fish.  When  it  is  pursued  it  will  dive  under  the  water 
for  a  long  time,  and  some  of  the  Indians  have  informed  me  that  they  have 
known  it  to  disappear  for  a  day. 

•f  A  well  known  animal  of  the  beaver  species,  whose  fur  is  made  into  hats, 
which  are  passed  off  as  beaver  hats  ! 


OJEBWAY   TRADITION.  35 

increase  of  the  musk-rat.  Nanahbozhoo  then  took  the 
earth  which  he  found  in  the  musk-rat's  paws  and  mouth, 
and  having  rubbed  it  with  his  hands  to  fine  dust,  he  placed 
it  on  the  waters,  and  blew  upon  it ;  then  it  began  to  grow 
larger  and  larger,  until  it  was  beyond  the  reach  of  his  eye. 
In  order  to  ascertain  the  size  of  the  world,  and  the  progress 
of  its  growth  and  expansion,  he  sent  a  wolf  to  run  to  the 
end  of  it,  measuring  its  extent  by  the  time  consumed  in  the 
journey.  The  first  journey  he*  performed  in  one  day,  the 
second  took  him  five  days,  the  third  ten,  the  fourth  a  month, 
then  a  year,  five  years,  and  so  on,  until  the  world  was  so 
large  that  Nanahbozhoo  sent  a  young  wolf  that  could  just 
run,  which  died  of  old  age  before  he  could  accomplish  his 
journey.  Nanahbozhoo  then  said  the  world  was  large 
enough,  and  commanded  it  to  cease  from  growing.  After 
this  Nanahbozhoo  took  a  journey  to  view  the  new  world  he 
had  made,  and  as  he  travelled  he  created  various  tribes  of 
Indians,  and  placed  them  in  different  parts  of  the  earth ;  he 
then  gave  them  various  religions,  customs,  and  manners. 
This  Nanahbozhoo  now  sits  at  the  North  Pole,  overlooking 

7  O 

all  the  transactions  and  affairs  of  the  peopl&he  has  placed  on 
the  earth.  The  Northern  tribes  say  that  Nanahbozhoo  always 
sleeps  during  the*  winter  ;  but,  previous  to  his  falling  asleep, 
fills  his  great  pipe,  and  smokes  for  several  days,  and  that  it 
is  the  smoke  arising  from  the  mouth  and  pipe  of  Nanah 
bozhoo  which  produces  what  is  called  "  Indian  summer." 

The  reader  will  observe  many  resemblances  in  this  tradi 
tion  of  Nanahbozhoo  to  that  beautiful  account  of  Noah's 
flood  handed  down  to  us  in  sacred  history,  which  leads  me 
to  conclude  it  is  a  corruption  of  the  same, — Nanahbozhoo 
being  substituted  for  Noah,  the  raft  for  the  ark,  the  sending 
of  the  animals  to  search  and  fetch  the  earth  for  the  raven 
and  the  dove,  and  Nanahbozhoo  making  Indians  to  people 

D2 


36  IDEAS   OF   THEIR   ORIGIN. 

the  earth  for  the  rapid  increase  of  mankind  after  the  flood. 
As  the  Indians  had  no  means  of  preserving  records,  the 
true  history  of  any  event  would  in  the  course  of  time  be  lost, 
and  I  have  noticed  that  even  this  tradition  is  related  quite 
differently  by  various  tribes  of  Indians,  either  by  adding  to 
or  omitting  some  parts  of  the  story.  From  all  that  can  be 
gathered  from  the  wise  old  Sachems  and  their  traditions  on 
this  subject,  it  appears  that  their  notions  as  to  their  origin 
are  little  better  than  a  masi  of  confusion.  Many  of  their 
traditions  are  founded  on  dreams,  which  will  account  for 
the  numerous  absurd  stories  current  amongst  them. 

I  am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  aborigines  of 
America  came  originally  from  the  northern  parts  of  Asia, 
and  that  they  crossed  over  at  Behring's  Straits.  I  think 
this  supposition  may  account  for  the  prevailing  opinion 
among  almost  all  the  tribes,  that  their  forefathers  were 
first  placed  somewhere  in  the  west,  whence  they  took  their 
journey  towards  the  sun-rising.  The  notion  they  entertain 
of  the  souls  of  the  dead  returning  to  a  good  country 
towards  the  sun-setting,  may  be  derived  from  a  faint 
remembrance  of,  their  having  come  from  that  direction,  and 
the  love  they  still  feel  for  the  better  land  they  have  left 
behind. 

The  love  of  country  is  a  feeling  implanted  in  the  breast 
of  every  man,  however  poor  and  obscure  he  may  have  been 
in  the  land  of  his  birth  and  among  his  own  people.  When 
he  emigrates  to  foreign  parts  nothing  is  more  common  than 
to  hear  such  an  one  extol  his  native  land,  and  speak  with 
rapture  of  the  many  happy  days  he  has  spent  in  it.  His 
temporal  condition  and  prospects  may  be  far  better  in  his 
adopted  country,  yet  he  will  still  remember  the  "  leeks  and 
onions  in  Egypt."  Thus  it  is  with  the  American  Indian. 
He  looks  forward  to  a  happy  return  to  a  land  of  plenty 


THEORY   OF   THE   TEN    TRIBES.  37 

and  great  joy,  not  literally,  but  in  spirit;  and  this  desire 
and  hope  fill  his  soul  with  exultation  when  he  sees  the 
glorious  orb  of  day  sinking  near  the  abodes  of  departed 
spirits. 

Much  has  of  late  years  been  said  and  written  on  the 
theory  of  the  North  American  Indians  having  descended 
from  the  ten  lost  tribes  of  Israel.  There  are  many  things 
to  favour  this  opinion,  and  many  against  it.  When  I  read 
the  book  called  "The  Star  jn  the  West, "  and  "Smith's 
View  of  the  Hebrews,"  I  was  strongly  inclined  to  favour 
the  theory.  Certainly  many  of  the  customs  and  sacrifices 
of  the  Indians  resemble  very  much  those  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  such  as  observing  days  of  purification,  offering  the 
first-fruits  of  the  earth,  burnt  offerings,  and  reckoning 
time  by  moons.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  have  no 
Sabbaths,  no  circumcision,  no  altars  erected,  and  no  distinc 
tion  between  clean  and  unclean  animals.  It  would  seem 
almost  impossible  for  the  descendants  of  the  Israelites  ever 
to  have  lost  the  recollection  of  their  Sabbath  days,  and  the 
rite  of  circumcision,  both  of  which  were  so  solemnly 
enjoined  upon  them.  One  of  the  above-mentioned  works 
gives  an  account  of  circumcision  existing  among  some 
tribes  in  the  w%st ;  but  I  have  inquired  of  several  old 
Indian  men  whether  they  ever  heard  of  such  a  practice 
being  observed  by  our  forefathers  previous  to  the  landing 
of  Europeans  on  the  shores  of  America,  and  they  have 
always  expressed  themselves  quite  ignorant  on  the  subject.* 

From  all  I  have  heard  and  read  on  the  subject,  I  am 
inclined  to  favour  the  opinion  that  the  Indians  are 
descendants  of  the  Asiatic  Tartars,  as  there  appears  to  me 
a  more  striking  similarity  in  features,  customs  and  manners, 
between  them  and  my  countrymen  than  any  other  nation,  f 

*   Vide  Notes  B  and  C,  Appendix.  f  Appendix  D. 


38  IDEAS   OF   THEIR   ORIGIN. 

If  it  were  possible  for  a  few  of  the  most  enlightened 
Indians  in  each  nation  to  visit  that  part  of  Asia  which  lies 
nearest  to  Bearing's  Straits,  for  the  purpose  of  examining 
minutely  into  the  language,  customs,  and  manners  of  the 
Tartars,  they  would,  in  my  opinion,  discover  such  a  simi 
larity  between  the  people  of  the  two  countries,  as  to  lead  to 
the  satisfactory  conclusion  that  the  aborigines  of  America 
are  descended  from  the  Asiatics.*  It  would  be  exceedingly 
gratifying  to  me  were  the  fa.ct  ascertained,  and  I  hope  I 
may  yet  see  the  day  when  the  attention  of  some  of  the 
learned  and  scientific  men  in  Europe  and  America  shall  be 
turned  to  this  subject.  I  think  the  plan  is  quite  feasible, 
and  might  be  accomplished  without  very  great  expense. 
It  would  not  only  be  satisfactory  to  know  the  origin  of  my 
countrymen,  but  might  be  the  means  of  introducing  pure 
Christianity  among  the  Tartars,  by  sending  native  mission 
aries  from  America  to  the  other  side  of  the  great  waters. 
I  leave  the  subject  for  the  consideration  of  all  who  feel  any 
interest  in  this  puzzling  question. 

*  In  a  letter  from  the  author,  dated  April  4th,  1853,  he  states  :  "  The  other 
day  I  had  an  interview  with  a  young  Chinese  who  is  studying  for  the  Church. 
In  appearance  he  resembles  H.  P.  Chase,  and  when  he  read  the  Lord's 
Prayer  in  his  language  I  fancied  I  was  listening  to  E<£.&  the  fire-keeper  of 
the  Six  Nations.  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  our  Indians  are  a 
branch  of  the  Tartar  or  Chinese  family,  there  are  so  many  striking  re 
semblances  between  the  two  races." 


CHAPTER  III. 

INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

Country  of  the  Ojebways — Lake  Superior — Surrounding  country — Its  Mission 
stations— Lake  Huron— Eesidence  ^,of  the  Thunder  Gods— Man itaulin 
Island— Attempts  to  settle  Indians  there— Lake  Michigan— Island  of 
Mackinaw — St.  Clair  Eiver  and  Lake— Detroit  Eiver— Lake  Erie — 
Grand  River— Niagara  Eiver  and  Falls— Grand  and  Navy  Islands— Lake 
Ontario — St.  Lawrence  and  Ottawa  Eivers — Mountains—  Queenston 
Heights — Climate  and  soil — Mode  of  clearing  a  farm — Natural  pro 
ductions. 

THE  Ojebway  nation  is  found  scattered  in  small  bodies 
in  the  country  extending  from  the  River  St.  Lawrence, 
thence  along  the  northern  shores  of  lakes  Ontario,  Erie, 
St.  Clair,  Huron,  both  sides  of  Lake  Superior,  and  on  to 
Hudson's  Bay  territory,  and  the  head  waters  of  the  Mis 
sissippi.  A  few  of  the  same  people  are  also  found  inter 
mingled  with  the  Ottawas  and  others  on  ftie  south  shore  of 
Lake  Huron,  aiirl  in  the  vicinity  of  Lake  Michigan.  Within 
the  range  of  the  same  tract  of  country  are  to  be  found  several 
other  nations  of  Indians,  as  the  Six  Nations,  of  whom  are  the 
following :  Mohawks,  Onondagas,  Senecas,  Oneidas,  Cayu- 
gas,  Tuscaroras ;  and  also  Delawares,  Munceys,  Minominees, 
Wayandots,  Ottawas,  and  Pottawatamees,  &c.  Each  band 
or  community  has  its  own  chiefs,  and  manages  its  own 
affairs,  within  the  limits  of  its  territory,  quite  independently 
of  other  tribes  of  the  same  nation ;  but  in  matters  which 
affect  the  whole  nation,  a  general  council  is  called,  com 
posed  of  all  or  a  majority  of  the  chiefs  of  the  different  tribes. 


40  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 


THE    OJEBWAY   COUNTRY. 

The  country  originally  occupied  by  the  Ojebway  nation,* 
and  in  which  scattering  tribes  are  still  found,  is  situated 
between  the  latitudes  of  42°  and  50°  north,  and  longitudes 
75°  and  100°  west  of  Greenwich. 

Within  this  ratige  lie  the  immense  fresh-water  lakes  or 
inland  seas  so  noted  for  their  size  and  grandeur ;  a  short 
description  of  which  I  shall  fyere  insert,  commencing  at  the 
fountain  head  with 

LAKE   SUPERIOR. 

This  lake  is  so  called  from  its  being  the  largest  of  all  the 
lakes  in  North  America.*  It  is  reckoned  to  be  about  420 
miles  from  east  to  west,  and  its  greatest  breadth  about  135 
miles.  Its  circumference  is  about  1,000  miles.  The  waters 
of  this  lake  are  as  pure  as  the  clearest  spring.  Its  northern 
shore  is  studded  with  numerous  islands  of  various  forms  and 
sizes ;  on  the  south  they  are  but  few,  and  these  rather  small. 

There  are  several  large  bays  on  both  sides  of  the  lake ; 
the  most  noted  |s  Kahkewaoonnahning,  commonly  called 
Kawawenah  Bay,  situated  on  the  south  shore.  At  this  bay 
the  Rev.  John  Sunday,  a  native  missionary,  planted  the 
gospel  in  the  year  1832,  and  laboured  with  great  success  for 
seven  months.  Here  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  of  the 
United  States  has  a  mission,  and  I  have  been  informed  that 
the  American  Board  of  Missions  conducted  by  the  Presby 
terians  have  also  missions  near  this  bay  and  at  Fond  du  Lac. 

The  principal  rivers  which  flow  into  Lake  Superior  are 
St.  Louis  at  its  western  extremity,  Nipigon,  Black  river, 
Walibeshkah,  Michipicoton,  Montreal,  Carp,  Garlicky  Ontona- 
gon,  Monvaise,  Bois  Brule.  This  great  lake  has  its  outlet  in 

*  The  Ojebway  name  is  Ojebway  Kechegahme. 


LAKE   SUPERIOR.  41 

Lake  Huron  by  the  river  or  straits  of  St.  Marie,  called  by 
the  Ojebways  Bahwetig,  or  the  Falls,  because  near  the  com 
mencement  of  this  river  is  the  Sault  or  Falls  of  St.  Marie. 
These  falls  are  not  perpendicular,  but  form  a  rapid  of 
about  a  mile  in  length,  in  which  distance  there  is  a  descent 
of  about  twenty  feet. 

The  Sault  St.  Marie  is  a  famous  place  for  white  fish,  which 
are  caught  in  great  abundance  by  the  Indians,  and  are 
most  delicate  and  delicious  food.  Opposite  the  Sault,  on 
the  north  side,  is.  a  mission  station,  under  the  care  of  the 
Church  of  England.  The  Rev.  W.  M'Murray,*  the  mis 
sionary  stationed  there,  is  an  excellent  and  pious  man, 
whose  labours  have  been  much  blessed  among  the  poor 
Indians.  His  wife  is  an  Indian  lady,  daughter  of  the  late 
Mr.  Johnson,  who  married  a  Chippeway  woman,  and  re 
sided  at  Sault  St.  Marie.  Here  is  also  an  establishment  of 
the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.  On  the  American  side  is 
Fort  Brady,  where  a  few  troops  are  stationed.  The  Ame 
rican  Baptist  Board  of  Missions  have  for  a  long  time  had 
a  station  at  this  place,  and  have  been  instrumental  in 
making  some  converts  and  educating  several  of  the  Indian 
children.  A  short  distance  below  Fort  Brady,  the  Metho 
dist  Episcopal  fchurch  of  the  W.  S.  have  also  a  mission, 
where  a  number  of  the  Ojebways  are  settled  in  log-houses, 
and  are  faithful  members  of  the  society.  These  converts 
were  first  visited  and  taught  in  the  Christian  religion  by 
John  Sunday  and  other  native  teachers. 

Soon  after  leaving  the  Sault,  islands  of  various  sizes 
begin  to  multiply,  which  increase  in  number  as  you  travel 
towards  the  waters  of  Lake  Huron.  At  the  outlet  of 
this  strait  is  the  island  of  St.  Joseph,  of  considerable  mag 
nitude,  and  capable,  I  am  informed,  of  producing  wheat, 

*  Now  (1860)  Hector  of  Niagara. 


42  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

potatoes,  and  other  vegetables.  Near  this  island  is  that  of 
St.  Drummond's,  where  the  British  formerly  had  a  fort ; 
but  it  is  now  entirely  forsaken,  and  the  buildings  are  gone 
to  ruin.  So  long  as  a  military  establishment  was  kept 
up  there,  it  was  a  place  of  general  resort  for  the  various 
tribes  of  Indians  from  Superior,  Huron,  Michigan,  and  Green 
Bay,  who  went  there  to  receive  the  Government  presents. 

LAKE   HURON. 

This  lake,  next  in  size  tor  Superior,  is  about  270  miles 
from  the  River  St.  Clair  to  the  Island  of  Mackinaw,  and 
about  150  at  its  greatest  breadth  ;  it  is  nearly  1,100  miles 
in  circumference.  The  principal  bays  in  this  noble  sheet  of 
water  are  the  Georgian,  Gloster,  Nahdoowasahge,  and 
Sangenah.  It  is  said  that  there  are  3,000  islands  on  the 
north  shore  of  this  lake,  of  different  shapes  and  sizes  ;  most 
of  them  are  composed  of  granite,  with  trees  of  evergreen 
growing  from  the  interstices  of  the  rocks,  while  others  are 
entirely  barren. 

Next  to  the  stupendous  Falls  of  Niagara,  I  think  these 
islands  present  to  the  eye  of  the  traveller  one  of  the  most 
wild  and  romantic  scenes  imaginable.  Some  of  them, 
towering  far  above  the  rest,  are  barren  and*  rugged ;  others 
beautifully  wooded,  with  the  diversified  foliage  of  the  cedar, 
pine,  and  spruce.  When  on  the  lake,  you  see  them  stretch 
ing  in  the  distance  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  with  swarms 
of  gulls  and  ducks  flying  about.  The  channels  and  bays  are 
so  numerous  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  person  unaccustomed 
to  their  windings  to  find  his  way ;  even  those  who  are  in 
the  habit  of  traversing  them  often  go  astray.  I  have  never 
taken  this  route  without  a  guide  well  acquainted  with  the 
coast ;  but  with  this  precaution  we  have  sometimes  found 
ourselves  penned  up  in  a  bay,  and  been  obliged  to  make 
our  way  back  again. 


LAKE   HURON.  43 

The  La  Croche  mountains,  on  the  main  shore,  which 
almost  form  islands,  project  over  the  waters  of  the  lake  in 
awful  grandeur ;  being  principally  composed  of  white  flint 
rock,  when  viewed  from  a  distance  they  have  all  the  ap 
pearance  of  snow-capped  mountains.  It  is  on  these  moun 
tains  the  poor  superstitious  Indians  say  the  thunder-gods, 
or  eagles,  have  their  abode,  and  hatch  their  young.  The 
great  and  little  Manitoulin  Islands  lie  stretched  along  the 
lake,  as  if  the  father  and  mother  of  the  thousands  of  small 
ones,  whom  they  seemed  formed  to  protect  from  the  bois 
terous  waves  of  the  Huron.  These  two  islands  are  in 
general  barren,  and  destitute  of  game.  The  Colonial  Go 
vernment  have  made  an  attempt  to  locate  the  scattering 
tribes  of  Indians  in  Upper  Canada  on  the  great  Mani 
toulin  Island  ;*  but,  on  account  of  many  disadvantages,  the 
Indians  in  general  have  refused  to  settle  on  it.  Some  of 
the  Ottawa  Indians  have  made  attempts  at  improvements  on 
this  island,  and  have  grown  a  few  potatoes  and  some  Indian 
corn.  The  government  have  also  commenced  an  establish 
ment,  where  the  annual  presents  are  issued  to  such  Indians 
as  may  come  for  them. 

The  wonderful  works  of  nature  displayed  in  these  islands 
show  forth  the*power  and  greatness  of  their  Creator,  and 
lead  us  to  exclaim,  "  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works ; 
in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all !" 

Scarcely  one  in  a  hundred  of  these  islands  is  capable  of 
cultivation,  therefore  in  their  present  rude  and  wild  magni 
ficence  they  must  remain,  till  all  nature  be  put  to  confusion, 
and  the  elements  melt  away  with  fervent  heat,  The  rivers 
which  empty  themselves  into  Lake  Huron  are  French 
JRiver,Moon,  Severn,  Coldwater,  Nahdoowasahgee,  Sahgeeng, 
Maitland,  Auxsable,  Bayfield,  Sagana,  Thunder,  Messissauge, 

*  Properly,  Manedoomini — the  Spirit  Island. 


44  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

Spanish,  and  several  others  of  less  note.  There  are  several 
excellent  fisheries  on  this  lake ;  the  most  noted  is  that  near 
Sahgeeng  river,  along  the  east  shore.  The  principal  fish 
caught  are  the  salmon  trout,  of  enormous  size,  white  fish, 
herring,  bass,  sturgeon,  pickerell,  pike,  mullet,  sheephead^ 
which  form  the  chief  food  of  the  Indians  along  the  coast  of 
these  lakes.  The  soil  on  the  north  shore  is  very  rocky,  and 
therefore  unfit  for  cultivation,  and  I  have  been  informed  by 
Indian  hunters  that  this  rocky  country  extends  a  long 
distance  into  the  interior.  On  the  eastern  shore  the  land 
is  in  general  good  and  capable  of  producing  excellent  crops 
of  wheat,  oats,  potatoes,  turnips,  &c.,  especially  from  the 
Sahgeeng  to  the  outlet  of  the  lake.  The  south-west  shore 
is  also  rather  stony  and  swampy,  which  will  retard  the 
settlement  in  that  quarter.  About  Sagana  Bay  I  have  been 
informed  there  is  some  good  land,  which  will  no  doubt 
speedily  be  settled  by  Americans,  in  whose  dominions  it  is 
situated. 

LAKE  MICHIGAN. 

This  lake  is  an  arm  of  Lake  Huron,  joined  by  the  Straits 
of  Mackinaw.  Its  course  from  Mackinaw  is  south-west ;  it 
is  about  300  miles  in  length,  and  eighty-fivfc  at  its  greatest 
breadth  ;  circumference  about  1000.  The  principal  bay  in 
this  lake  is  situated  on  the  west  side,  and  is  called  Green 
Bay,  ninety  miles  long  and  about  thirty-five  broad.  At  the 
head  of  this  bay  the  Oneida  Indians  from  the  State  of  New 
York  have  formed  a  settlement,  and  there  is  a  mission 
station  among  them.  On  the  east  is  Grand  Traverse  Bay. 

The  rivers  which  flow  into  this  lake  are  Grand  Traverse, 
Belisis,  Sandy,  Kallemazo,  Grand,  Calumot,  Milwarkie, 
Menoominee,  and  Fox. 

The  islands  in  this  lake  are  few  in  number ;  the  most 


LAKE   MICHIGAN.  45 

celebrated  is  that  of  Meslienemahkenoong  (the  Great  Turtle,) 
commonly  called  Michilimackinack,  or  Mackinaw.  This 
island  is  well  situated  for  a  fort,  and  is  noted  on  account  of 
there  being  a  military  establishment  on  it;  and  also  as  being 
the  great  depot  of  the  American  Fur  Company.  There  are 
many  romantic  spots  on  this  island;  one  curious  natural 
wonder  is  the  stone  arch  and  cap. 

The  following  interesting  description  of  a  visit  to  this 
island  in  July,  1851,  is  give?}  by  the  author  in  a  private 
letter : — "  We  landed  this  morning  at  Mackinaw,  which 
place  has  greatly  improved  since  I  was  here  twenty-five 
years  ago.  The  village  contains  about  8,000  inhabitants.  lam 
luxuriating  on  delicious  white  fish  every  day.  After  dinner 
a  party  of  us  sallied  forth  to  see  the  wonders  of  the  Island. 
We  first  went  through  a  forest  to  see  the  Arch  Rock,  which 
hangs  over  a  precipice  of  100  feet  or  more,  forming  a 
natural  bridge.  Some  daring  ones  walk  over  the  arch,  but 
to  look  at  it  was  enough  for  me.  It  spans  about  forty  feet, 
and  is  second  only  to  the  natural  bridge  in  Virginia.  We 
then  wandered  through  the  thicket  to  the  Harm's  Foot, 
which  stands  on  the  highest  part  of  the  island,  from  whence 
is  presented  a  splendid  view  of  the  lakes  and  islands  far  and 
near.  From  thence  we  proceeded  to  see  the  Sugar  Loaf 
Rock  which  rises  out  of  the  earth  some  thirty  feet  from  its 
base,  like  a  large  turtle  lifting  its  head ;  from  which  I  have 
no  doubt  the  Indians  gave  the  name  of  the  island 
MeshenemaJikenoong,  or  the  Great  Turtle.  From  thence  we 
went  to  see  the  Skull  Cave,  where  a  trader  was  concealed  by 
an  Indian  when  the  British  troops  were  massacred  by  the 
Indians.  The  account  is  in  one  of  our  Indian  narratives. 
The  cave  is  now  nearly  filled  up  with  fallen  stones.  There  is 
another  object  of  curiosity,  called  the  Lover's  Rock,  but  we 
were  too  fatigued  to  go  and  see  it Towards 


46  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

evening  I  met  a  few  Indians  in  a  tent  by  the  beach,  to 
whom  I  conversed  on  religion,  gave  some  advice,  &e.  One 
of  them  said  he  was  converted  to  Christianity  at  the  camp 
meeting  dear  Charles  and  I  attended  at  Lake  Superior, 
and  that  he  was  still  holding  on  in  the  good  way.  The 
rest  were  pagans.  They  stated  they  resided  on  the  shores 
of  Lake  Michigan,  and  that  there  were  a  number  of  Indians 

o        / 

in  that  vicinity,  most  of  whom  were  anxious  to  receive 
religious  instruction,  and  hail  been  waiting  a  long  time 
for  a  missionary  to  come  among  them.  I  pitied  them  from 
the  bottom  of  my  heart.  O,  ye  Christians  of  Britain, 
Canada,  and  the  United  States,  will  ye  suffer  these  immortal 
souls  to  perish  for  the  lack  of  knowledge !  If  it  be  true 
that  one  soul  is  of  more  value  than  ten  thousand  worlds 
like  this,  why  then  not  care  for  these  poor  perishing  souls, 
though  they  may  be  few  in  number  ?  O  Lord,  raise  up 
more  labourers,  for  the  harvest  is  truly  great,  and  souls  are 
perishing !" 

The  American  Board  of  Missions  have  for  a  long  time  had 
a  station  on  this  island,  and  have  educated  several  of  the 
Indian  youths,  especially  the  half-breeds.  Many  of  the 
traders  under  the  employ  of  the  American  Fur  Company 
have  taken  wives  from  this  school,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
that  the  religious  instructions  there  received  will  not  be  lost, 
but  that  they  will  infuse  the  savour  of  the  Gospel  among 
their  Indian  brethren  wherever  their  lot  may  be  cast. 

The  land  around  this  lake  is  in  general  of  a  good  quality, 
especially  about  the  south  shore,  near  which  stands  the 
city  of  Chicago,  the  landing-place  of  the  thousands  of 
emigrants  who  are  bending  their  way  to  the  far  west. 

Lakes  Huron  and  Michigan  forming  the  same  sheet  of 
water,  empty  themselves  into  Lake  St.  Clair,  flowing  about 
thirty  miles  down  the  beautiful  river  St.  Clair.  The  channel 


ST.    CLAIR.  47 

at  the  outlet  of  Huron  is  rather  narrow,  not  more  than  a 
musket-shot  from  one  side  to  the  other ;  near  this  is  Fort 
Gratiot  on  the  American  coast,  and  on  the  Canadian  shore 
is  the  St.  Clair  Mission.  Approaching  nearer  the  lake  it 
forms  itself  into  various  channels,  which  cause  a  number  of 
islands;  on  some  of  these  the  Indians  plant,  and  find 
pasture  for  their  cattle. 

ST.  CLAIE. 

This  is  a  small  lake,  called  by  the  Ojebways  Wahiceyah- 
tahnoong,  (the  Round  Lake,)  so  named  from  its  shape.  It  is 
about  thirty  miles  in  diameter. 

The  rivers  which  flow  into  this  lake  are  the  Thames, 
called  by  the  Indians  Aslikalmesebe,  (the  Horn  River,)  from 
its  resemblance  in  shape  to  the  deer's  horns.  Bear  Creek 
also  empties  into  this  lake. 

The  country  around  is  in  many  parts  very  low  and 
marshy,  yet  the  soil  is  good  and  productive. 

At  the  south  extremity  of  this  lake  commences  the 
noble  river  Detroit,  reaching  about  thirty  miles,  when  its 
waters  empty  themselves  into  Lake  Erie.  4 The  banks  of  this 
river  are  well  settled  by  French  and  other  inhabitants,  who 
possess  extensive  farms  and  have  planted  large  orchards. 
On  its  west  side  stands  the  city  of  Detroit,  and  opposite  the 
little  village  of  Sandwich.  Near  the  outlet  of  this  river  is 
the  town  of  Amherstburg,  a  short  distance  north  of  which 
is  an  Indian  settlement  of  the  Huron  or  Wyandot  tribe. 
Some  of  these  people  adhere  to  the  Roman  Catholic 
religion,  and  others  to  the  Methodist  doctrines. 

Amherstburg  is  the  most  southern  point  of  Canada.  The 
climate  is  favourable  for  the  growth  of  almost  all  kinds  of 
grain  and  vegetables.  Tobacco  flourishes  well  here,  and 
the  farmers  raise  large  quantities  of  it  for  market. 


48  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

LAKE   ERIE.      . 

The  Indians  call  this  lake  Wahbeshkegoo-Kechegahme,  (the 
WJiite  Water  Lake).  It  is  so  named  from  its  colour,  in 
contra-distinction  to  the  beautiful  green  and  blue  waters- 
of  the  upper  lakes.  It  is  about  250  miles  in  length,  and 
60  in  breadth.  Its  course  is  east  and  west. 

The  rivers  which  flow  into  this  lake  are  the  Grand 
River,  or  Ouse,  on  the  banksrof  which  are  settled  the  Six 
Nations  of  Indians,  the  Moumee,  and  Raisen.  On  either 
side  it  is  well  settled  by  white  people,  and  the  soil,  on  the 
whole,  is  very  good  for  agricultural  pursuits. 

There  are  several  villages  scattered  along  the  vicinity  of 
this  lake.  The  city  of  Buffalo  stands  on  the  east  side,  and 
Cleveland  on  the  south  shore.  The  enormous  western  and 
northern  supplies  of  Lake  Erie  flow  down  the  celebrated 
River  Niagara,  and,  as  they  approach  the  stupendous 
cataract,  come  dashing  and  foaming  against  immoveable 
rocks  for  several  miles  before  they  reach  the  awful  precipice 
over  which  they  fall  thundering  into  the  chasm  beneath : 
thence  they  flow  juto  Lake  Ontario.  On  the  west  side  of 
the  lake  there  are  several  islands.  Above  the  Falls  is  the 
largest  one,  called  Grand  Island  ;  and  another  called  Navy 
Island,  which  has  lately  become  notorious  on  account  of 
the  rebels  from  Canada  and  the  vagabonds  of  the  United 
States  making  it  their  head-quarters.  It  is  only  a  small 
swampy  spot,  and  would  not,  in  all  probability,  have  come- 
into  notice  but  for  the  above-mentioned  circumstance. 

The  Chippeway  River  empties  itself  into  the  Niagara, 
a  few  miles  above  the  Falls,  on  the  site  of  which  is  the 
village  of  Chippeway.  The  word  Niagara  is  Mohawk,  but 
is  pronounced  by  the  natives  Oo-noo-nah-gah-rah. 

The    Ojebways   call    the  falls  Kahkejewung,  the  Water 


NIAGARA.  49 

Falls.  At  the  mouth  of  the  Niagara  river  is  the  town  of 
Niagara,  containing  a  large  population.  It  is  quite  evident 
that  the  falls  had  their  existence  in  the  first  place  at 
Queenston  Heights,  about  seven  miles  below  their  present 
situation  ;  and  that  they  have  been  receding  imperceptibly 
in  that  direction  ever  since  the  flood,  and  will  continue  so 
to  do,  there  is  no  doubt,  as  the  weight  of  water  and  the 
immense  masses  of  ice  which  tumble  over  the  rock  are 
constantly  wearing  it  away. 

LAKE   ONTARIO. 

This  is  a  fine  sheet  of  water,  about  200  miles  long  and 
50  broad.  Its  course  is  nearly  east  and  west.  Circum 
ference  about  500  miles.  The  principal  rivers  besides  the 
mighty  Niagara  which  run  into  Ontario  are  the  Credit, 
Nappane,  Black,  Oswego,  and  Genesee.  In  several  of  these 
.most  excellent  salmon  are  caught. 

The  bays  are  Burlington  at  the  head  of  the  lake, 
separated  from  the  main  lake  by  a  narrow  sandy  beach,  on 
which  grow  scattering  oak  trees  and  wild  grape  vines.  The 
Bay  of  Quinty  is  on  the  north  side  of  the  east  end  of  the 
lake.  Grape  Island  Mission  was  on  tilis  bay,  but  the 
Indians  are  no^  removed  to  the  township  of  Alnwick. 

At  the  east  end  of  Ontario  commences  the  well-known 
river  St.  Lawrence,  which  flows  into  the  Atlantic  Ocean, 
where  the  waters  of  these  immense  lakes  and  their 
numerous  supplies  are  lost  in  the  briny  deep  of  the  Gulf 
of  St.  Lawrence.  The  river  Ottawa  runs  into  it  near 
Montreal,  also  St.  Maurice,  Chandiere,  St.  Francis,  Richelieu, 
St.  Regis,  and  Oswegatche. 

All  these  lakes,  and  their  connecting  rivers,  are  navigable 
for  the  largest  ships  and  steamboats.  During  the  summer 
seasons  Ontario  and  Erie  present  very  busy  scenes  of  com- 

E 


50  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

merce,  with  first-rate  steamboats  and  schooners  constantly 
plying  up  and  down  their  noble  waters.  Besides  the  great 
lakes  already  mentioned,  there  are  a  number  of  less  note, 
such  as  Rice  Lake,  Simcoe,  about  thirty  miles  in  diameter, 
Nippissing,  Nipigon,  Rainy  Lake,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba, 
Mud  Lake,  Sturgeon,  Pigeon,  and  Balsom. 

MOUNTAINS. 

There  are  but  few  mountains  in  the  range  of  the  Ojebway 
country.  The  principal  oner'  is  that  which  stretches  round 
the  head  waters  of  Lake  Ontario,  and  over  which  the 
waters  of  the  upper  lakes  precipitate  with  awful  grandeur 
into  the  bosom  of  Ontario,  forming  Niagara  Falls.  The 
scenery  from  this  mountain  at  Queenston  Heights  is  ex 
ceedingly  grand,  presenting  to  the  eye  in  panoramic  beauty 
the  extensive  waters  of  Lake  Ontario,  the  noble  Niagara 
river,  winding  its  way  through  high  banks,  clothed  in  the 
richest  foliage,  the  wild  forest  and  the  cultivated  farm,  with 
here  and  there  a  town  or  village,  showing  that  prosperity 
and  comfort  are  rewarding  the  industry  of  the  old  settler 
and  the  emigrant. 

At  the  head  \\Saters  of  Lake  Ontario  this  mountain  takes 
a  majestic  curve,  presenting  a  landscape  soi\iewhat  different, 
but  not  less  grand.  Immediately  beneath,  inclosed  as  it  were 
in  a  crescent,  is  the  city  of  Hamilton ;  beyond  stretches 
the  lovely  Burlington  Bay,  separated  from  the  lake  by  a 
narrow  sandy  beach  of  six  miles  long.  When  the  late 
Captain  Joseph  Brant,  and  my  father,  Augustus  Jones,  had 
the  whole  country  to  choose  from,  Captain  B.  selected  a 
tract  of  land  at  the  north-west  end  of  the  beach,  built  a 
large  frame-house,  where  he  lived  with  his  family;  and  my 
father,  choosing  the  other  extremity,  settled  his  family 
on  the  opposite  side.  The  two  families  were  constantly 


CANADIAN   SCENERY.  51 

crossing  this  sandy  beach,  living  on  friendly  terms  with 
each  other.  I  think,  without  exception,  this  part  of 
Canada  outvies  ah1  others  I  have  visited,  as  regards  the 
beauty  of  its  scenery,  the  quality  of  its  land,  the  high  state 
of  cultivation,  and  the  local  advantages  it  has  for  carrying 
on  trade.  Perhaps  I  may  be  partial  in  my  judgment,  as  it 
was  on  the  romantic  Burlington  Heights  I  first  drew  my 
breath,  and,  in  my  youthful  days,  was  accustomed  to 
traverse  the  shores  of  its  clear  waters  in  the  light  birch- 
bark  canoe ;  here  I  ranged  the  forest,  and  shot  many  a 
partridge,  squirrel,  and  pigeon,  where  now  may  be  seen 
the  fine  brick  or  stone  house,  and  the  productive  farm  of 
the  white  man.  Here  also  I  used  to  climb  the  mountain, 
and,  after  reaching  the  summit,  indulge  myself  in  viewing 
the  country  and  waters  below,  till  I  would  feel  reluctant  to 
quit  a  spot  so  charming  and  attractive. 

CLIMATE  AND    SOIL. 

The  Canadian  climate  in  general  is  clear,  pure,  and  dry; 
the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold  are  great ;  the  thermometer, 
in  summer,  often  rising  to  120  degrees,  and,  in  winter, 
falling  to  20  degrees  and  sometimes  30  decrees  below  zero. 
Snow  often  falls*  in  November,  and  continues  on  the  ground 
till  April ;  the  depth  of  snow  varies  in  diiferent  parts ; 
along  the  shores  of  Lakes  Ontario,  Erie,  and  St.  Clair,  it 
seldom  falls  over  two  feet,  whereas  further  north  it  is  often 
three  or  four  feet ;  persons  much  exposed  during  the  ex 
treme  cold  weather  are  often  frost-bitten.  Spring  sets  in 
suddenly,  and  the  extreme  heat  of  summer  causes  vegetation 
to  spring  up  rapidly;  the  autumns  are  lovely,  and  the 
foliage  splendid;  I  have  often  thought  a  correct  repre 
sentation  of  one  tree  would,  by  persons  who  had  never  seen 
such  foliage,  be  considered  unnatural  and  exaggerated. 

E2 


52  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

The  winters  are  far  more  healthy  than  the  summers,  when 
fevers  are  prevalent  in  many  parts. 

Along  the  chain  of  the  great  lakes  the  soil  and  cliniate  is 
in  general  well  adapted  for  the  growth  of  winter  and  spring 
wheat,  rye,  oats,  peas,  barley,  Indian  corn,  potatoes,  tur 
nips,  melons,  &c.  The  country  on  the  north  shore  of  Lakes 
Huron  and  Superior  is  unfit  for  cultivation,  excepting  now 
and  then  small  spots,  as  these  parts  abound  with  rocks  and 
cold  cedar  swamps.  All  vegetables  that  grow  in  the  open 
fields  in  England  thrive  in  Western  Canada,  especially  in  the 
southern  parts ;  apple,  pear,  and  plum  trees  are  cultivated 
to  great  advantage.  Peaches  are  grown  on  the  south  shore 
of  Lake  Ontario,  and  as  far  as  to  the  head  waters  of  Erie. 
The  tobacco  plant  grows  in  the  vicinity  of  Lakes  St.  Clair  and 
Erie,  and  petroit  river ;  currants  and  gooseberries  do  well 
in  most  places ;  grapes  may  be  raised  in  the  open  air  in 
southern  parts,  but  require  care  to  preserve  them  from  the 
severe  frosts  of  winter.  I  sowed  in  my  garden  a  number 
of  flower-seeds  sent  me  by  a  kind  friend  from  England, 
nearly  all  of  which  flowered  beautifully ;  they  were  much 
admired  by  the  Indians,  who  said  they  far  surpassed  theirs 
on  account  of  their  scent.  Many  American  wild  flowers 
have  to  be  raised  in  hot-houses  in  England. 

Western  Canada,  as  regards  agriculture,  is  decidedly  the 
garden  of  Her  Majesty's  possessions  in  North  America ;  the 
rivers  and  lakes  affording  great  facilities  for  carrying  on 
extensive  trade  and  commerce.  Most  of  the  settlers  in  this 
part  of  the  country  have  risen  to  affluence  and  respectability 
by  the  industrious  cultivation  of  their  farms,  and  it  is  truly 
pleasing  to  observe  their  gradual  ascent  from  the  shanty 
to  the  brick  or  stone  house.  On  many  farms  you  may  still 
see  the  humble  log  house,  their  first  dwelling-place  in  the 
wilderness,  where  they  have  spent  many  a  long  and  dreary 


THE   EARLY   SETTLERS.  53 

clay  in  subduing  the  forest ;  and  after  the  hard  toils  of  six 
days'  work  were  over,  and  the  axe  no  longer  heard  to  echo 
through  the  dreary  woods,  no  cheerful  sound  of  the  church- 
going  bell -would  salute  their  ear,  to  remind  them  that  the 
sacred  Sabbath  had  returned,  and  summon  them  away  from 
earthly  toil  and  care  to  spend  its  hallowed  hours  in  the  courts 
of  the  Lord's  house.  They  could  not  say  with  the  poet — 

"Dear  is  the  hallow'd  morn  to  me 

When  village  bells  awake  the  day, 
And  by  their  sacred  minstrelsy 

Call  me  from  earthly  cares  away. 

"  And  dear  to  me  the  winged  hour 
Spent  in  Thy  hallow'd  courts,  0  Lord, 

To  feel  devotion's  soothing  power, 
And  catch  the  manna  of  Thy  word." 

Yet,  no  doubt,  many  pious  souls  who  had  not  forgotten 
the  Sabbath  privileges  of  their  native  land  would  unite  their 
voices  even  in  the  solemn  stillness  of  a  Canadian  forest — 

"And  there,  like  incense,  softly  rose 

The  strains  of  prayer  and  praise, 
And  broke  the  Sabbath-like  repose 

With  soft  harmonious  lays. 

"  And  oft  as  evening's  purple  shade 
*     Was  lost  in  twilight  dim, 
Together  in  the  forest  glade 

They  sang  their  evening  hymn." 

The  method  pursued  by  a  new  settler  to  clear  his  farm 
is,  first  to  cut  down  all  the  under-brush,  which  he  piles 
into  heaps  ;  he  then  begins  to  fell  the  trees,  and  to  cut  them 
into  such  lengths  as  may  be  drawn  by  one  or  two  yoke  of 
oxen.  The  limbs  are  next  cut  off,  and  carefully  thrown 
into  heaps.  After  he  has  gone  through  as  much  land  as 
he  wishes  to  clear,  which  is  called  a  fallow,  he  leaves  it 
lying  during  the  summer  for  the  purpose  of  drying,  and 
then  about  the  month  of  August  sets  it  on  fire,  which  runs 


54  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

through  the  whole  ground,  burning  up  all  the  leaves,  rub 
bish,  and  limbs.  After  the  fire  has  done  its  first  execution, 
the  settler  makes  a  bee,  inviting  a  number  of  his  neighbours 
to  come  and  help  him  log  and  pile  the  large  timber  which 
the  fire  did  not  consume.  The  party  commences  by  several 
yoke  of  oxen  drawing  the  logs  together  to  various  parts  of 
the  ground,  which  are  then  piled  up  by  means  of  hand 
spikes  ;  a  dozen  men  will  in  this  way  log  several  acres  a 
day.  After  these  logs  are  nicely  heaped  they  are  set  on  fire, 
and  by  a  little  attention  in  rolling  the  brands  together  the 
whole  of  the  timber  is  soon  burnt  up.  On  these  occasions 
all  work  without  wages  ;  a  dinner  is  provided,  and  the  owner 
of  the  land  too  often  provides  plenty  of  fire-water  with  which 
to  treat  his  friends.  The  next  thing  done  is  to  save  the 
ashes,  which  are  drawn  off  the  ground  and  put  into  a  dry 
place  till  winter,  when  he  takes  them  to  the  manufacturers 
of  pot  or  pearl  ashes.  He  next  drags  or  harrows  the  ground 
two  or  three  times  before  he  sows  it  with  wheat;  which 
done,  it  is  harrowed  two  or  three  times  more ;  this  com 
pletes  the  sowing.  He  next  sets  to  work  to  make  rails 
from  such  timber  ss  is  easily  split,  which  he  hauls  round 
his  field  and  then  lays  up  in  a  zigzag  manner,  so  as  to  form 
a  fence  five  or  six  feet  high ;  such  a  fence  will  keep  out  all 
cattle  and  pigs.  The  stumps  of  the  trees  cut  down  in  the 
fallow  are  left  standing  about  three  feet  above-ground, 
where  they  remain  till  they  rot  out,  which  generally  takes 
ten  or  more  years.  Wheat  sown  in  September  or  October 
remains  all  the  winter  under  the  snow. 

NATURAL   PRODUCTIONS. 

The  Canadian  forests  consist  in  certain  parts  of  immense 
tall  groves  of  pine,  with  other  trees  intermingled.  In  some 
districts  the  forests  abound  with  oak,  elm  bass-wood, 


NATTJKAL   PRODUCTIONS.  55 

white-wood,  walnut,  hickory,  butter-nut,  slippery  elm, 
poplar,  sassafras,  and  dogwood.  In  other  parts,  especially 
in  the  north,  the  land  is  covered  with  sugar  maple,  beech, 
birch,  ash,  hemlock,  and  ironwood.  In  low  swampy 
ground  grow  spruce  firs  of  various  species,  willow,  alder, 
water  ash,  bird's-eye  maple,  cedar,  larch,  and  sycamore, 
commonly  called  button-wood.  The  wild  fruit  trees  are 
several  kinds  of  wild  plums,  crab  apple,  thorn,  cherry, 
elder,  and  bush  cranberry.  Many  of  the  small  lakes  yield 
plentiful  supplies  of  wild  rice,  which  the  Indians  gather  in 
great  abundance,  in  the  autumn,  and  make  into  soup.  The 
woods  and  prairies  abound  with  blackberries,  huckleberries, 
strawberries,  raspberries,  gooseberries,  black  currants,  wild 
grapes,  and  marsh  cranberries.  There  is  a  root  resembling 
in  shape  and  taste  the  West  India  sweet  potato.  This 
serves  for  food,  and  grows  in  rich  black  soil.  It  is  com 
monly  called  ground  nut.  There  is  another  plant  called 
wahbezeepin,  or  the  swan  potato,  found  in  bogs  or  marshy 
soil.  The  Indians  boil  and  eat  it  in  cases  of  extreme 
hunger.  Another  root  sometimes  eaten  by  them  is  called 
oduhpin.  It 'is  long,  white,  and  tender,  and  has  a  warm, 
pungent  taste.  ^  But  of  all  the  natural  productions  mundah- 
min  (the  Indian  corn  or  maize)  is  the  most  valued  by  the 
Indians ;  of  which  the  following  tradition,  related  to  me  by 
Chief  Netahgawinene,  of  Cold  Water,  will  show.  Many 
winters  ago  the  Great  Spirit  appeared  to  one  of  our  wise 
forefathers,  and  showed  him  a  plant  of  the  mundahmin,  or 
Indian  corn,  on  which  grew  two  ears.  The  Great  Spirit 
then  told  him  to  preserve  the  two  ears  until  the  next 
spring,  when  he  was  to  plant  them.  He  was  further  com 
manded  to  preserve  the  whole  crop,  and  send  two  ears  to 
each  of  the  surrounding  nations,  with  the  injunction  that 
they  were  not  to  eat  of  it  until  the  third  crop.  The  wise 


56  INDIAN   LOCALITIES. 

Indian  did  as  he  was  commanded.     His  corn  grew  strong 
and  brought  forth  much.     The  next  summer  he  enlarged 
his  ground,  and  planted  all  his  seed,  which  yielded  plenti 
fully.     He  then  sent  two  ears  to  each  of  the  surrounding 
tribes,  with  proper  directions,  which  they  observed,  and  by 
this  means  the  corn  was  distributed  among  all  the  American 
Indians.     It  is  considered  by  them  the  best  grain  in  the 
world,  because  the  Great  Spirit  gave  it  to  them  for  their 
bread.     Pounded  parched  corn  and  pemegun  is  the  cele 
brated  food  for  warriors  and  travellers  in  the  western  and 
northern  countries.     The  Great  Spirit  about  this  time  is 
also  said  to  have  given  the  Indian  the  tobacco  plant,  that 
he  might  smoke  the  pipe  of  peace  with  his  fellows,  and 
cause  the  smoke  of  the  calumet  to  ascend  to  the  Great 
Spirit  as  sweet  incense.   The  prairies  and  woodlands  present 
a  splendid  appearance  during  the  summer  months,  from  the 
endless  variety  of  beautiful  wild  flowers  which,  bursting 
forth  in   succession,   display  the   most    brilliant    colours, 
although  they  have  little  or  no  fragrance.     I  have  often 
been  led  into  delightful  contemplation  of  the  goodness  ancj 
power  of  the  Supreme,  when  traversing  the  mighty  forests, 
contrasting  the  sombre  foliage  of  the  trees  with  the  delicate 
yet  brilliant  hues  of  the  wild  flowers  which  deck,  like  so 
many  gems,  the  green  verdure  beneath,  and  I  have  been 
led  in  admiration  and  gratitude  to  exclaim,  "My  Father 
made  them  all !" 


THE        RIPPLING        STREAM 

(OMUDDWAJ    ECOONOQUA.) 


.   CHAPTER    IV. 

GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

Treatment  of  the  -women  by  the  men-rCharacter  of  women — General  descrip 
tion — Education  of  children — Family  government — Treatment  of  the  aged 
• — Cannibalism. 

CONSIDERING  the  manners  of  life,  dress,  and  habits  of 
the  North  American  Indians,  it  may  be  said  that  they  are 
a  moral  people.  This  was  strikingly  characteristic  of  them 
before  they  were  contaminated  by  unprincipled  European 
adventurers,  who  introduced  the  fire-waters  and  many  vices 
amongst  them.  In  their  original  state  they  were  generally 
true  to  each  other,  and  as  moral  as  a  people  unrenewed 
by  Divine  grace  could  be  expected  to  be.  It  is  true  the 
depraved  nature  in  them  is  as  strong  as  it  is  in  other 
nations  ;  but  the  good  counsel  of  the  wise  sachems,  and  the 
mark  of  disgrace  put  upon  unruly  persons,  had  a  very 
desirable  influence. 

They  are  naturally  suspicious,  revengeful,  stoical,*  and 
indolent.  In  time  of  peace  they  are  land  and  hospitable 
to  each  other,  particularly  to  strangers,  with  whom  they 
will  divide  the  last  morsel  of  food.  "Hospitality,"  says 
Morse,  "  is  a  prominent  trait  in  the  Indian  character.  To 
the  stranger,  whether  white  or  red,  they  are  hospitable  and 
generous,  furnishing  the  best  food  and  accommodation 
their  dwellings  afford,  often  relinquishing  their  own 

*  Appendix  E. 


58  GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

for  the  refreshment  and  comfort  of  the  stranger.*  When 
aroused,  however,  to  take  up  the  tomahawk,  vengeance 
sparkles  in  their  eyes.  They  have  a  high  sense  of 
honour,  and  like  to  be  thought  good,  kind,  and  brave. 
Carver  says,  "  In  danger  they  readily  give  assistance 
to  those  of  their  band  who  stand  in  need  of  it,  without 
any  expectation  of  return,  except  of  those  just  rewards 
that  are  always  conferred  by  the  Indians  on  merit." 

Their  indolence  leads  them, to  be  very  improvident;  the 
thought  of  laying  up  a  store  of  provisions  beforehand 
seems  never  to  enter  their  minds ;  but  so  long  as  they  have 
anything  to  eat,  they  will  lounge  about  and  sleep,  and 
never  think  of  hunting  till  hunger  presses  them  to  go  in 
search  of  game.  They  spend  their  time  when  in  their 
villages  or  wigwams,  in  smoking,  making  their  implements 


*  Mr.  Harmon,  a  clerk  of  the  North- West  Company,  who  resided  in  the 
Indian  country  for  many  years,  remarks  on  Indian  hospitality  : — "  February 
llth,  1801.  On  the  1st  instant,  accompanied  by  eight  of  our  people,  and 
one  of  the  natives  as  a  guide,  I  set  off,  with  a  small  assortment  of 
goods,  to  go  and  trade  with  about  fifty  families  of  Crees  and  Assiniboins. 
When  we  had  approached  within  about  a  mile  of  the  camp  of  the  natives, 
ten  or  twelve  of  their  chiefs,  or  most  respectable  men,  came  on  horseback,  to 
meet  and  conduct  us  to  their  dwellings.  We  reached  them  through  a  crowd 
of  people,  who  hailed  us  with  a  shout  of  joy.  Immediately  after  our 
arrival,  the  principal  chief  of  the  village  sent  his  son  to  invite  me  and  my 
interpreter  to  his  tent.  As  soon  as  we  had  entered  it,  and  were  seated,  the 
respectable  old  chief  caused  meat  and  berries,  and  the  best  of  every  thing 
which  he  had,  to  be  set  before  us.  Before  we  had  eaten  much,  we  were  sent 
for  to  another  tent,  where  we  received  similar  treatment ;  and  from  this  we 
were  invited  to  another  j  and  so  on  till  we  had  been  to  more  than  half-a-dozen 
tents.  At  all  these  we  ate  a  little,  and  smoked  our  pipes  ;  for  my  interpreter 
informed  me  they  would  be  greatly  affronted,  and  think  that  we  despised 
them,  if  we  refused  to  taste  of  what  was  set  before  us.  Hospitality  to 
strangers  is  among  the  Indian  virtues.  During  several  days  that  we  remained 
with  these  people,  we  were  treated  with  more  real  politeness  than  is  com 
monly  shown  to  strangers  in  the  civilized  parts  of  the  world." 


THEIR   CRUELTY.  59 

for  war  and  hunting,  and  talking  over  their  various  exploits 
in  the  chase  and  in  the  fight.  To  strangers  they  are 
reserved,  but  among  themselves  they  are  notorious  talkers 
and  newsmongers ;  no  event  occurs  in  any  village  but  it  is 
soon  published  abroad.  In  the  presence  of  others  they  are 
seldom  known  to  hold  any  conversation  with  their  wives. 
Morse  testifies,  "Except  when  intoxicated  they  are  not 
vociferous,  noisy  or  quarrelsome  in  their  common  intercourse, 
but  mild  and  obliging.  Backbiting,  whispering,  cursing 
and  swearing, — to  our  shame  it  must  be  said, — are  vices  not 
of  savage,  but  of  civilized  man  !  The  Indians  who  have  been 
conversant  with  ivhite  men,  like  the  ancient  Cretans,  are  liars. 
Many  among  them  are  full  of  subtilty,  deceit,  and  artifice, 
implacable,  unmerciful,  without  pity.*  When  enmity  to 
wards  an  individual  family,  or  tribe,  from  whatever  cause, 
is  imbibed,  it  remains  till  death,  unless  previously  gratified 
or  removed  by  taking  revenge  on  his  enemy.  The  most 
horrid  scenes  of  torture  and  cruelty  are  witnessed  by  whole 
tribes  of  both  sexes,  old  and  young,  without  any  show  of 
pity.  But  these  dispositions,  and  the  indulgence  of  them, 
unhappily  are  not  confined  to  Indians.  I  would  to  God  for 
the  honour  of  our  country  they  were.  Were  we  to  charge 
the  Indians  with  the  indulgence  of  these  ferocious  dispo 
sitions,  we  should  expose  ourselves  to  the  just  retort, 
'Physician,  heal  thyself/  Thou  that  reproachest  us  as 
implacable,  unmerciful,  unpitying  to  white  people,  dost 
thou  suffer  thy  warriors  to  indulge  these  same  dispositions 
toward  defenceless  Indians,  desolating  and  burning  our 
pleasant  villages,  and  slaughtering  our  shrieking  wives  and 
children  ?" 

*  A  Pawnee  brave,  the  subject  of  a  very  interesting  anecdote,  may  be  con 
sidered  as  one  among  many  other  honourable  exceptions  to  these  general 
remarks. — P.  J. 


GENERAL   CHARACTER. 


TREATMENT   OF   THE  WOMEN   BY   THE   MEN. 

In  accordance  with  the  custom  of  all  pagan  nations,  the 
Indian  men  look  upon  their  women  as  an  inferior  race  of 
beings,  created  for  their  use  and  convenience.  They  there 
fore  treat  them  as  menials,  and  impose  on  them  all  the 
drudgeries  of  a  savage  life,  such  as  making  the  wigwam, 
providing  fuel,  planting  and  hoeing  the  Indian  corn  or 
maize,  fetching  the  venison  and  bear's  meat  from  the  woods 
where  the  man  shot  it:  in  short,  all  the  hard  work  falls 
upon  the  women  ;  so  that  it  may  truly  be  said  of  them,  that 
they  are  the  slaves  of  their  husbands. 

In  the  wigwam  the  men  occupy  the  best  places,  leaving 
such  parts  as  are  most  exposed  to  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather  to  the  poor  women.  In  regard  to  their  food,  the 
women  eat  the  coarsest  parts  of  the  meat,  or  what  the  men 
leave.  When  travelling  the  men  always  walk  on  before. 
It  would  be  considered  great  presumption  for  the  wife  to 
walk  by  the  side  of  her  husband  ;  she  therefore  keeps  at  a 
respectful  distance.  I  have  often  seen  the  husband  start 
with  nothing  but  his  gun  or  bow  and  arrows,  while  the  poor 
wife,  at  some  distance  behind,  would  be  seen  bending  under 
the  weight  of  all  their  goods,  often  with  a  child  packed  in 
the  midst  of  materials  for  building  the  wigwam.  These 
burdens  they  carry  about  with  them  in  all  their  journeying, 
which  soon  makes  them  decrepid.  The  men  have  an  idea 
that  it  is  unmanly  and  disgraceful  for  them  to  be  seen  doing 
anything  which  they  imagine  belongs  to  the  women's 
department.  I  have  scarcely  ever  seen  anything  like 
social  intercourse  between  husband  and  wife,  and  it  is 
remarkable  that  the  women  say  very  little  in  the  presence  of 
the  men. 


ETILS   OF    "  FIRE-WATERS."  61 

Since  the  introduction  of  the  fire-waters  the  miseries  of 
the  Indian  women  have  been  increased  tenfold.  Several 
instances  have  occurred  within  my  own  recollection  of  their 
dying  from  the  injuries  they  had  received.*  Paganism  and 
intemperance  are  the  sad  degradation  and  ruin  of  Indian 
females !  If  any  class  of  persons  have  special  cause  to  thank 
God  for  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel,  surely  it  is  the  women 
of  pagan  countries.  Christianity  alone  can  deliver  them 
from  the  wretched  slavery  produced  by  heathenism  and 
drunkenness.  Would  to  God  its  beneficial  effects  were  felt 
by  all  now  labouring  under  the  iron  sway  of  ignorance, 
superstition,  and  savage  cruelty  ! 

CHARACTER   OF   WOMEN. 

Indian  women,  notwithstanding  all  the  heavy  burdens 
imposed  on  them,  are  generally  true  and  constant  in  their 
affection  to  their  husbands.  No  mothers  can  be  fonder  of 
their  children,  though  some  may  think  they  are  destitute  of 
natural  love.  This  mistake  has  arisen  from  the  fact  that 
some  of  the  drunken  Indian  women  have  been' known  to  sell 
their  children  for  a  bottle  of  whisky,  or  suffered  them  to 
perish  for  want  of  proper  attention  and  care.  Such  instances, 
however,  are  few  and  far  between,  and  confined  to  those 
abandoned  wretches  who  have  been  ruined  by  the  jftre- 
waters.^  They  are  much  more  industrious  than  the  men, 

*  The  Rev.  E.  Adams  stated  at  a  missionary  meeting,  that  when  he  was 
missionary  at  Muncey  Town,  an  old  pagan  Indian  got  drunk,  and  drove  his 
wife  and  family  out  of  the  wigwam,  which  soon  after  took  fire  and  roasted  the 
drunken  man  to  death.  At  another  time,  an  Indian  quarrelled  with  his  wife  ; 
his  mother  reproved  him  for  it ;  upon  which  he  threw  her  into  the  fire  ;  she 
managed  to  crawl  out,  but  the  drunken  savage  took  up  a  tomahawk  and 
killed  her  on  the  spot. 

*h  Appendix  F. 

+  An  instance  of  an  Indian  mother's  love  is  related  of  Osheowhmai,  the  wife 
of  Little  Wolf,  one  of  the  Iowa  Indians,  who  died  while  at  Paris,  from  an 


62  GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

and  are  generally  employed  in  fetching  meat  from  the 
woods,  dressing  skins,  planting  Indian  corn,  making 
clothing,  belts,  mocassins,  mats,  canoes,  maple  sugar,  &c., 
&c.  The  Indians  who  are  settled  near  to  white  people  also 
make  baskets  and  brooms,  for  which  they  find  a  ready  sale. 
The  women  are  naturally  shy  and  distant  to  strangers. 
They  are  inordinately  fond  of  trinkets  and  gaudy  apparel. 
Many  of  the  young  are  in  the  habit  of  painting  their  faces. 
Like  the  Jews,  too,  the  women  observe  certain  days  of 
purification,  during  which  they  separate  themselves  as  much 
as  possible  from  the  rest,  having  their  own  wigwam,  fires, 
provisions,  cooking  utensils,  all  of  which  are  considered  as 
unclean,  and  are  never  used  by  any  but  themselves.  They 
are  very  careful  to  remove  the  fire  and  ashes  from  the 
wigwam  in  which  the  family  reside,  and  then  strike  fresh 
fire,  believing  that  if  this  be  not  done  sickness  would  imme 
diately  follow. 

GENERAL  DESCRIPTION. 

The  stature  of  the  men  averages  five  feet  ten  inches,  that 
of  the  women  five  feet.  Both  males  and  females  are  well 
formed ;  the  muscles  and  bones  of  the  former  are  smaller  in 
proportion  than  those  of  the  latter  ;  a  fact  which,  no  doubt, 
arises  from  the  women  having  to  perform  the  heavy 
drudgeries  of  an  Indian  life.  The  men  are  built  more  for 
fleetness  than  for  strength ;  they  are  great  walkers  and 
runners,  and  think  nothing  of  walking  forty  or  fifty  miles 
a  day. 

The  women  have  larger  heads  than  the  men,  round  and 

affection  of  the  lungs,  brought  on  by  grief  for  the  death  of  her  young  child  in 
London.  Her  husband  was  unremitting  in  his  endeavours  to  console  and 
restore  her  to  the  love  of  life  ;  but  she  constantly  replied,  "  No,"no  ;  my  four 
children  recall  me  ;  I  see  them  by  the  side  of  the  Great  !  They  stretch  out 
their  arms  to  me,  and  are  astonished  that  I  do  not  join  them." 


PHYSICAL   CHARACTERISTICS.  63 

rather  broad  at  the  top,  high  cheek  bones  and  black  eyes, 
while  many  have  large  Roman  noses ;  their  mouths  and  lips 
in  general  are  large,  their  teeth  good  and  white,  their  hair 
jet  black  and  straight. 

The  men  have  little  or  no  beard,  as  they  take  pains  to 
pluck  out  what  scattering  sprouts  they  may  have  had ;  in 
the  course  of  generations  no  doubt  their  posterity  have  been 
affected  by  this  custom.  Their  complexion  is  a  reddish- 
brown  ;  apart  from  want  of  cleanliness,  there  is  no  peculiar 
smell  about  their  bodies. 

I  have  often  reflected  on  the  causes  of  the  different  com 
plexions  of  the  human  race, — whence  this  variety  of  colour 
in  persons  descended  from  one  common  stock,  as  revelation 
informs  us  that  God  made  of  one  blood  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth?  It  is  my  opinion  that  the  complexion  is  greatly 
affected  by  the  habits,  modes  of  life,  and  food.  For 
instance,  a  nation  attentive  to  cleanliness,  and  dwelling  in 
comfortable  houses,  will  become  fairer  and  fairer ;  on  the 
contrary,  a  wandering  people,  like  the  American  Indians, 
living  in  smoky  bark  wigwams,  anointing  their  bodies  with 
oil  and  paint,  and  neglecting  the  customs  and  comforts  of 
civilized  society,  may  be  expected  to  become  darker  and 
darker.  The  following  fact  known  to  myself  will  illustrate 
what  I  have  stated.  James  Johnson — or  as  he  is  commonly 
called,  Yankee  Jim — went  among  the  Indians  when  very 
young,  a  fair-skinned  boy,  but  adopting  in  every  particular 
their  mode  of  life,  is  now,  in  his  seventieth  year,  almost  as 
swarthy  as  any  pure  Indian. 

EDUCATION   OP   CHILDREN. 

The  education  and  general  knowledge  of  a  people  un 
acquainted  with  letters  and  with  the  arts  and  sciences  must 
necessarily  be  very  limited.  Such  was  the  condition  of 


64  GENEKAL   CHARACTER. 

the  North  American  Indians  before  the  missionaries  brought 
to  them  the  words  of  eternal  life,  with  the  blessings  of 
civilization.  The  highest  ambition  of  pagan  Indian  parents, 
in  regard  to  the  education  of  their  children,  is,  to  make 
them  good  hunters.  At  an  early  age  they  are  first  taught 
to  handle  the  bow  and  arrow,  with  which  they  wander 
along  the  banks  of  the  lakes  and  rivers,  shooting  at  marks, 
small  birds,  and  squirrels.  Constant  practice  soon  makes 
them  expert  marksmen.  They  are  also  taught  how  to  handle 
a  spear  and  manage  a  canoe,  so  that  they  may  become  good 
fishermen.  When  a  little  older  they  are  allowed  to  shoot  and 
hunt  with  a  gun  and  rifle ;  and  as  soon  as  the  boys  are  able 
to  kill  large  game,  they  accompany  their  fathers  in  their 
hunting  excursions,  when  they  are  taught  the  art  of 
taking  the  game,  by  being  made  acquainted  with  the 
nature  of  the  various  animals,  the  kind  of  ground  they 
occupy,  when  they  are  found  eating,  and  when  asleep. 
They  also  teach  them  the  virtue  of  the  hunting  medicines, 
by  which  they  charm  the  game. 

When  they  are  young  a  spirit  of  war  is  instilled  into 
their  bosoms ;  and  in  order  to  excite  them  to  courage  and 
ambition,  their  parents  and  the  old  wise  men  recount  to 
them  the  wonderful  exploits  of  the  braves  in  ,  former  days, 
such  as  a  single  warrior  stealing  secretly  up  to  a  village, 
killing  a  number  of  the  enemy,  taking  off  their  scalps,  and 
making  his  escape  before  the  remainder  were  apprised  of 
the  slaughter.  The  brave  warrior  then  carries  the  scalps 
to  his  own  village,  where  the  men,  women,  and  children 
meet  and  bless  him.  He  thus  becomes  a  noted  personage  in 
his  tribe.  Great  care  is  taken  to  teach  them  the  war 
medicine  song  and  dance,  in  which  they  often  join. 

Another  part  of  their  education  consists  in  their  being 
taught  the  mysteries  of  their  religion,  such  as  fasting,, 


THE  YIETUE   OP  FASTING.  65 

feasts,  offerings,  religious  songs  and  dances,  the  initiation 
into  the  orders  of  the  Wahbahnoowin  and  Media. 

As  an  inducement  to  excel  in  the  number  and  length  of 
their  fasts,  the  old  men  promise  to  relate  to  them  in  the 
evening,  after  lying  down  to  rest,  various  traditions,  which 
are  always  of  the  marvellous  land,  illustrative  of  the  bless 
ings  received  and  the  power  obtained  by  fasting  and  prayer. 
They  tell  them  how  some  have  become  invincible  in  war, 
successful  in  the  chase,  or  profound  pow-wow  or  medicine 
men.  They  even  speak  ;of  some  young  Indians  becoming 
immortal  through  perseverance  in  fasting.  The  following 
is  a  specimen  of  their  wonderful  tales : — 

Many  winters  ago  several  young  people  commenced 
fasting,  which  they  continued  day  after  day  until  they  were 
reduced  to  mere  skeletons  ;  and  having  now  fully  secured 
the  blessings  and  aid  of  the  munedoos,  they  were  told  that 
they  had  earned  for  themselves  by  their  untiring  faithful 
ness  immortal  lives.  No  sooner  was  this  blessing  pro 
nounced,  than  they  rose  from  the  earth,  and  were  wafted  by 
some  magical  power  wherever  they  willed  to  go,  and  are 
supposed  by  the  Indians  to  be  still  in  existence.  They  call 
them  paligak,  or  the  flying  skeletons.  They  say  they  have 
repeatedly  heard  them  shout  in  the  air,  and  those  that  hear 
them  generally  faint. 

Another  story  they  relate  is  about  the  robin,  which  they 
call  obeclie.  They  say  that  this  robin  was  once  an  Indian 
female,  who  fasted  a  long  time,  and  just  before  she  was 
turned  into  a  bird  she  painted  her  breast,  and  as  she  flew 
away  she  laughed  for  joy,  saying  that  she  would  ever  after 
wards  return  to  her  friends  early  in  the  spring,  and  bring 
them  the  news  of  what  was  to  happen  during  the  year  :  if 
peace  and  plenty,  then  she  would  come  to  them  laughing, 
making  the  following  noise,  "  Che — die — che;"  that  is — 

p 


66  GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

Ha — ha — ha :  but  if  war  or  trouble  then  she  would  say, 
"  Uh-nwo7i-c7ie-ga,"  or  I  prophesy  evil  tidings. 

The  old  sages  also  repeatedly  give  the  young  people 
gathered  around  the  cheerful  blaze  of  the  hearth  lectures 
on  the  duties  of  hospitality  to  strangers,  teaching  them  to 
revere  the  aged,  and  to  treasure  up  in  their  minds  the 
counsels  they  hear  from  them,  and  to  endeavour  to 
maintain  dignity  of  character.  They  are  also  taught 
that  in  the  presence  of  their  parents  and  the  aged 
they  should  be  reserved,  especially  at  their  meals;  and 
that  when  engaged  in  common  conversation  they  must  not 
be  boisterous,  but  speak  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  and  never 
interrupt  another  when  talking. 

The  Indians  exhibit  much  natural  politeness ;  they  are, 
generally,  very  gentle  and  obliging  in  their  manners ;  the 
women  in  particular  show  great  bashfulness  when  spoken 
to.  Carver,  in  his  travels,  tells  of  a  young  Indian  with 
whom  he  fell  in  company  when  on  a  journey  to  the  Falls 
of  Niagara.  He  says,  "  When  the  young  chief  first  came  in 
sight  of  the  cataract  he  addressed  the  Great  Spirit,  whose 
residence  he  supposed  this  to  be ;  he  then  threw  into  the 
stream  his  pipe,  tobacco,  and  various  ornaments,  as  offerings ; 
and  continued  fervently  to  petition  the  Great  Spirit  to 
afford  them  protection  and  a  bright  sun ;  and  would  not 
leave  the  place  till  they  had  together  smoked  his  pipe  in 
honour  of  the  Great  Spirit."  He  then  goes  on  to  state: — 
"  I  was  greatly  surprised  at  beholding  an  instance  of  such 
elevated  devotion  in  so  young  an  Indian,  and  looked  on 
him  with  greater  respect  for  these  sincere  proofs  he  gave 
of  his  piety.  Indeed  the  whole  conduct  of  this  young  chief 
at  once  amazed  and  charmed  me.  During  the  few  days  we 
were  together  his  attention  seemed  to  be  wholly  employed 
in  yielding  me  every  assistance  in  his  power ;  and  even  in 
so  short  a  time  he  gave  me  innumerable  proofs  of  the 


DEFECTIVE  EDUCATION.  67 

most  generous  and  disinterested  friendship  ;  so  that  on  our 
return  I  parted  from  him  with  great  reluctance.  Whilst  I 
beheld  the  artless  yet  engaging  manners  of  this  unpolished 
savage,  I  could  not  help  drawing  a  comparison  between 
him  and  some  of  the  more  refined  inhabitants  of  civilized 
countries,  not  much  I  own  in  favour  of  the  latter.77 

FAMILY  GOVERNMENT. 

In  family  government,  I  regret  to  say,  my  countrymen 
are  very  deficient;  no  discipline  is  enforced  upon  their 
children,  consequently  they  grow  up  without  restraint,  and 
become  self-willed  and  disobedient  to  their  parents  and 
guardians.  As  before  stated  they  are  not  allowed  to  grow 
up  without  receiving  the  wise  counsels  of  the  sachems;  but 
the  evil  lies  in  not  insisting  on  the  due  observance  of  what 
they  are  taught.  They  scarcely  ever  inflict  any  punishment 
upon  them  beyond  that  of  angry  looks,  and  a  little  angry 
talk.  Like  Eli,  when  their  children  make  themselves  vile 
they  restrain  them  not.  Most  of  the  Christian  Indians 
now  see  and  lament  the  want  of  family  government ;  but 
not  having  been  themselves  instructed  in  the  right  way, 
they  are  quite  ignorant  how  to  exact  implicit  obedience 
from  their  children,  and  to  "  train  them  in  the  way  they 
should  go." 

I  fear  it  will  be  long  before  the  Indians  will  learn  the 
blessed  art  of  family  government,  especially  if  no  greater 
exertions  are  made  to  teach  the  rising  generation  the  value 
and  importance  of  governing  themselves.  Nothing  appears 
more  lovely  to  me  than  to  see  a  well-ordered  family  where 
the  law  of  kindness  rules,  and  the  parents  are  obeyed, 
feared,  and  loved.  In  such  a  family  peace  and  harmony 
reign.  There  the  blessing  of  God,  which  maketh  rich,  and 
addeth  no  sorrow,  is  enjoyed. 

F2 


68  GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

TREATMENT   OF   THE   AGED. 

Some  have  supposed  that  age  is  not  respected  by  the 
Ojebways,  but  this  is  a  great  mistake.  No  people  reve 
rence  old  age  more  than  the  Indians.  The  advice  of  the 
uhkewailizee,  or  long  dweller  upon  the-  earth,  is  generally 
listened  to  with  great  attention,  as  it  is  from  them  that  the 
youth  receive  their  instructions  respecting  pow-wowism, 
medicines,  and  the  traditions  of  their  forefathers. 

Where  there  is  no  literature  it  cannot  be  otherwise  than 
that  they  should  think  much  of  those  who  impart  to  them 
all  the  knowledge  they  most  prize,  and  who  are  supposed,, 
from  the  length  of  time  they  have  lived,  to  have  gained 
great  experience.  These  remarks  refer  particularly  to  the 
males,  as  the  aged  females  are  not  in  general  looked  up  to 
with  the  same  degree  of  reverence,  although  they  are 
treated  kindly  by  their  relatives  and  friends.  I  knew  an 
old  crippled  woman  who,  for  many  years  before  her  death, 
was  supported  by  her  children  and  friends,  and  in  their 
wanderings  they  often  carried  her  on  their  backs,  and 
never  forsook  her  although  a  great  burden  to  them.  It 
has  been  reported  that  some  Indians  have  put  their  aged 
to  death  when  no  longer  able  to  hunt,  or  to  render  them 
any  assistance.  Cases  of  such  brutal  conduct  may  have 
occurred,  but  I  never  knew  an  instance  of  the  kind,  neither 
have  I  heard  of  any  on  which  I  could  fully  depend. 
Instances  have  been  known  of  very  aged  and  infirm  Indians 
abandoning  themselves  to  death.  A  case  of  this  kind 
occurred  at  Grape  Island.  An  old  woman,  by  the  name  of 
Beaver,  fancied  that  she  had  lived  long  enough,  and  as 
life  was  now  burdensome,  she  left  her  son's  house,  and  went 
out  into  the  woods  to  die.  The  missionary  hearing  of  it 
immediately  got  the  Indians  to  search  for  her.  They  found 
her  lying  on  the  ground,  and  brought  her  back  to  her  son, 


HORROR   OF   CANNIBALISM.  69 

where  she  lived  a  few  years  longer.    If  she  had  been  left  to 
herself  she  never  would  have  returned  alive. 

CANNIBALISM. 

It  has  been  ignorantly  stated  by  some  persons,  that  can 
nibalism  prevails  among  the  North  American  Indians.  In 
confirmation  of  this  report,  they  adduce  the  fabulous  say 
ings  of  Indians  about  weendegoos,  or  giant  men-eaters,  and 
also  the  sad  fact  that  some  northern  Indians  have  been 
known  through  famine  to  eat  one  another.  My  firm  con 
viction  is,  that  North  American  Indians  are  not  cannibals  ; 
and  Mr.  J.  Carver,  who  travelled  extensively  through  the 
interior  parts  of  North  America,  among  the  Ojebways, 
Sioux,  Sanks,  &c.,  makes  no  mention  of  cannibalism. 

Having  heard  such  assertions  some  years  since,  I  took 
particular  pains  to  ascertain  whether  or  no  this  was  a  fact, 
and  the  result  of  my  enquiries  amounted  to  this : — First, 
that  cannibalism  does  not  exist  among  them  as  it  does 
among  the  New  Zealanders.  Second,  that  such  is  their 
abhorrence  of  cannibalism,  that  they  have  a  common  law 
among  them  that  when  an  Indian  is  known  to  have  eaten 
human  flesh  through  starvation,  it  is  right  to  put  such  an 
one  to  death  as  soon  as  possible.  A  few  years  ago  I  met 
with  a  wretched  Indian  woman  at  the  narrows  of  Lake 
Simcoe,  who  had  fled  for  her  life  from  the  north-west  coun 
try,  in  consequence  of  having  eaten  her  husband  through 
extreme  hunger.  She  was  a  most  pitiable  object,  and  ap 
peared  as  though  an  evil  spirit  haunted  her,  as  she  wandered 
about  in  the  woods,  hiding  herself  behind  the  trees  and  logs. 
She  was  the  terror  of  all  the  people,  as  they  supposed  that 
Indians  who  have  once  tasted  human  flesh  became  deranged, 
possessing  the  nature  of  a  racoon,  porcupine,  or  some  other 
animal.  They  fall  on  such  a  person,  and  beat  out  his 
brains  with  a  club.  No  doubt,  if  the  Lake  Simcoe  Indians 


70  GENERAL   CHARACTER. 

had  not  been  Christians,  this  poor  woman  would  have  been 
put  to  death.     Christianity  saves  in  all  ways. 

That  the  poor  Indians  in  the  barren  regions  of  the  North 
should  occasionally,  through  starvation,  be  driven  to  eat 
one  another,  is  nothing  more  than  might  be  expected.  Has 
not  the  same  thing  often  occurred  among  the  white  people 
when  shipwrecked  or  cast  upon  some  desolate  island? 
Thirdly,  the  whole  amount  of  cannibalism,  if  such  it  may 
be  called,  of  some  of  the  western  war  tribes,  is  this, — that 
they  have  been  known  to  take  the  heart  of  their  enemy, 
cut  it  into  small  pieces,  and  boil  it  in  a  large  kettle  of  corn 
soup  for  a  heathen  feast  or  offering.  Each  warrior  then 
takes  a  ladleful,  as  a  bravado  or  triumph  over  his  enemy. 
This,  in  Indian  mode  of  speech,  is  called  "drinking  the 
heart's  blood  of  the  enemy." 

In  Alexander  Henry's  travels  among  the  Indians  in 
Canada,  between  the^years  1760  and  1776,  he  mentions  an 
Indian  family  who  had  been  so  reduced  by  famine  as  to  be 
compelled  to  eat  each  other.  One  young  man  arrived  at ' 
the  author's  wintering  place.  The  Indian  was  suspected  of 
what  he  had  done,  and  search  being  made,  it  was  found  he 
had  lately  eaten  his  surviving  companion.  He  confessed 
the  crime,  and  was  forthwith  put  to  death  by  tomahawk. 
He  also  mentions  that  some  French  Canadians,  in  a  time  of 
extreme  hunger,  proposed  to  kill  and  eat  an  Indian  woman 
who  was  in  their  company. 

In  no  book  of  travels  among  North  American  Indians 
have  I  seen  cannibalism  mentioned  as  prevalent  amongst 
them.  Goldsmith,  in  his  geography,  says — "Murder  is 
seldom  heard  of  among  them.  A  murderer  is  detested  by 
all  the  tribe,  and  obliged,  like  another  Cain,  to  wander  up 
and  down  forlorn  and  forsaken  even  by  his  own  relations 
and  former  friends." 


CHAPTER  Y. 

MODE   OF  LIFE. 

Wigwams — Ancient  Domestic  Implements — Mode  of  travelling — Dress. 

IN  their  natural  state,  the  Indians  have  no  settled  home, 
but  wander  about  from  place  to  place  in  pursuit  of  game 
or  fish,  on  which  they  subsist.  No  sooner  do  these  grow 
scarce  in  one  part  of  the  country  than  they  remove  to 
another.  Each  tribe  or  body  of  Indians  has  its  own  range 
of  country,  and  sometimes  each  family  has  its  own  hunting 
grounds,  marked  out  by  certain  natural  divisions,  such  as 
rivers,  lakes,  mountains,  or  ridges ;  and  all  the  game  within 
these  bounds  is  considered  their  property  as  much  as  the 
cattle  and  fowl  owned  by  a  farmer  on  his  own  land.  It  is 
at  the  peril  of  an  intruder  to  trespass  on  the  hunting 
grounds  of  another. 

The  game  they  hunt  consists  of  deer,  elk,  bear,  moose, 
beaver,  otter,  musk  rat,  hare,  martin,  mink,  and  a  great 
variety  of  fish  and  fowl.  The  buffalo  is  taken  in  abundance 
towards  the  Rocky  Mountains,  and  on  the  prairies  of  the 
great  Mississippi.  Before  the  introduction  of  guns  they 
took  their  game  by  means  of  bows  and  arrows,  spears  and 
snares.  The  old  Indians  say  that  previous  to  the  use 
of  fire-arms  the  game  was  much  tamer  and  in  greater 
abundance.  In  time  of  peace,  hunting  and  fishing  con 
stitute  the  chief  employment  of  the  men.  It  requires 
great  judgment  and  perseverance  to  be  a  good  hunter. 
The  Indians  who  inhabit  the  prairie  countries  towards  the 


72  MODE   OF  LIFE. 

Rocky  Mountains  hunt  on  horseback;  but  the  northern 
tribes,  who  live  in  the  forest  parts  of  America,  hunt  on 
foot,  either  following  the  tracks  of  the  deer  or  bear,  or 
accidentally  coming  upon  them.  A  good  hunter  has  such 
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  habits  of  the  animals 
he  wishes  to  take,  that  he  knows  exactly  what  section  of 
country  they  frequent,  the  time  of  day  they  feed,  and  when 
and  where  they  sleep.  He  will  therefore  act  accordingly. 

Many  hunters  use  charms,  made  of  roots  and  herbs,  in 
which  they  place  great  confidence.  There  is  one  kind  of 
medicine  to  give  them  good  luck,  another  to  make  them 
invisible  to  the  animal,  and  another  which  they  put  on 
guns  or  arrows  to  make  them  sure  of  killing.  I  have 
known  some  good  hunters  in  one  day  kill  ten  or  fifteen 
deer,  and  have  heard  of  others  killing  as  many  as  twenty. 
When  they  slaughter  as  many  as  these,  they  do  not  stop  to 
skin  or  dress  them,  but  leave  them  where  they  fall  until 
the  next  day,  when  the  women  and  children  assist  in  taking 
the  carcases  to  the  wigwams. 

The  wild  pagan  Indians  have  no  houses,  but  live  in  wig 
wams.  The  wigwams  are  made  by  placing  poles,  twelve  or 
fourteen  feet  long,  in  the  ground.  These  meet  at  the  top, 
and  are  left  open  for  the  smoke  to  escape.  Over  them 
they  spread  nets,  made  of  flags  or  birch  bark,  and  some 
times  the  skins  of  animals.  The  fire  is  in  the  centre, 
around  which  the  families  take  their  seats  on  the  ground, 
having  skins  or  bark  for  their  carpeting.  A  wigwam 
about  twelve  feet  in  diameter  will  contain  about  three 
families.  Here  they  cook,  eat,  smoke,  and  sleep.  When 
they  make  their  wigwams  long  enough  to  have  two  fires, 
they  will  contain  six  or  eight  families.  One  family  at  each 
fire  will  cook  at  a  time,  and  then  divide  the  food  with  all  be 
longing  to  the  same  fire.  After  the  morning  meal  is  over  they 


,  1 .4nae/U  TiowL> ,  3  ^Antiqu**  Fip&  Head* 


HUNTING.  73 

have  no  set  time  for  eating,  but  leave  it  to  the  direction  of 
their  craving  appetites,  or  the  good  luck  of  having  a 
supply  of  provisions.  During  the  absence  of  a  hunter,  the 
portion  of  meat  which  he  would  have  eaten  is  carefully 
.saved  for  his  return,  on  which  he  makes  a  hearty  repast. 
When  he  is  successful  he  will  make  a  feast  and  sing  his 
hunting  chaunts  to  his  munedoo  for  a  whole  night,  and  by 
the  dawn  of  day  he  will  be  off  again.  If  on  this  day,  by 
uncommon  perseverance,  he  has  the  good  luck  to  kill  a 
deer  or  bear,  it  is  attributed  to  the  virtue  of  the  songs  or 
medicine  employed  for  the  occasion.  The  Indians  who  live 
within  the  bounds  of  the  English  settlements  depend,  in  a 
great  measure,  for  their  livelihood  on  making  baskets, 
brooms,  wooden  bowls,  ladles,  and  scoop  shovels,  which 
they  sell  to  the  white  people  in  exchange  for  provisions. 

ANCIENT*  DOMESTIC   IMPLEMENTS. 

Their  mode  of  procuring  fire,  before  the  introduction  of 
the  steel  and  flint,  was  by  friction.  Three  pieces  of  dry 
-cedar  or  pine  wood  and  a  small  bow  were  provided.  One 
flat  piece  was  put  on  the  ground,  with  a  small  incision  in 
it ;  then  a  round  straight  stick  was  placed  perpendicularly 
into  the  incision  of  the  bottom  piece,  round  which  the  bow 
string  was  twisted  once ;  a  flat  piece  was  placed  on  the  top 
round  stick,  to  press  it  do  »vn.  This  done,  the  bow  was  pulled 
quickly  backward  and  forward,  and  spun  round  till  the 
wood  ignited.  Sometimes  pieces  of  spunk  wood  were  placed 
round  the  pivot,  which  greatly  facilitated  the  ignition. 

Their  axes  were  made  of  hard  stone  sharpened  at  one 
«nd.  The  handle  was  split  so  as  to  receive  the  stone,  which 
was  fastened  in  with  strings  and  glue  made  from  the  stur 
geon's  head.  These  rude  axes,  being  very  blunt,  could  only 
«ut  through  soft  or  rotten  wood  and  the  bark  of  trees. 


74  MODE   OP  LIFE. 

Thus  they  were  able  to  peel  off  bark,  which  serves  as  a, 
covering  for  wigwams  and  canoes.  These  axes  have  long 
since  been  superseded  by  hatchets  or  axes  of  European 
manufacture,  which  the  Indians  now  obtain  from  the  traders.. 
The  farmer  frequently  ploughs  up  these  ancient  edge  tools,, 
and  also  their  flint  arrow-points  and  earthenware. 

Their  pipes  were  made  of  soft  stone,  cut  and  carved  into 
all  sorts  of  shapes  and  figures.  Some  were  also  made  from 
baked  clay  or  granite.  Their  pots  were  made  of  the  same 
materials,  and  baked  thoroughly  hard  so  as  to  stand  the 
action  of  fire.  The  Indians  are  well  pleased  to  discard 
these  for  English  pots  and  kettles,  which  they  find  much 
more  convenient.  Their  knives  and  awls  were  made  of  flint 
or  sharp  stones.  They  had  no  forks,  but  used  their  fingers 
in  eating.  Instead  of  dishes,  they  had  wooden  bowls  and 
ladles.  Their  hunting  implements  consisted  of  bows  and 
arrows.  The  arrows  used  in  war  were  pointed  with  sharp 
flints  or  bones,  and  those  for  killing  small  game  were  blunt 
at  one  end.  In  their  primitive  state  they  roasted  much  of 
their  meat,  which  was  suspended  on  sticks,  one  end  stuck 
in  the  ground,  and  the  other  turned  towards  the  fire. 

MODE   OP  TRAVELLING. 

The  Indians  residing  in  the  northern  and  woody  parts  of 
the  country  travel  during  the  si/mmer  months  either  on 
foot  or  by  water ;  but  during  the  long  winter  months,  hav 
ing  no  horses,  they  employ  the  reindeer  or  dogs  to  draw 
them  in  sledges,  which  are  made  of  a  broad  thin  board 
turned  up  at  one  end  for  a  runner.  The  dogs  used  are  a 
species  of  bull-dog  or  Newfoundland.  Two  will  draw  a  man 
and  his  provisions  at  the  rate  of  thirty  or  forty  miles  a  day. 
The  harness  is  made  of  dressed  deer-skin.  These  dogs  are 
kept  upon  short  allowance,  being  fed  only  when  their  clay's 


TRAVELLING.  75 

journey  is  finished.  It  is  said  that  when  well  fed  they 
can  only  perform  half  the  service.  As  the  country  becomes 
settled  both  Indians  and  whites  travel  in  sleighs  drawn  by 
horses.  To  those  well  wrapped  in  furs  this  manner  of  tra 
velling  is  very  pleasant  and  easy.  The  horses  wear  strings 
of  bells  round  their  necks.  When  the  snow  is  deep,  the 
Indians  use  snow-shoes.  When  they  travel  by  water, 
they  use  the  well-known  birch  bark  canoe,  which  is  made 
as  light  as  possible.  They  first  sew  the  bark  together  with 
the  roots  of  the  spruce  fir  tree,  and  then  line  it  with  thin 
pieces  of  cedar.  The  ribs  and  supporters  are  made  of  the 
same  wood.  A  canoe  that  will  carry  four  or  five  persons 
can  be  borne  on  the  shoulder  of  one  man.  Some  of  the 
canoes  used  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  are  large 
enough  to  carry  twenty  or  thirty  persons.  These  are  em 
ployed  in  transporting  goods  and  furs.  The  smaller  ones 
are  used  for  fishing,  trapping,  hunting,  and  gathering  the 
wild  rice.  The  Indians  who  reside  in  southern  and  prairie 
countries,  where  horses  abound,  generally  make  their  jour 
neys  on  these  animals.  It  is  said  by  travellers  that  the 
natives  are  very  expert  riders.  They  both  hunt  the  buffalo 
and  go  to  war  on  horseback.  The  Indian  men  are  swift 
travellers  on  foot.  I  have  known  them  to  walk  with  ease 
fifty  and  sixty  miles  a  day,  and  some  have  accomplished  the 
journey  from  Niagara  to,  Toronto,  a  distance  of  eighty  miles, 
in  one  day,  and  that  too  when  there  was  only 'a  narrow 
Indian  footpath.  Whenever  they  go  on  a  journey  they 
carry  with  them  their  blankets,  guns,  pipes,  tomahawks, 
and  provisions. 

DEESS. 

The  clothing  of  the  men  consists  of  a  loose  coat  coming 
down  below  the  knees.  This  is  made  of  dressed  deer  or 
moose  skin  fantastically  decorated  with  tassels  of  the  same 


76  MODE   OF   LIFE. 

material,  or  with  porcupine  quills,  beads  and  silver  brooches. 
Their  leggings  are  made  of  the  same  skins.  Round  their 
waists  they  tie  belts  worked  with  worsted  and  beads.  Their 
head-dresses  are  made  from  the  skins  and  feathers  of  birds, 
such  as  the  eagle,  crow,  hawk,  owl,  and  duck;  and  some 
times  from  fur  skins,  such  as  the  beaver,  mink,  musk  rat, 
and  the  tails  of  the  deer,  wolf,  and  fox.  The  men  generally 
wear  their  hair  long,  hanging  down  to  their  shoulders. 
This  serves  as  a  covering  for  their  heads,  and,  being  well 
greased,  no  rain  can  penetrate  it.  Some  of  the  old  men 
have  the,  hair  of  their  heads  cut  very  close,  and  others  have 
it  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  except  a  small  tuft  on  the  crown 
which  is  left  as  a  bravado,  so  that  in  case  they  should  fall 
into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  they  may  be  scalped  with 
ease.  To  this  tuft  they  sometimes  fasten  a  silver  or  leaden 
cube,  three  or  four  inches  long.  Many  of  them  also  have 
their  ears  cut  from  one  end  to  the  other,  leaving  the  end 
fast  to  the  ear,  to  which  they  fasten  weights  of  lead,  wampum, 
and  other  trinkets,  so  as  to  hang  down  in  a  loop.  In  a  few 
years  these  strings  of  the  ear  stretch  long  enough  to  reach 
the  shoulders,  and  they  think  this  makes  them  look  vene 
rable.  They  seldom,  however,  keep  them  entire  for  any 
length  of  time ;  for  in  the  first  drunken  brawl,  ten  chances 
to  one  they  have  the  mortification  of  having  them  pulled  off 
or  broken.  They  have  their  nosds  pierced  also,  and  in 
them  they  wear  nose-jewels.  Their  pouches,  containing 
their  pipes  and  tobacco,  are  fastened  to  their  belts,  and  a 
sheath  for  the  scalping-knife  hangs  round  the  neck.  Their 
mocassins  are  made  of  dressed  deer  skins  worked  with 
quills  or  beads.  The  women  wear  short  gowns  and 
petticoats  made  of  deer  skin,  and  a  mantle  thrown  over  the 
shoulders:  they  also  wear  leggings  and  mocassins  neatly 
worked.  The  hair  is  tied  up  in  a  bunch  behind.  In 


DRESS.  7 1 

winter  both  men  and  women  clothe  themselves  with  furs, 
such  as  the  buffalo,  bear,  and  hare.  At  present,  those 
Indians  who  have  the  means  of  obtaining  clothing  of 
European  manufacture  have  adopted  the  same,  but  the 
style  of  wearing  it  is  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  their 
ancient  dress.  The  Christian  Indians  have  their  hair  tied 
behind  and  hanging  down  their  backs.  Many  of  them 
wear  round  beaver  or  straw  hats,  and  neat  shawls  or 
cloaks. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

COURTSHIP   AND   MARRIAGE. 

Penning  the  Marriage  Contract— No  Ceremony  or  Vows — Wedding  Dress — 
Divorce — Polygamy. 

IN  forming  marriage  contracts  the  most  common  prac 
tice  observed  by  the  Ojebways  is  for  the  parents  of  both 
parties  to  make  up  the  match;  very  often  without  the 
consent,  or  even  knowledge,  of  the  young  people.  Some 
times  this  agreement  is  entered  into  when  the  children  are 
very  young,  and  it  generally  happens  that  they  yield  to 
the  arrangements  made  by  their  parents,  not  only  with 
out  any  courtship,  but  even  before  they  have  spoken  to 
each  other.  When  the  contract  is  not  made  by  the 
parents,  the  Indian  youth,  having  fixed  his  affections  on 
some  young  woman,  will  make  his  wish  known  to  his 
mother  or  some  particular  friend ;  to  whose  care  he 
commits  the  presents  he  has  prepared  for  the  occasion. 
These  usually  consist  of  a  fine  blanket,  gown,  and 
leggings  for  the  object  of  his  love^;  and  a  kettle,  a  sack  of 
corn,  or  some  other  article,  for  the  parents.  If  these 
presents  are  received  it  is  at  once  understood  that  the  offer 
is  accepted.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  fire-waters  they 
have  formed  a  sad  substitute  for  the  kettle  and  other  useful 
articles  as  presents  to  the  parents  of  the  bride.  There  is 
great  reserve  manifested  by  the  young  females,  and  not  to 
maintain  it  would  be  to  lose  the  spotlessness  of  their 
character,  and  bring  on  themselves  the  reproach  of  the  old 


THE  MARRIAGE  CONTRACT.  79 

people.  The  period  of  their  courtship  is  not  generally  pro 
tracted  beyond  a  few  months,  when  it  is  terminated  by  the 
young  man's  taking  his  chosen  companion  on  a  wedding 
trip  for  several  days. 

Wherever  night  overtakes  them  there  they  pitch  the 
wigwam,  and  spend  the  days  in  shooting  or  fishing,  the 
bride  steering  the  canoe.  When  this  excursion  is  ended, 
they  return  with  the  product  of  the  chase,  which  they 
present  to  the  parents  of  the  bride,  laying  it  at  the  mother's 
feet ;  and  with  them  they  continue  to  reside,  as  the  parents 
consider  they  have  a  claim  on  their  industry  and  support 
till  they  have  a  family  of  their  own  to  maintain.  On 
this  account  the  parents  are  always  anxious  that  their 
daughters  should  marry  good  hunters.  Although  no 
public  vows  are  made,  nor  any  particular  ceremonies  are 
performed,  at  the  marriages  of  the  Indians,  it  is  surprising 
how  seldom  their  mutual  engagements  are  violated. 

There  is  a  good  understanding  between  them  as  to  their 
individual  duties  and  employments:  the  husband  takes 
pains  to  please  his  wife  by  showing  his  skill  as  a  hunter ; 
thus  practically  proving  that  he  is  able  and  willing  to 
supply  her  wants  by  his  abilities  in  fishing  and  the  chase. 
The  wife,  again,  although  her  fatigues  and  drudgery  are 
often  great,  performs  her  part  cheerfully.  Neither  men 
nor  women  in  general  trouble  themselves  with  each  other's 
business,  but  there  are  many  instances  on  record,  and 
others  known  to  myself,  which  prove  how  strong  and 
sincere  their  love  is  for  each  other.  A  man  has  been  known 
to  go  forty  or  fifty  miles  to  procure  for  his  wife  something 
that  he  knew  she  much  wanted.  And  the  wife,  in  her  turn, 
knowing  how  fond  the  father  is  of  his  children,  will  relate 
to  him,  on  his  return,  some  little  adventures  or  anecdotes 
concerning  them,  that  will  divert  and  reward  him  for  all 
his  exertions. 


80  COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE. 

Heckewelder  mentions  the  folio  wing  anecdote  of  an  aged 
Indian  who  had  spent  much  time  among  the  white  people 
in  Pennsylvania  and  New  Jersey: — "  One  day,  about  the 
year  1770,  he  observed  that  the  Indians  had  a  much  easier 
way  of  getting  a  wife  than  the  whites,  and  were  more 
certain  of  getting  a  good  one — '  For/  said  he,  in  his 
broken  English,  l  white  man  court, — court,  may  be  one 
whole  year  ! — may  be  two  year  before  he  marry !  Well ! — 
may  be  then  get  very  good  wife — but  may  be  not ! — may  be 
very  cross  ! — Well  now,  suppose  cross,  scold  so  soon  as  get 
awake  in  the  morning,  scold  all  day,  scold  until  sleep, — 
all  one ; ( he  must  keep  him  !  *  White  people  have  law  for 
bidding  throwing  away  wife,  be  he  ever  so  cross !  must 
keep  him  always.  Well !  how  does  Indian  do  ? — Indian, 
when  he  sees  industrious  squaw,  which  he  like,  he  go  to 
him,  place  his  two  fore-fingers  close  aside  each  other,  make 
two  look  like  one,  look  squaw  in  the  1  *ce — see  him  smile — 
which  is  all  one  he  say  yes !  so  he  take  him  home — no 
danger  he  cross !  no !  no !  Squaw  know  too  well  what 
Indian  do  if  he  cross !  throw  him  away  and  take  another  ! 
Squaw  love  to  eat  meat !  no  husband,  no  meat !  Squaw  do 
everything  to  please  husband,  he  do  the  same  to  please 
squaw ;  live  happy  !" 

DIVORCE.   v 

Whenever  an  Indian  finds  it  necessary  to  divorce  his 
wife,  it  is  for  some  heinous  crime,  such  as  adultery;  in 
which  case,  before  the  separation  ensues,  the  husband  bites 
off  the  wife's  nose.  The  children  are  then  equally  divided, 
or  if  the  number  happens  to  be  odd,  the  woman  takes  the 
greater  number.  Intolerable  laziness  on  the  part  of  the 
woman  has  also  been  cause  of  divorce. 

*  The  pronouns  in  the  Indian  language  have  no  feminine  gender. 


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.  81 

POLYGAMY. 

Polygamy  once  prevailed  to  a  great  extent  among  all 
the  Indian  tribes.  It  was  considered  lawful  for  any  man 
to  marry  as  many  wives  as  he  could  provide  for ;  hence 
most  of  the  chiefs,  brave  warriors,  and  hunters,  had  a  plu 
rality  of  wives.  I  have  heard  of  a  chief  in  the  West  having 
as  many  as  ten ;  but  I  never  personally  knew  any  who  had 
more  than  three,  though  many  who  had  two.  They  generally 
select,  if  possible,  sisters,  from  an  idea  that  they  will  be  more 
likely  to  live  together  in  peace,  and  that  the  children 
of  the  one  would  be  loved  and  cared  for  by  the  other  more 
than  if  the  wives  were  not  related.  Yet,  notwithstanding 
all  these  precautions,  jealousies,  as  a  natural  consequence, 
will  arise,  which  often  lead  to  grievous  quarrels  and  fight 
ings.  I  once  witnessed  a  fight  between  the  two  wives  of 
a  chief  called  Capt»  in  Jim.  The  quarrel  arose  from  the 
unequal  distribution  of  a  loaf  of  bread  between  their  chil 
dren.  The  husband  being  absent,  the  wife  who  had 
brought  the  bread  to  the  wigwam  gave  a  piece  of  it  to 
each  child,  but  the  best  and  largest  portion  to  her  own. 
Such  partiality  immediately  led  to  a  quarrel.  The  woman 
who  brought  the  bread  threw  the  remainder  in  anger  to 
the  other ;  she  as  quickly  cast  it  back  again  ;  in  this  foolish 
way  they  kept  on  for  ,some  time,  till  their  fury  rose  to  such 
a  height  that  they  at  length  sprang  at  one  another,  catching 
hold  of  the  hair  of  the  head  ;  and  when  each  had  uprooted 
a  handful  their  ire  seemed  satisfied. 

Chief  John  Asance,  of  Cold  Water,  at  the  time  of  his 
conversion,  in  the  year  1827,  had  three  wives;  of  whom  he 
used  to  say  to  the  white  people,  when  under  the  influence 
of  the  fire-waters,  "  Me  very  great  chief,  me  got  him  dree 
wives,  all  broders," — meaning  they  were  sisters. 

The  rule  we  have  adopted  with  respect  to  converted 


82  COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE. 

Indians  who  had  more  than  one  wife  was  this. — That,  as  it 
was  unlawful  for  any  Christian  man  to  have  more  than  one 
wife  at  a  time,  the  missionaries  were  requested  to  advise  all 
Indians  who  wished  to  serve  the  Great  Spirit  to  put  away 
all  excepting  the  first  woman  they  married.  She  was  con 
sidered  to  be  his  lawful  wife. 

This  regulation  has  invariably  been  enforced,  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  gratitude  to  Almighty  God  that  almost  in  every 
instance,  painful  as  "it  was,  the  Indians  have  submitted 
cheerfully.  I  knew  one  instance  where  a  chief  had  a  most 
powerful  struggle  between  his  own  inclination  and  his 
desire  to  #o  his  duty  to  his  Creator.  This  man  had  two 
wives,  the  younger  of  whom  was  a  beautiful  woman.  The 
chief  loved  her  very  much,  and,  when  told  that  before  he 
could  receive  the  ordinance  of  baptism  he  must  put  away 
his  young  wife,  and  live  only  with  the  old  one,  whom  he 
had  first  married,  the  trial  commenced  in  his  mind.  He 
wished  to  be  a  Christian,  but  the  thought  of  parting  with 
his  beloved  young  wife  was  more  than  he  could  then 
endure  ;  he  told  the  missionary  he  must  have  a  little  time 
to  consider  the  subject.  He  then  retired  alone  into  the 
woods,  and  was  there  three  days,  fasting,  praying,  and 
meditating  on  this  important  step.  At  the  end  of  this 
time  he  came  back  and  informed  the  missionary  that  he 
had  prayed  and  considered  the  matter,  and  that  he  was 
now  convinced  that  it  would  be  wrong  in  him  to  retain  his 
young  wife,  and  therefore  he  would  put  her  away;  but  that 
he  would  hereafter  call  her  "sister,"  and  that  he  would 
help  to  support  her.  After  this  noble  conquest  over  the 
natural  man,  the  chief,  his  wife,  and)  his  adopted  sister  were 
baptised.  He  remained  faithful  to  his  promise,  and  lived 
with  his  old  wife  two  or  three  years,  when  she  died.  He 
then  took  to  himself  his  beloved  adopted  sister,  the  object 
of  his  affections. 


) 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THEIR  RELIGION. 

Objects  of  Worship — Belief  in  two  Supreme  Spirits— Subordinate  Deities — 
Sun,  Moon,  and  Stars  worshipped — Animals,  Waterfalls,  Trees,  Kocks, 
Thunder — Tradition  of  Thunder  Gods — Personal  and  familiar  Gods — 
Mode  of  making  personal  Gods,  and  worshipping  them. 

THE  various  tribes  of  the  Ojebway  nation  scattered 
along  the  shores  of  the  great  lakes  universally  believe  in 
the  existence  of  one  Supreme  Being ;  whom  they  call 
Keclie-munedoo,  which  literally  signifies  the  Great  Spirit, 
or  Kezha-munedoo,  the  Benevolent  or  Merciful  Spirit. 
Believing  Him  to  abound  in  love  and  mercy  towards  his 
creatures,  they  suppose  him  too  exalted  to  concern 
Himself  with  the  follies  of  poor  earthly  beings,  whose 
existence  lasts  only  as  it  were  for  a  day,  his  chief  care 
being  that  of  supplying  their  daily  wants.  Munedoo 
means  a  spirit,  either  good  or  bad.  In  order  to  designate 
the  character  or  nature  of  the  spirit,  they  use  the  prefixes, 
as  in  the  words  abov»e-mentioned. 

They  also  believe  in  the  existence  of  an  evil  spirit,  whom 
they  call  Ma7ije«munedoo.  This  spirit,  they  imagine, 
possesses  power  to  injure  any  who  dare  to  offend  him ; 
and,  in  order  to  retain  his  friendship  and  appease  his 
anger,  some  have  been  known  to  offer  sacrifice  to  him,  so 
that  he  might  not  bring  upon  them  death,  illness,  or  bad 
luck  in  hunting. 

They,  moreover,  believe  that  there  are  innumerable  sub- 

a  2 


84  THEIE   RELIGION. 

ordinate  deities,  or  spirits,  who  have  particular  control 
over  the  affairs  of  this  world.  For  instance,  they  believe 
that  there  is  one  god  who  has  the  charge  of  game,  another 
who  presides  over  the  fish  and  the  water,  another  who 
controls  the  winds  and  the  storms,  and  another  who 
watches  over  the  vegetable  world. 

These  imaginary  deities  become  the  objects  of  their 
invocations  when  they  are  so  circumstanced  as  to  require 
their  blessing.  For  instance,  if  an  Indian  wishes  for  suc 
cess  on  a  hunting  excursion,  he  will  direct  his  offering 
and  prayer  to  the  god  who  presides  over  the  deer,  the 
bear,  or  the  beaver,  (a  wonderful  gamekeeper  he  must  be,) 
that  success  may  attend  him ;  or,  if  he  desires  to  catch 
many  fish,  or  have  a  prosperous'voyage,  he  will  sacrifice  to 
the  god  of  the  waters.  I  have  known  an  Indian  kill  a 
black  dog  and  throw  it  into  the  lake,  that  he  might  meet 
with  no  disaster  whilst  on  his  voyage.  In  this  way  the 
poor  dark-minded  Indian  ignorantly  worships  the  creatures 
of  his  own  imagination. 

The  sun,  moon,  and  stars  are  also  adored  as  gods.  At 
the  rising  of  the  sun  the  old  chiefs  and  warriors  chant 
their  hymns  of  praise  to  welcome  his  return ;  and,  at  his 
going  down  they  thank  him  for  the  blessing  of  light  and 
heat  during  the  day.  When  a  visible  eclipse  of  the  sun 
takes  place,  the  poor  Indians  are  thrown  into-  the  greatest 
alarm.  They  call  it  the  sun's  dying,  and  suppose  that  he 
actually  dies.  In  order  to  assist  in  bringing  him  to  life 
again,  they  stick  coals  of  fire  upon  the  points  of  their 
arrows,  and  shoot  them  upwards  into  the  air,  that  by  these 
means  the  expiring  sun  may  be  re-animated  and  rekindled. 
The  moon  and  stars  are  reverenced  for  the  light  they  give 
by  night,  enabling  the  lonely  wanderer  to  travel  in  the 
absence  of  the  sun.  I  well  remember,  when  I  was  a  little 


PABOOKOWAIH. 


OBJECTS   OF  ADOKATION.  85 

boy,  being  told  by  our  aged  people  that  I  must  never  point 
my  finger  at  the  moon,  for,  if  I  did,  she  would  consider  it 
a  great  insult,  and  instantly  bite  it  off. 

Besides  the  superintending  gods  above  mentioned,  they 
hold  in  great  veneration  certain  animals  which  they  conceive 
to  possess  supernatural  powers — such  as  the  wolf,  fox,  and 
toad,  and  all  venomous  snakes.   Many  of  their  own  brethren 
are  highly  esteemed  by  passing  themselves  oif  as  pow-wows, 
or  conjurors,  and  thus,  by  their  cunning  art,  impose  on  the 
credulity  of  these  deluded  people.     Any  remarkable  fea 
tures  in  natural  scenery  or  terrific  places  become  objects  of 
superstitious  dread  and  veneration,  from  the  idfea  that  they 
are  the  abodes  of  gods :  for  instance,  curious  trees,  rocks, 
islands,  mountains,  caves,  or  waterfalls.*     Whenever  they 
approach  these  it  is  with  the  greatest  solemnity,  smoking  a 
pipe,  and  leaving  a  little  tobacco  as  an  offering  to  the  pre 
siding  spirit  of  ftie  hallowed  spot.     Waterfalls  are  noted 
places  for  their  tobacco  offerings,  from  the  belief  that  the 
gods  of  the  falls  are  very  fond  of  this  plant.     In  former 
days,  long  before  the  sublime  and   stupendous  Falls  of 
Niagara  became  a  place  of  fashionable  resort,  the  red  man 
would  draw  near  to  this  awful  cataract  with  timid  steps, 
invoking  most  solemnly  the  blessing  of  the  mighty  Spirit, 
imagining  that  the  King  God  of  all  other  falls  must  cer 
tainly  reside  here.  *  In  fact,  everything  that  strikes  the 
dark  untutored  mind  of  the  Indian  with  awe  and  astonish 
ment  becomes  to  him  an  object  of  dread  and  adoration. 
No  wonder,  then,  that  thunder,  being  far  beyond  his  com 
prehension,  is  regarded  as  a  most  powerful  deity,  and  has 
given  rise  to  many  absurd  stories.     They  consider  the  thun 
der  to  be  a  god  in  the  shape  of  a  large  eagle,  that  feeds  on 
serpents,  which  it  takes  from  under  the  earth  and  the  trunks 

*   Vide  Appendix  G. 


86  THEIR   EELIGION. 

of  hollow  trees.  When  a  thunderbolt  strikes  a  tree  or  the 
ground,  they  fancy  that  the  thunder  has  shot  his  fiery 
arrow  at  a  serpent  and  caught  it  away  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye.  Some  Indians  affirm  that  they  have  seen  the  ser 
pent  taken  up  by  the  thunder  into  the  clouds.  They 
believe  that  the  thunder  has  its  abode  on  the  top  of  a  high 
mountain  in  the  west,  where  it  lays  its  eggs  and  hatches 
its  young,  like  an  eagle,  and  whence  it  takes  its  flight  into 
different  parts  of  the  earth  in  search  of  serpents. 

The  following  is  a  story  related  by  an  Indian  who  is  said 
to  have  ventured,  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  to  visit  the  abode 
of  the  thunders : — "  After  fasting,  and  offering  my  devo 
tions  to  the  thunder,  I  with  much  difficulty  ascended  the 
mountain,  the  top  of  which  reached  to  the  clouds.  To  my 
great  astonishment,  as  I  looked  I  saw  the  thunder's  nest, 
where  a  brood  of  young  thunders  had  been  hatched  and 
reared.  I  saw  all  sorts  of  curious  bone^  of  serpents,  on 
the  flesh  of  which  the  old  thunders  had  been  feeding  their 
young ;  and  the  bark  of  the  young  cedar  trees  pealed  and 
stripped,  on  which  the  young  thunders  had  been  trying  their 
skill  in  shooting  their  arrows  before  going  abroad  to  hunt 
serpents." 

Another  thunder  tradition  says : — "  That  a  party  of 
Indians  were  once  travelling  on  an  extensive  plain,  when 
they  came  upon  two  young  thunders  tying  in  their  nest  in 
their  downy  feathers,  the  old  thunders  being  absent  at  the 
time.  Some  of  the  party  took  their  arrows,  and  with  the 
point  touched  the  eyes  of  the  young  thunders.  The  mo 
ment  they  did  so  their  arrows  were  shivered  to  pieces,  as 
if  a  young  thunder  arrow  had  struck  them.  One  of  the 
party,  more  wise  than  his  companions,  entreated  them  not  to 
meddle  with  them,  warning  them  that  if  they  did  they  would 
pay  dearly  for  their  folly.  The  foolish  young  men  would 


THUNDER   TRADITIONS.  87 

not  listen,  but  continued  to  teaze  and  finally  killed  them. 
As  soon  as  they  had  done  this  a  black  cloud  appeared, 
advancing  towards  them  with  great  fury.  Presently  the 
thunder  began  to  roar  and  send  forth  volumes  of  its  fiery 
indignation.  It  was  too  evident  that  the  old  thunders 
were  enraged  on  account  of  the  destruction  of  their  young 
— soon,  with  a  tremendous  crash,  the  arrows  of  the  mighty 
thunder-god  fell  on  the  foolish  men  and  destroyed  them, 
but  the  wise  and  good  Indian  escaped  unhurt. 

In  addition  to  their  belief  in  the  existence  of  these  general 
god.s,\e&chpoiv-iuow  conjuror  &R([medicine  'man  has  his  personal 
or  familiar  gods,  which  are  of  his  own  imagining.*  The 
method  they  take  to  obtain  the  favour  of  these  is  by  fasting 
and  watching.  The  Indian  youth  from  the  age  of  ten  to 
manhood  are  encouraged  by  their  parents  and  the  old 
people  to  fast,  with  the  promise  that  if  they  do  they  will 
entertain  them  in  the  evening  by  the  relation  of  one  of  their 
traditions  or  tales.  Inspired  with  the  hope  of  gaining 
favour  with  some  god,  and  looking  forward  to  the  promised 
reward  at  the  end  of  the  day,  they  rise  before  the  sun,  take 
a  piece  of  charcoal,  which  they  pound  to  powder,  and  with 
it  blacken  their  faces,  the  girls  only  blackening  the  upper 
part.  During  their  fast  they  abstain  from  all  food  and 
drinks  ;  towards  sunset  they  wash  their  faces  and  then  eat  a 
little  broth  or  soup  /which  has  been  prepared  for  them ;  in 
this  way  they  go  on  for  several  successive  days,  the  longer 

*  I  have  in  my  possession  two  family  gods.  On  e  is  called  PabooTcowaik — 
the  God  that  crushes  or  breaks  down  diseases.  The  other  is  a  goddess  named 
Nahneetis,  the  guardian  of  health.  This  goddess  was  delivered  up  to  me  by 
Eunice  Hank,  a  Muncey  Indian  woman,  who  with  her  friends  used  to  worship 
it  in  their  sacred  dances,  making  a  feast  to  it  every  year,  when  a  fat  doe  was 
sacrificed  as  an  offering,  and  many  presents  were  given  by  the  friends  assem 
bled.  She  told  me  she  was  now  restored  to  worship  the  Christians'  God,  and 
therefore  had  no  further  use  for  it. 


88  THEIR   RELIGION. 

the  better,  and  the  more  munedoos  they  will  be  likely  to 
propitiate.  All  this  time  they  notice  every  remarkable 
event,  dream,  or  supernatural  sound ;  and  whichever  of 
these  makes  the  most  impression  on  their  minds  during  their 
fast,  suggests  the  particular  spirit  which  becomes  their 
personal  munedoo  as  long  as  they  live,  and  in  all  emergencies 
and  dangers  they  will  caU  upon  him  for  assistance.  A  pious 
Indian,  by  the  name  of  Thomas  Magee,  stated  in  one  of  our 
religious  meetings  that  there  was  a  time  when  he  used  to 
worship  a  great  number  of  little  gods;  that  at  one  time, 
when  in  the  danger  of  perishing  in  the  woods  with  cold,  he 
prayed  to  thfe  trees  standing  around  him  to  save  him  from 
freezing  to  death ;  but  that  the  trees  stood  still  and  made 
no  effort  to  save  him,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  own 
exertions  he  would  certainly  have  died.  He  thanked  the 
Great  Spirit  that  he  had  been  brought  to  know  the  vanity 
of  idol-worship,  and  that  now  he  worshipped  the  one  true 
God.  By  the  agency  of  these  munedoos  they  pretend  to 
possess  the  power  of  bewitching  one  another,  performing 
extraordinary  cures,  foretelling  future  events,  vanquishing 
their  enemies,  and  charming  the  pretty  Indian  girl  they 
intend  to  marry.  If  they  chance  to  dream  of  seeing  a 
munedoo  standing  on  a  rock  in  the  lake,  they  imagine  they 
have  obtained  the  assistance  of  a  powerful  god.  To  dream 
of  seeing  an  old  grey-headed  man  is  taken  as  a  token  of 
long  life ;  or  of  a  pretty  woman,  that  they  will  be  blest  with 
more  wives  than  one.  If  they  happen  to  dream  of  sharp- 
pointed  instruments,  or  anything  that  is  proof  against  the 
arrow,  tomahawk,  or  bullet,  they  fancy  themselves  proof 
against  the  shot  of  their  enemy.  When  they  dream  of 
animals  or  fowls  they  imagine  they  are  invested  with  the 
power  of  self-defence  as  possessed  by  these  creatures.  A 
poor  Indian  at  Lake  Huron  used  to  boast  that  he  had 


FAITH   IN   DREAMS.  89 

obtained  the  spirit  of  a  bat.  The  following  Ojebway 
tradition  of  a  war  exploit  will  show  the  confidence  they 
place  in  dreams : — 

A  canoe  manned  with  warriors  was  once  pursued  by  a 
number  of  others,  all  filled  with  their  enemies.  They 
endeavoured  to  escape,  paddling  with  all  their  might,  but 
the  enemy  still  gained  upon  them ;  then  the  old  warriors 
began  to  call  for  the  assistance  of  those  things  they  had 
dreamt  of  during  their  fast-days.  One  man's  munedoo  was 
a  sturgeon,  which  being  invoked,  their  speed  was  soon  equal 
to  that  of  this  fish,  leaving  the  enemy  far  behind ;  but  the 
sturgeon  being  short-winded,  was  soon  tir<sd,  and  the 
enemy  again  advanced  rapidly  upon  them.  The  rest  of  the 
warriors,  with  the  exception  of  one  young  man  who,  from 
his  mean  and  ragged  appearance,  was  considered  a  fool, 
called  the  assistance  of  their  gods,  which  for  a  time  enabled 
them  to  keep  in  advance.  At  length,  having  exhausted  the 
strength  of  all  their  munedoos,  they  were  beginning  to  give 
themselves  up  for  lost,  the  other  canoes  being  now  so  near 
as  to  turn  to  head  them,  when  just  at  this  critical  moment 
the  foolish  young  man  thought  of  his  medicine  bag,  which  in 
their  flight  he  had  taken  off  from  his  side  and  laid  in  the 
canoe.  He  called  out,  "Where  is  my  medicine  bag?" 
The  warriors  told  him  to  be  quiet ;  what  did  he  want  with 
his  medicine  bag  at  /this  perilous  time  ?  He  still  shouted, 
"Where  is  my  medicine  bag?"  They  again  told  him  to  paddle 
and  not  trouble  them  about  his  medicine  bag.  As  he  per 
sisted  in  his  cry,  "  Where  is  my  medicine  bag  ?"  one  of  the 
warriors  seeing  it  by  his  side  took  it  up  and  threw  it  to 
him.  He,  putting  his  hand  into  it,  pulled  out  an  old  pouch 
made  of  the  skin  of  a  Saw-Ull,  a  species  of  duck.  This  he 
held  by  the  neck  to  the  water.  Immediately  the  canoe 
began  to  glide  swiftly  at  the  usual  speed  of  a  Saw-bill;  and 


\)0  THEIE    EELIGION. 

after  being  propelled  for  a  short  time  by  this  wonderful 
power,  they  looked  back  and  found  they  were  far  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  enemy,  who  had  now  given  up  the  chase. 
Surely  this  Indian  deserved  a  patent  for  his  wonderful  pro 
pelling  power,  which  would  have  superseded  the  use  of  the 
jarring  and  thumping  steam-boats,  now  the  wonder  and 
admiration  of  the  American  Indian.  The  young  man  then 
took  up  his  pouch,  wrung  the  water  out  of  it,  and  replaced 
it  in  his  bag ;  telling  the  Indian  that  he  had  not  worn  his 
medicine  bag  about  his  person  for  nothing, — that  in  his  fast 
he  had  dreamt  of  this  fowl,  and  was  told  that  in  all  dangers 
it  would  deliver  him,  and  that  he  should  possess  the  speed 
and  untiring  nature  of  the  Saw-bill  duck.  The  old  warriors 
were  astonished  at  the  power  of  the  young  man  whom  they 
had  looked  upon  as  almost  an  idiot,  and  were  taught  by 
him  a  lesson,  never  to  form  a  mean  opinion  of  any  persons 
from  their  outward  appearance. 

Another  story  related  by  our  people  illustrates  the  reli 
ance  they  place  on  the  power  and  help  of  these  munedoos: — 

Many  years  ago  an  old  chief  had  occasion  to  go  to  war 
with  a  neighbouring  tribe  of  Indians.  He  assembled  all  his 
warriors  together,  and,  after  informing  them  of  the  object 
he  had  in  view,  called  them  to  him  one  by  one,  and  inquired 
what  they  had  dreamt  of  during  their  fast-days,  and  what 
munedoos  they  could  rely  on  for  assistance.  Those  who  had 
had  dreams,  and  those  who  had  had  none  at  all,  he  placed  by 
themselves.  All  who  had  dreamt  of  wars,  or  things  proof 
against  the  arrow,  tomahawk,  or  bullet,  he  selected  for  the 
expedition.  When  he  came  to  the  last  man  and  asked  him 
what  he  had  dreamt  of,  he  replied,  with  a  long  whining 
tone,  "  Ahneed."  The  chief,  not  understanding  what 
he  meant,  repeated  the  question;  the  man  replied  as 
before,  "  Ahneed."  "  What  do  you  say  ?"  said  the  chief. 


FASTING  AND   DREAMS.  91 

"  Ahneed"  was  again  the  answer.  The  chief  inquired  what 
he  meant  by  ahneed ;  when  the  warrior  surprised  him  by 
stating  that  during  his  fastings  he  dreamt  of  almit,  that  is, 
a  spear.  The  chief  asked,  "  And  what  good  will  a  spear 
do  you  ?"  "  As  the  point  of  the  spear  is  proof  against 
the  arrow,  tomahawk,  and  bullet,  so  is  my  body  against  all 
the  shot  of  the  enemy/7  "  Very  well/'  said  the  chief, 
"  you  shall  go  with  me  to  the  war."  The  chief,  with  his 
select  warriors,  then  left  for  the  scene  of  action ;  and,  after 
crossing  a  river  in  canoes,  they  fell  upon  the  enemy,  whom 
they  soon  conquered,  destroying  many  of  them.  In 
all  the  battles  they  fought,  not  one  of  the*  old  chiefs 
party  fell.  The  success  and  preservation  of  this  war  party 
was  attributed  solely  to  the  aid  of  the  munedoos  obtained 
by  dreams. 

I  well  remember,  in  my  early  days,  when  I  used  to 
blacken  my  face  vand  fast,  in  order  to  obtain  the  favour  of 
some  familiar  god,  that  one  day,  being  thirsty,  I  took  a  sip 
of  water.  The  moment  I  had  done  so  I  remembered  I  was 
fasting.  The  thoughtless  act  filled  me  with  sorrow,  and  I 
wept  the  greater  part  of  the  night,  fearing  that  now  no 
munedoo  would  ever  communicate  himself  to  me. 

In  all  my  fastings  I  never  had  any  vision  or  dream ;  and, 
consequently,  obtained  no  familiar  god,  nor  a  spirit  of  the 
rank  of  a  pow-wow.  *  What  a  mercy  it  is  to  know  that  neither 
our  happiness  nor  success  depends  upon  the  supposed 
possession  of  these  imaginary  gods,  but  that  there  is  one 
only  true  and  living  God,  whose  assistance  none  ever  did, 
or  ever  can,  seek  in  vain  ! 

Many  of  the  white  people  who  have  but  a  partial 
acquaintance  with  the  Indian  character,  have  imagined 
that,  whilst  the  Indian  follows  the  light  of  nature,  he  will 
be  saved  by  that  light,  and  that  he  is  far  happier  in  that 


THEIR   EELIGION. 

barbarous  state  than  he  would  be  as  a  civilised  Christian. 
They  have  therefore  contended  that,  as  an  act  of  justice 
to  the  poor  Indian,  the  missionary  ought  not  to  disturb  his 
happiness  by  endeavouring  to  impart  to  him  that  by  which 
he  cannot  be  benefited.  Their  constant  cry  is,  "  Let  the 
Indian  alone :  he  is  well  enough  off :  do  not  enhance  his 
guilt  and  his  misery."  Would  these  objectors  wish  to 
become  savages  for  the  sake  of  bettering  their  condition  ? 
Perhaps  there  is  not  much  difference  between  them  and 
the  wild  Indian.  I  believe  that  if  an  Indian  avails  himself 
of  the  light  he  has  he  will  be  saved,  as  infants  are,  through 
the  merits  of  Christ's  blood.  He  certainly  knows  that  it 
is  wrong  to  murder,  quarrel,  fight,  steal,  and  commit 
fornication  and  adultery ;  but  I  ask,  where  is  the  Indian 
who  ever  lived  in  accordance  with  this  intuitive  knowledge 
of  truth  ?  I  know  of  none,  and  I  have  made  particular 
inquiry  of  the  old  men  if  they  ever  knew  an  Indian  to 
walk  so  straight  as  never  to  break  the  law  of  nature.  The 
answer  uniformly  has  been,  "  Not  a  single  one."  Conse 
quently,  if  any  are  saved  by  the  light  of  nature,  the 
number  must  be  small.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  the 
poor  untutored  Indian  can  follow  the  light,  when  we  con 
sider  that  " the  light  that  is  in  him  is  darkness"  and  that 
he  is  under  the  power  and  control  of  the  evil  spirit,  who 
worketh  in  the  hearts  of  all  the  pagan  nations  of  the 
earth.  Every  enlightened  Christian  knows  that  were  it 
not  for  the  direct  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  he  could 
not  of  himself  do  any  good  thing ;  but  that  the  carnal 
mind,  which  is  enmity  against  God,  would  predominate, 
and  lead  him  to  commit  all  manner  of  sin.  If  it  be  diffi 
cult  for  the  Christian  to  follow  the  good  he  knows,  what 
must  be  the  utter  helplessness  of  the  pagan  Indian,  who  is 
destitute  of  all  Christian  privileges  ?  This  much  I  admit, — 


INFLUENCE   OF   CHRISTIANITY.  95 

that  the  state  of  the  red  man,  previous  to  the  introduction 
of  European  vices,  and  the  fire-waters,  was  superior  to 
what  it  is  now,  when  the  white  man's  religion  has  not 
changed  his  heart.  But  the  Indian,  unhappily,  is  more 
prone  to  follow  the  evil  than  the  good  practices  of  the 
white  man.  This  proves  that  he  is  naturally  depraved ; 
and  if  Christianity  has  not  effected  all  that  is  desirable  in 
the  suppression  of  vice,  it  is  the  Indian's  sin,  and  not  the 
white  man's  religion,  that  ought  to  be  blamed.  I  can 
affirm  that  the  Indian  in  his  natural  state  is  not  happy. 
He  has  his  trials,  afflictions,  and  fears :  the  worst  passions 
of  the  human  mind  bear  uncontrolled  sway,  entailing- 
misery  and  woe.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to 
the  wicked."  A  civilized  state,  even  without  religion,  is- 
far  preferable- to  paganism. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

RELIGIOUS  FEASTS  AND   SACRIFICES. 

Not  periodical — Invitation  to  feasts — Coloured  quills — Mode  of  offering 
Sacrifices  —  Burnt  Offerings — Concluding  prayer — Kesponse — Various 
kinds  of  Feasts — Mode  of  burying  the  Dead — Mourning  for  the  Dead — 
Notions  of  a  Future  State. 

THE  Ojebways  attach  great  importance  to  their  religious 
feasts  and  sacrifices.  They  observe  them  frequently  during 
the  course  of  the  year,  but  not  at  any  stated  period ;  each 
person  appointing  his  own  time,  to  suit  his  convenience  or 
necessity.  The  Indians,  when  approaching  their  imaginary 
gods,  never  kneel  or  prostrate  their  bodies  before  the 
object  of  adoration,  excepting  when  they  enter  Jeesulikon, 
or  the  conjuring-house. 

Their  mode  of  imploring  the  favour  or  appeasing  the 
anger  of  their  deities,  is  by  offering  sacrifices  to  them 
in  the  following  order: — When  an  Indian  meets  with 
ill-luck  in  hunting,  or  when  afflictions  come  across  his 
path,  he  fancies  that  by  the  neglect  of  some  duty  he  has 
incurred  the  displeasure  of  his  munedoo,  for  which  he  is 
angry  with  him ;  and,  in  order  to  appease  his  wrath,  he 
devotes  the  first  game  he  takes  to  making  a  religious  feast, 
to  which  he  invites  a  number  of  the  principal  men  and 
women  from  the  other  wigwams.  A  young  man  is  gene 
rally  sent  as  a  messenger  to  invite  the  guests,  who  carries 
with  him  a  bunch  of  coloured  quills  or  sticks,  about  four 
inches  long.*  On  entering  the  wigwam  he  shouts  out 

*  Indian  method  of  dying  porcupine  quills  : — White;  The  natural  colour. 
Red  ;  Dyed  with  a  roo  called  ahdesahwahyon,  and  the  berries  of  the  sumach, 


N  AHNEETIS  ,    THE     GUARDIAN    OF     HEALTH 
Hie*  Broaches  werv  all  Annual  -Fresents  . 


PJELIGIOUS   FEASTS.  95 

Keweekomegoo ;  that  is,  "  Yon  are  bidden  to  a  feast !"  He 
then  distributes  the  quills  to  such  as  are  invited:  these 
answer  to  the  white  people's  invitation  cards.  When  the 
guests  arrive  at  the  feast-maker's  wigwam  the  quills  are 
returned  to  him ;  they  are  of  three  colours,  red,  green,  and 
white ;  the  red  for  the  aged,  or  those  versed  in  the  wall- 
bulinoo  order;  the  green  for  the  media  order;  and  the 
white  for  the  common  people.  The  guests  bring  with 
them  their  pouches,  pipes,  and  calumet.  When  seated  on 
the  ground,  around  the  fire,  they  soon  begin  to  smoke,  in 
profound  silence,  which  they  continue  to  do  so  long  as  the 
food  is  preparing.  The  Indian  who  makes  the  feast  sits 
smoking  with  a  solemn  countenance,  dressed  in  his  best 
clothes  and  ornaments.  He  then  places  his  medicine-bag, 
pouch,  and  images,  by  his  side.  The  kettle  in  which  the 
meat  has  been  prepared  is  taken  off  the  fire  and  placed 
before  him.  The  bowls  of  the  guests  are  then  handed  to  the 
person  who  serves,  and  returned  to  the  owners  with  pieces 
of  meat ;  giving  to  the  aged  such  as  are  most  esteemed. 
When  all  are  served  the  remainder  is  put  on  the  fire  as  a 
burnt  offering.  Each  one  also  cuts  off  a  piece  from  his 
portion,  which  he  puts  on  the  burning  coals.  While  the 
meat  is  burning,  an  aged  man,  previously  engaged,  offers 
up  a  prayer,  consisting  of  vain  repetitions,  to  the  munedoos ; 
the  purport  of  whidh  is,  that  as  the  munedoos  are  always 
pleased  with  the  offerings  of  their  people,  this  man  doth 
now  come  with  his  offering,  and  that  it  may  please  them  to 
restore  to  him  their  blessings,  and  cause  him  his  accus 
tomed  success  in  hunting,  or  as  the  case  may  be.  At  the 
conclusion  of  the  prayer  all  unite  in  a  hearty  response,  by 

called  by  the  Indians  Pahquahnahminzh.  Blue;  Dyed  with  blue  cloth, 
boiled  until  the  dye  is  extracted.  Yellow ;  Dyed  with  a  yellow  root,  called 
cozahwahke.  Black;  Dyed  with  the  bark  of  the  black  walnut  tree. 


96  RELIGIOUS   FEASTS. 

saying  Too ;  equivalent  to  the  Christian's  Amen.  After 
this  they  proceed  to  eat ;  what  is  left  they  take  away  to 
their  own  wigwams.  The  person  who  makes  the  feast,  and 
his  family,  never  partake  of  any. 

The  gods  to  whom  these  feasts  are  dedicated  are  various, 
GFor  instance,  if  an  Indian  is  visited  with  sickness,  he  fancies 
that  he  has  offended  the  Master  of  life ;  and,  therefore,  to 
remove  the  disease,  he  makes  a  feast  to  that  particular 
god.  Should  he  meet  with  ill  luck  in  hunting,  he  imagines 
he  has  displeased  the  god  of  the  game,  and  the  offering  is 
made  to  him.  I  have  frequently  seen  the  Indians,  when 
on  a  journey  by  water,  kill  a  dog  and  throw  it  into  the 
lake  or  river,  as  an  offering  to  the  god  of  the  waters,  for 
a  safe  and  prosperous  voyage,  or  for  success  in  fishing. 
Tobacco  is  esteemed  a  weed  peculiarly  pleasing  to  the 
munedoos,  and  is  used  more  or  less  in  all  their  feasts.  The 
jire-waters,  now  so  much  loved  by  the  natives,  have  become 
a  common  offering,  judging  the  taste  of  their  gods  by  their 
own.  They  consider  it  the  most  acceptable  sacrifice  they 
can  make.  Sometimes,  an  Indian,  before  he  prepares  a 
feast,  will  sing  and  beat  his  tawaegun  (drum)  for  a  whole 
night,  his  object  being  to  make  atonement  for  neglected 
duty. 

In  illustrating  the  nature  of  the  great  atonement  to  my 
pagan  countrymen,  I  have  often  made  reference  to  their 
own  sacrifices.  This  has  greatly  assisted  me  in  explaining 
to  them  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  Christian  religion, 
— the  necessity,  value,  and  efficacy  of  the  oblation  presented 
by  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  for  the  redemption  of 
transgressors. 

The  Ojebways  have  no  regularly  appointed  priests  among 
them.  The  pow-wows,  conjurors,  and  gifted  speakers,  act 
for  them,  so  that  any  ambitious  Indian,  by  cultivating  the 


ANNUAL       PRESENTS      TO      NAHNEETIS 

ClffOi  'Petticoats,  J  Piece  ofDcersforv 
.  - Short  Gcmv ,  5  Shirt?,  €,  Cotton;  Jterchuf 

VJhtterrv  for  Gcwn/  S  Leqqtns  . 


DIFFERENT  KINDS_QF_.FEASTS.  9 7 

talent  of  public  speaking,  may  become  the  mouthpiece  of  his 
deluded  brethren. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  feasts ;  of  these  the  following 
are  the  most  important : — • 

The  Painted  Pole  Feast,  or  Sahsahgewejegun,  which  sig 
nifies  the  spreading  out  to  view  the  desires  of  the  suppli 
cants — a  term  still  often  used  by  the  Christian  Indians  in 
making  their  wants  known  to  God.  When  this  feast  is 
made  a  long  pole  is  erected ;  after  the  bark  is  carefully 
pealed  it  is  painted  red  and  black,  and  before  raising  it  a 
bunch  of  sacred  feathers  and  tobacco  is  tied  near  the  top. 
When  elevated  a  shout  is  raised,  after  which  the  meat 
cooked  for  the  occasion  is  distributed,  part  of  it  being 
burnt  as  an  offering  to  the  sun,  the  pole  pointing  to  the 
object  of  worship. 

Weendahsowin  Weekoondeidn,  The  Naming  Feast. — This 
feast  is  held  when  a  name  is  to  be  given  to  a  child.  It  is 
prepared  by  the  parents,  who  invite  a  number  of  their  rela 
tions  or  neighbours.  Representations  of  the  gods  to  whom 
the  child  is  to  be  dedicated  are  previously  prepared,  and 
now  laid  before  it.  While  the  meat  is  burning,  an  old 
Indian  offers  up  a  prayer,  during  which  he  pronounces  the 
name  given  to  the  child,  to  which  the  whole  company 
respond  by  repeating  it. 

Ooslikenetaligawin,  which  signifies  the  offering  of  the  first 
animal  or  fowl  killed  by  a  boy,  and  is  always  turned  into 
a  feast.  The  whole  is  cooked,  and  part  offered  as  a  burnt 
offering.  These  feasts  consist  of  two  kinds.  The  first  small 
game  the  boy  kills,  such  as  a  bird,  squirrel,  or  duck,  makes 
the  first  feast ;  and  the  second  is  when  he  kills  a  bear,  dear, 
or  buffalo.  It  is  a  kind  of  offering  of  the  first-fruits,  and 
destines  the  boy  to  take  his  place  among  the  braves  and 
noted  hunters. 


98  EELIGIOUS   FEASTS. 

JeebanaJikawin ;  A  feast  or  offering  to  the  dead. — This 
ceremony  is  observed  by  kindling  a  fire  at  the  head  of 
the  grave,  on  which  a  portion  of  meat  is  burnt,  and  a 
prayer  offered  to  the  dead.  The  fire-water  was  a  celebrated 
offering  in  this  feast,  especially  if  the  departed  had  been 
fond  of  it  during  his  earthly  career ;  it  was  then  believed 
that  he  would  enjoy  the  pure  alcoholic  fumes  arising  from, 
the  liquid  flames. 

Kahgahgeshee,  or  Crow  Feast. — The  meat  or  fish  on  this 
occasion  is  spread  on  bark  trays,  around  which  the  party 
invited  take  their  seats,  like  a  flock  of  crows  round  a  dead 
carcase,  helping  themselves  from  the  abundance  placed  be 
fore  them,  each  trying  to  outdo  his  fellow  in  gormandizing. 
While  eating  they  now  and  then  raise  a  noise  like  a  crow. 
The  Indians  often  say  that  the  white  man's  table  is  a  com 
plete  crow  feast. 

Uhnemoosh,  or  Dog  Feast,  is  considered  a  meritorious 
sacrifice.  After  the  dog  is  killed  and  the  hair  singed  off,  it 
is  cooked  without  breaking  a  bone.  The  animal  is  then 
divided  among  the  guests,  a  portion  being  devoted  as  a 
burnt  offering.  The  dog  is  considered  by  Indians  as  an 
ominous  animal,  and  supposed  to  possess  great  virtue. 

There  are  several  other  minor  feasts,  unnecessary  to 
detail. 

MODE  OF  BURYING  THEIR  DEAD. 

As  soon  as  an  Indian  dies  his  friends  proceed  to  lay  him 
out  on  the  ground,  putting  his  best  clothes  on  him,  and 
wrapping  his  body  in  skins  or  blankets.  Formerly,  coffins 
were  not  known,  or  not  used  among  them.  After  digging 
a  hole  about  three  feet  deep,  generally  in  the  course  of 
twelve  hours  they  inter  him,  with  his  head  towards  the 
west.  They  then  place  by  the  side  of  the  corpse  all  his 


V 


. 


BURIAL   CEREMONIES.  99 

former  hunting  and  war  implements ;  such  as  his  bow  and 
arrow,  tomahawk,  gun,  pipe  and   tobacco,  knife,   pouch, 
flint  and  steel,  medicine-bag,  kettle,  trinkets,  and  other 
articles  which  he  carried  with  him  when  going  on  a  long 
journey.     The  grave  is  then  covered,  and  on  the  top  of  it 
poles  or  sticks  are  placed  lengthways,  to  the  height  of 
about  two  feet,    over  which  birch  bark  or  mats  form  a 
covering  to  secure  the  body  from  the  rain.     The  relations 
or  friends  of  the  deceased  then  sit  on  the  ground  in  a  circle 
round  the  head  of  the  grave,  when  the  usual  offering  to  the 
dead — consisting  of  meat,  soup,  or  the  fire-waters — is  made. 
This  is  handed  to  the  people  present  in  bowls,  a  certain 
quantity  being  kept  back  for  a  burnt  offering.     While  this 
is  preparing  at  the  head  of  the  grave,  the  old  man,  or 
speaker  for  the  occasion,  makes  a  prayer  to  the  soul  of  the 
departed,  enumerating  his  good  qualities,   imploring  the 
blessing  of  the  dead  that  his  Spirit  may  intercede  for  them, 
that  they  may  have  plenty  of  game ;  he  also  exhorts  his 
spirit  to  depart  quietly  from  them.     They  believe  that  the 
soul  partakes  of  a  portion  of  the  feast,  and  especially  that 
which  is  consumed  by  fire.    If  the  deceased  was  a  husband, 
it  is  often  the  custom  for  the  widow,  after  the  burial  is 
over,  to  spring  or  leap  over  the  grave,  and  then  run  zig 
zag  behind  the  trees,  as  if  she  were  fleeing  from  some 
one.     This  is  called  running  away  from  the  spirit  of  her 
husband,  that  it  may  not  haunt  her.    In  the  evening  of  the 
day  on  which  the  burial  has  taken  place,  when  it  begins  to 
grow  dark,  the  men  fire  off  their  guns  through  the  hole  left 
at  the  top  of  the  wigwam.     As  soon  as  this  firing  ceases, 
the  old  women  commence  knocking  and  making  such  a 
rattling  at  the  door  as  would  frighten  away  any  spirit  that 
would  dare  to  hover  near.     The  next  ceremony  is,  to  cut 
into  narrow  strips,  like  ribbon,  thin  birch  bark.     These  they 

H  2 


100  RELIGIOUS   FEASTS. 

fold  into  shapes,  and  hang  round  inside  the  wigwam,  so 
that  the  least  puff  of  wind  will  move  them.  With  such 
scarecrows  as  these,  what  spirit  would  venture  to  disturb 
their  slumbers  ?  Lest  this  should  not  prove  effectual,  they 
will  also  frequently  take  a  deer's  tail,  and  after  burning  or 
singeing  off  all  the  hair,  will  rub  the  necks  or  faces  of  the 
children  before  they  lie  down  to  sleep,  thinking  that  the 
offensive  smell  will  be  another  preventive  to  the  spirit's 
entrance.  I  well  remember  when  I  used  to  be  daubed 
over  with  this  disagreeable  fumigation,  and  had  great  faith 
in  it  all.  Thinking  that  the  soul  lingers  about  the  body 
a  long  time  before  it  takes  its  final  departure,  they  use 
these  means  to  hasten  it  away. 

I  was  present  at  the  burial  of  an  old  pagan  chief  by  the 
name  of  OdahmeJcoo,  of  Muncey  Town.  We  had  a  coffin 
made  for  him,  which  was  presented  to  his  relatives ;  but 
before  they  placed  the  body  in  it,  they  bored  several  holes 
at  the  head,  in  order,  as  they  supposed,  to  enable  the  soul 
to  go  in  and  out  at  pleasure. 

During  the  winter  season,  when  the  ground  is  frozen  as 
hard  as  a  rock,  two  or  three  feet  deep ;  finding  it  almost 
'  impossible  to  penetrate  through  the  frost,  having  no  suitable 
tools,  they  are  obliged  to  wind  up  the  corpse  in  skins  and  the 
bark  of  trees,  and  then  hang  it  on  the  fork  of  a  large  tree, 
high  enough  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  wolves,  foxes, 
and  dogs,  that  would  soon  devour  it.  Thus  the  body 
hangs  till  decomposition  takes  place,  and  the  bones,  falling 
to  the  ground,  are  afterwards  gathered  up  and  buried. 

MANNER  OF  MOURNING  FOR  THE  DEAD. 

Immediately  after  the  decease  of  an  Indian  all  the  near 
relatives  go  into  mourning,  by  blackening  their  faces  with 
charcoal,  and  putting  on  the  most  ragged  and  filthy 
clothing  they  can  find.  These  they  wear  for  a  year,  which 


MOURNING   FOR  TlUf 

is  the  usual  time  of  mourning  for  a  husband  or  wife,  father 
or  mother. 

At  the  expiration  of  a  year  the  widow  or  widower  is 
allowed  to  marry  again.  Should  this  take  place  before  the 
year  expires,  it  is  considered  not  only  a  want  of  affection 
for  the  memory  of  the  dead,  but  a  great  insult  to  the  rela 
tions,  who  have  a  claim  on  the  person  during  the  days  of 
the  mourning.  The  first  few  days  after  the  death  of  the 
relative  are  spent  in  retirement  and  fasting ;  during  the 
whole  of  their  mourning  they  make  an  offering  of  a  portion 
of  their  daily  food  to  the  dead,  and  this  they  do  by  putting 
a  part  of  it  in  the  fire,  which  burns  while  they  are  eating. 
I  have  seen  my  poor  countrymen  make  an  offering  of  the 
fire-waters  to  the  departed :  they  deem  this  very  acceptable, 
on  account  of  its  igniting  the  moment  it  touches  the  fire. 
Occasionally  they  visit  the  grave  of  the  dead,  and  there 
make  a  feast  and  an  offering  to  the  departed  spirit :  tobacco 
is  never  forgotten  at  these  times.  All  the  friends  of  the 
dead  will  for  a  long  time  wear  leather  strings  tied  round 
their  wrists  and  ankles,  for  the  purpose  of  reminding  them 
of  their  deceased  relative. 

It  is  a  custom  always  observed  by  widows,  to  tie  up  a 
bundle  of  clothes  in  the  form  of  an  infant,  frequently  orna 
mented  with  silver  brooches.  This  she  will  lie  with  and 
carry  about  for  twelve  months,  as  a  memorial  of  her  de 
parted  husband.  When  the  days  of  her  mourning:  are 
ended,  a  feast  is  prepared  by  some  of  her  relatives,  at 
which  she  appears  in  her  best  attire.  Having  for  the  first 
time  for  a  twelvemonth  washed  herself  all  over,  she  looks 
once  more  neat  and  clean. 

NOTIONS   OF  A  FUTURE   STATE. 

The  Ojebways,  although  believers  in  a  future  state,  know 
nothing  about  the  blessedness  of  heaven,  as  an  inheritance 


;    .\  BELIGIOUS  FEASTS. 

procured  by  the  merits  and  prepared  by  the  grace  of  the 
Saviour.  They  have,  therefore,  no  motives  to  impel  them 
to  a  life  of  holy  obedience,  and  to  qualify  them  for  the  enjoy 
ment  of  that  world  of  glory  on  which  the  Christian  fixes 
the  eye  of  faith ;  in  hope  of  admission  into  which  he  can  say : 
"  We  know  that  if  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were 
dissolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  They  are  equally 
ignorant  of  a  place  of  torment,  as  described  in  the  word  of 
God ;  consequently  they  have  no  fears  of  eternal  punish 
ment  to  check  their  unbridled  indulgences,  but  are  left  to 
act  as  if  there  were  no  hell  to  escape,  and  no  heaven  to 
gain.  The  Indians  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  soul 
after  the  death  of  the  body,  but  their  ideas  on  this  subject 
are  very  confused  and  absurd.  The  little  knowledge  they 
think  they  possess  is  derived  from  persons-  who  have  been 
in  a  trance,  and  travelled  in  their  dreams  to  the  imaginary 
world  of  spirits,  which  they  say  lies  towards  the  sun-setting. 
They  believe  that  the  souls  of  brave  warriors,  good  hunters, 
the  virtuous,  and  the  hospitable,  go  there  and  spend  an 
eternity  in  carnal  pleasures,  such  as  feasting,  dancing,  and 
the  like  ;  but  the  soul  of  the  coward,  the  lazy  hunter,  the 
stingy,  the  liar,  the  thief,  the  adulterer,  and  the  unmerciful, 
they  imagine  will  wander  about  in  unknown  regions  of  dark 
ness,  and  be  exposed  to  the  continual  rage  of  wolves,  bears, 
panthers,  &c.  These  are  all  the  ideas  the  poor  Ojebways 
have  of  a  future  state  ;  and  they  can  Conceive  of  no  greater 
degree  of  felicity  or  misery  as  the  reward  of  good  and  evil. 
Some  Indians  believe,  that  between  this  world  and  the  world 
of  spirits  there  is  a  wide,  deep,  and  rapid  river,  over  which 
the  souls  of  Indians  are  constrained  to  pass  on  a  log  or  pole 
which  is  placed  across  it.  They  think  that  the  souls  of  the 
brave  and  good  encounter  no  difficulty  in  crossing,  whilst 


IDEAS   OF  A   FUTURE   STATE.  103 

those  of  the  cowardly  and  wicked  fall  off-  and  are  carried 
down  by  the  current  into  unknown  regions. 

The  following  story,  which  was  communicated  to  me  by 
an  Indian  named  Netaligawineneli,  will  serve  to  illustrate 
the  source  whence  they  derive  their  absurd  ideas  of  a  future 
state : — 

In  the  Indian  country  far  west  an  Indian  once  fell  into 
a  trance,  and  when  he  came  to  life  again,  he  gave  the  fol 
lowing  account  of  his  journey  to  the  world  of  spirits. 

"  I  started,  said  he,  my  soul  or  spirit  in  company  with 
a  number  of  Indians  who  were  travelling  to  the  same  spirit 
land.  We  directed  our  footsteps  to  wards  the  sun-setting.  On 
our  journey  we  passed  through  a  beautiful  country,  and  on 
each  side  of  our  trail  saw  strawberries  as  large  as  a  man's 
head.  We  ate  some  of  them,  and  found  them  very  sweet ; 
but  one  of  our  party  who  kept  loitering  behind,  came  up  to 
us  and  demanded,  'Why  were  we  eating  a  ball  of  fire?' 
We  tried  to  persuade  him  to  the  contrary,  but  the  foolish 
fellow  would  not  listen  to  our  words,  and  so  went  on  his 
way  hungry.  We  travelled  on  until  we  came  to  a  dark, 
swollen,  and  rapid  river,  over  which  was  laid  a  log  vibrat 
ing  in  a  constant  wavering  motion.  On  this  log  we  ven 
tured  to  cross,  and  having  arrived  at  the  further  end  of  it, 
we  found  that  it  did  not  reach  the  shore ;  this  obliged  us 
to  spring  with  all  our  might  to  the  land.  As  soon  as  we 
had  done  this,  we  perceived  that  the  supposed  log  on  which 
we  had  crossed  was  a  large  serpent,  waving  and  playing 
with  his  huge  body  over  the  river.  The  foolish  man  behind 
was  tossed  about  until  he  fell  off,  but  he  at  length  succeeded 
in  swimming  to  shore.  No  sooner  was  he  on  land  than  a 
fierce  and  famished  pack  of  wolves  fell  on  him  and  began  to 
tear  him  to  pieces,  and  we  saw  him  no  more.  We  jour 
neyed  on,  and  by  and  by  came  within  sight  of  the  town  of 


104  RELIGIOUS   FEASTS. 

spirits.  As  soon  as  we  made  our  appearance  there  was  a 
great  shout  heard,  and  all  our  relatives  ran  to  meet  us  and 
to  welcome  us  to  their  happy  country.  My  mother  made  a 
feast  for  me,  and  prepared  everything  that  was  pleasant  to 
eat  and  to  look  upon  ;  here  we  saw  all  our  forefathers ;  and 
game  and  corn  in  abundance  ;  all  were  happy  and  contented. 

"  After  staying  a  short  time,  the  Great  Spirit  of  the  place 
told  me  that  I  must  go  back  to  the  country  I  had  left,  as 
the  time  had  not  yet  arrived  for  me  to  dwell  there.  I  ac 
cordingly  made  ready  to  return ;  and  as  I  was  leaving,  my 
mother  reproached  me  by  all  manner  of  foolish  names  for 
wishing  to  leave  so  lovely  and  beautiful  a  place.  I  took 
my  departure,  and  soon  found  myself  in  the  body  and  in 
the  world  I  had  left." 

The  Indians  also  believe  that  the  soul  of  the  dead  lingers 
about  the  wigwam  or  place  of  the  departed  for  several  days, 
and  that  it  hovers  about  the  body  after  it  has  laid  in  the 
grave  for  some  time  before  it  finally  departs  to  the  world  of 
spirits.  In  addition  to  this  belief  in  the  immortality  of  their 
own  souls,  they  suppose  that  all  animals,  fowls,  fish,  trees, 
stones,  &c.,  are  endowed  with  immortal  spirits,  and  that 
they  possess  supernatural  power  to  punish  any  who  may 
dare  to  despise  or  make  any  unnecessary  waste  of  them. 
When  they  deify  any  of  these  objects,  they  imagine  that 
they  have  the  aid  of  their  souls,  imparting  to  them  the 
power  or  destructive  quality  the  animal  or  thing  possesses. 
In  their  heathen  state  they  very  seldom  cut  down  green  or 
living  trees,  from  the  idea  that  it  puts  them  to  pain ;  and 
some  of  the  pow-wows  have  pretended  to  hear  the  wailing  of 
the  forest  trees  when  suffering  under  the  operation  of  the 
hatchet  or  axe. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

COUNCILS. 

General  Councils — Common  Councils — Mode  of  Electing  Chiefs — Government. 
GENEBAL   COUNCILS. 

THESE  are  composed  of  the  chiefs  and  principal  men  of 
the  various  tribes,  met  to  deliberate  on  matters  connected 
with  their  general  interests.  The  head  chief  of  the  tribe  in 
whose  territory  the  council  is  convened,  generally  takes  the 
lead.  The  first  thing  done  is  to  kindle  the  council  fire. 
This  is  called  the  uncovering  of  the  slumbering  embers  of 
former  councils,  and  the  closing  of  a  council  is  called  the 
covering  of  the  council  fire.  From  this  fire  they  light  their 
pipes.  The  council  then  proceed  to  the  ceremony  of  smoking 
the  pipe  of  peace,  from  which  each  Indian  present  takes  a  few 
whiffs.  This  is  done  in  token  of  their  friendship  and  good-will 
to  all  parties.  The  pipe  of  peace  is  generally  decorated  with 
coloured  feathers,  strings  of  wampum,  and  ribbons.  When 
the  round  of  smoking  is  over  the  ceremony  of  condolence 
is  repeated, — a  specimen  of  which  is  the  following,  delivered 
by  Chief  Obwahnowashkung,  alias  John  Riley,  of  the 
Ojebways,  to  the  Oneidas  on  their  arrival  from  the  State  of 
New  York  to  their  new  settlement  at  Muncey  Town  :— 

"  Brothers, — We  thank  the  Great  Spirit  for  preserving 
us  to  meet  this  day  at  the  time  appointed. 

"  Brothers, — It  makes  our  hearts  glad  to  see  you  all 
seated  with  us  on  this  ground. 

"Brothers, — You  have  come  a  long  march  to  settle  your 
selves  down  by  us. 

"  Brothers, — I  raise  my  hand  to  heaven  and  take  the 


106  COUNCILS. 

white  feather,  and  brush  out  your  ears,  that  you  may  hear 
us  distinctly. 

"  Brothers, — I  raise  my  hand  to  heaven  and  take  the 
white  linen  and  wipe  out  your  eyes,  that  you  may  see  us 
clearly  who  we  are. 

"  Brothers, — Your  journey  has  been  long  and  tiresome. 
You  have  come  through  dust  and  mud,  and  in  your  hard 
march  have  sweat  much.  I  raise  my  hand  to  heaven  and 
take  the  clean  white  linen,  and  wipe  off  all  the  perspiration 
and  dust  from  your  bodies,  that  you  may  be  rested  and 
have  contentment. 

"  Brothers, — I  raise  my  hand  to  heaven  and  take  the 
white  linen  and  make  your  feet  clean,  that  you  may  tread 
softly  and  take  comfort. 

"  Brothers, — We  are  thankful  to  the  Great  Spirit  who 
has  brought  you  here  in  safety  with  your  women  and 
children.  I  raise  my  hand  to  heaven  and  take  the  pure 
white  linen  and  wipe  all  your  hearts  clean,  that  you  may 
have  great  happiness  in  this  land  of  our  fathers.  Your 
march  is  now  ended  ;  we  meet  you  as  brothers  ;  we  shake 
hands  with  you  all.  This  is  all  I  have  to  say." 

To  this  ceremony  the  assent  of  "Yah,  yah,"  was  responded 
throughout  the  whole  company  of  the  Oneidas.  Having  per 
formed  this  ceremony,  they  proceed  to  deliberate  on  the  busi 
ness  for  which  they  have  assembled.  The  leading  chiefs  of  the 
different  tribes  rise  in  succession  and  deliver  their  talk, 
during  which  the  greatest  attention  is  paid  by  all  present, 
who  now  and  then  utter  their  hearty  responses  by  the  word 
"  haahe."  At  these  councils  federal  unions  are  formed,  war 
or  peace  is  declared,  treaties  are  made  or  renewed,  and 
boundaries  of  territories  established.  There  is  no  voting 
among  them,  but  they  give  their  decisions  according  to  the 
opinions  expressed  by  a  majority  of  the  speakers.  When 
a  measure  is  found  to  be  unpopular  it  is  generally  dropped  : 


COUNCILS.  107 

hence  there  are  seldom  any  warm  discussions.  If  the  same 
freedom  of  speech  was  taken  at  the  Indian  Councils  which 
is  often  witnessed  in  the  Legislative  halls  of  the  white 
man,  the  scalping-knife  and  tomahawk  would  soon  be  seen 
glittering  in  true  Lynch  style  over  the  heads  of  the  rude 
Indian  law-makers. 

COMMON  COUNCILS. 

These  are  held  in  each  tribe  whenever  occasion  may 
require,  and  are  composed  of  the  chiefs  and  principal  men 
belonging  to  the  tribe.  Each  person  is  at  liberty  to  give 
his  opinion  on  all  matters  before  the  council.  At  these 
meetings  their  local  affairs  are  settled,  such  as  the  sale  and 
division  of  their  lands,  settling  disputes,  adopting  other 
Indians  into  their  own  body,  and  the  transaction  of  business 
with  the  British  Government. 

MODE   OF   ELECTING   CHIEFS. 

The  Indian  country  is  allotted  into  districts,  and  each 
section  is  owned  by  a  separate  tribe  of  Indians.  These 
districts  become  so  many  independent  states,  governed  by 
their  own  chiefs,  one  of  whom  is  styled  the  "  head  chief. " 
The  office  of  civil  chieftainship  is  hereditary,  but  not  always 
conferred  on  the  eldest  son.  When  a  vacancy  occurs,  the 
surviving  chiefs  and  principal  men  meet  in  council,  and  then 
select  the  most  suitable  person  out  of  the  family.  The 
eldest  son  has  the  first  consideration ;  but  if  he  is  deficient 
in  any  of  the  qualifications  which  they  consider  necessary, 
they  elect  the  next  best  qualified.  In  some  instances  this 
practice  has  caused  bickerings  and  jealousies  in  the  family, 
and  has  been  known  to  lead  even  to  murder.  The  title  of 
head  chief  is  either  hereditary  or  obtained  by  the  election 


108  COUNCILS. 

of  the  tribe  in  council  assembled.  Although  the  Ojebway 
nation  of  Indians  is  scattered  over  a  vast  section  of  country 
there  is  no  person  among  them  recognized  as  king.  The 
office  of  war  chief  is  not  hereditary,  but  the  tribe  in  council 
confer  this  honour  on  those  who  have  distinguished  them 
selves  by  bravery  and  wisdom.  Such  chiefs  always  take 
the  lead  in  their  wars,  while  the  civil  chiefs  manage  their 
general  matters  at  home.  Every  chief  has  his  attendant, 
called  mezhenuhivay,  who  acts  as  aide-de-camp.  It  is  his 
duty  to  deliver  the  messages  of  the  chief,  call  a  council,  and 
attend  to  all  the  necessary  preparations.  Formerly  the  chiefs 
received  no  emolument  for  their  services.  These  were 
purely  honorary,  except  on  the  division  of  government 
presents,  when  the  chiefs  got  a  larger  portion  than  the 
warriors.  Now,  however,  among  some  of  the  civilized 
tribes  the  head  chiefs  receive  a  small  annual  allowance  out 
of  their  payments  for  lands  ceded  to  the  Crown.  A  uni 
versal  custom  prevails,  as  far  as  the  influence  of  the  British 
Government  extends,  to  give  to  each  chief  a  silver  medal, 
as  a  mark  of  recognition  of  his  office.  This  medal,  on  all 
public  occasions,  is  worn  suspended  round  the  neck. 

GOVEKNMENT. 

The  Indian  form  of  government  is  patriarchal,  after  the 
manner  of  the  ancients.  The  chiefs  are  the  heads  or 
fathers  of  their  respective  tribes ;  but  their  authority  ex 
tends  no  further  than  to  their  own  body,  while  their 
influence  depends  much  on  their  wisdom,  bravery,  and 
hospitality.  When  they  lack  any  of  these  qualities  they 
fall  proportionably  in  the  estimation  of  their  people.  It 
is,  therefore,  of  importance  that  they  should  excel  in  every 
thing  pertaining  to  the  dignity  of  a  chieftain,  since  they 
govern  more  by  persuasion  than  by  coercion.  Whenever 


GOVERNMENT.  109 

their  acts  give  general  dissatisfaction  their  power  ceases. 
They  have  scarcely  any  executive  power,  and  can  do  but 
little  without  the  concurrence  of  the  subordinate  chiefs  and 
principal  men.  They  have  no  written  code  of  laws,  nor 
any  power  to  put  their  people  to  death  by  their  own  will ; 
but  they  are  taught  by  their  chiefs  and  wise  men  to  observe 
a  certain  line  of  conduct,  such  as  to  be  kind  and  hospitable. 
They  are  also  encouraged  to  be  good  hunters  and  warriors, 
and  great  pow-wows,  or  medicine  men. 

The  chiefs  of  each  tribe  settle  all  the  disputes  which  arise 
among  the  people,  watch  over  their  territories,  regulate  the 
order  of  their  marches,  and  appoint  the  time  for  their 
general  rendezvous.  This  generally  takes  place  after  sugar- 
making,  or  about  the  first  of  May,  when  they  have  their 
grand  pow-wow  dances  and  various  games. 

The  law  with  regard  to  murder  was  blood  for  blood, 
especially  if  the  relatives  of  the  murdered  man  required  the 
life  of  the  murderer.  The  manner  of  pronouncing  sentence 
was  the  following : — The  chiefs  and  principal  men  met  in 
council,  at  which  the  parties  concerned  were  present,  and 
when  the  guilt  of  the  accused  was  proved  the  head  chief 
pronounced  sentence  of  death.  The  executioner  was  the 
nearest  kin  to  the  murderer,  and  either  shot,  tomahawked, 
or  stabbed  him.  It  sometimes  happened  that  the  relatives 
of  the  murdered  and  his  kindred  were  held  responsible  for 
the  payment  of  whatever  was  demanded.*  I  knew  one 
instance  in  which  the  murderer  and  his  relatives  were 
several  years  making  payment,  consisting  of  clothing, 
kettles,  skins,  fire-water,  and  a  horse.  This  is,  in  fact, 
a  sort  of  servitude;  for  the  murderer  is  not  his  own, 
having  to  exert  himself  until  the  injured  parties  are  satisfied. 
Instances  have  occurred  in  which  the  parties  have  taken 

*  Vide  Appendix  H. 


110  COUNCILS. 

upon  themselves  to  punish  the  offender,  instead  of  sub 
mitting  the  case  to  the  proper  authorities.  I  was  informed 
by  John  Sunday,  a  well-known  Indian  Missionary,  that 
when  he  was  travelling  on  the  south  shore  of  Lake  Superior, 
the  Indians  informed  him  that  the  tribe  who  formerly  in 
habited  that  part  of  the  country  were  nearly  exterminated 
by  carrying  out  this  dreadful  spirit  of  revenge.  The  quarrel 
began  between  two  families,  which  ended  in  the  murder  of 
one  of  them.  The  friends  of  the  murdered  killed  the  mur 
derer,  and  so  they  continued  to  kill  one  family  after  another, 
till  the  wrhole  tribe  were  nearly  destroyed.  A  number  of 
graves  were  pointed  out  to  him  which  covered  the  remains 
of  these  unhappy  victims.  Formerly  the  advice  of  a  chief, 
or  noted  wise  man,  was  implicitly  obeyed ;  but  their  power 
has  much  decreased  since  the  settlement  of  the  country  by 
white  people.  The  British  Government  have  taken  them 
under  their  paternal  care ;  they  have  been  taught  to  look 
up  with  reverence  to  their  great  Father,  the  governor,  and 
the  Indian  agents.  As  a  consequence,  the  chiefs  have 
yielded  their  authority  into  the  hands  of  more  wise  and 
powerful  guardians.  Another  cause  of  their  losing  their 
influence  is,  the  introduction  of  fire-waters,  which  have 
sadly  prostrated  the  wisdom  and  dignity  of  the  Indian. 


CHAPTER  X. 

WAE. 

War  between  Ojebways  and  Nahdoways — Treaty  of  Peace — Division  of  Coun 
try — General  Council  held  January  17th,  1840 — Wars  between  Ojebways 
and  Sioux — Treaty  between  French  and  Ojebways — British  and  Ojebways 
— Mode  of  Warfare — Weapons  of  War — War  Song — War  Dance — Burying 
the  Tomahawk. 

I  HATE  often  listened  with  deep  attention  to  the  narration 
of  Ojebway  wars  with  other  tribes,  long  before  the  white 
man  appeared  in  their  country.  The  Ojebway  tradition 
states  that  the  greatest  and  most  bloody  war  their  nation 
ever  waged  was  with  the  Nahdoways,  a  term  applied  to  the 
six  nations  of  Indians  who  originally  inhabited  territory 
now  called  the  State  of  New  York.  The  Hnrons  or  Wyan- 
dots  are  also  called  by  the  same  name.  At  the  commence 
ment  of  their  wars  the  Ojebway  country  extended  eastward 
only  to  the  northern  shores  of  Lake  Huron,  and  the 
Nahdoways  owner\  all  the  region  east  and  south  of  it.  The 
Nahdoways  made  the  first  inroads  into  the  Ojebway  coun 
try,  where  they  surprised,  killed,  and  scalped  many  of  the 
scattered  tribes.  For  some  time  the  Ojebways  acted  only 
upon  the  defensive ;  but,  after  the  war  had  continued  for  a 
considerable  period,  during  which  many  were  killed  on 
both  sides,  the  Nahdoways  got  so  exasperated  at  being 
often  defeated,  that  they  began  to  kill  and  waste,  and  to  eat 
all  their  prisoners.  These  brutal  acts  called  forth  the  ven 
geance  of  the  great  Ojebway  nation.  A  general  council 
was  called;  the  chiefs,  prophets,  and  warriors  met;  the 


112  WARS. 

council  fire  was  lighted,  and  the  smoke  ascended  to  the 
abode  of  the  Great  Spirit.  The  meat  of  the  buffalo,  deer, 
bear,  and  beaver  was  brought  and  cooked  ;  sacrifices  were 
offered  to  the  gods  of  war  for  success  in  their  contemplated 
destruction.  The  prophets  predicted  certain  victory ;  the 
sachems  made  speeches,  and  exhorted  the  young  braves  to 
signalize  themselves  by  some  daring  exploit,  and  thus  im 
mortalize  their  names.  The  old  warriors  sung  the  war 
song,  and  the  young  men  danced  the  war  dance.  The  war 
whoop  was  raised,  which  made  the  earth  quake,  the  sound 
echoing  like  that  of  thunder  from  mountain  to  mountain. 
The  tomahawk,  or  puhguhmahgun,  was  lifted  up,  the  scalp- 
ing-knife  sharpened,  and  the  hows  and  arrows  made  ready. 
The  medicine  bags  were  prepared,  and  filled  with  war 
medicines  and  emblems  of  their  munedoos.  The  warriors 
painted  themselves ;  the  women  prepared  the  parched  corn 
and  the  pemegun.  All  being  in  readiness,  the  war-whoop 
was  again  raised,  and  every  warrior  breathed  vengeance  on 
his  enemy.  The  women  saluted  their  husbands,  and,  ex 
horting  them  to  be  courageous,  wished  them  a  happy 
return  with  many  scalps.  The  children  wept  at  the 
thought  that  perchance  they  might  never  again  see  the 
smile  of  their  fathers ;  but  the  brave  warrior  leaves  all  the 
endearments  of 'home  for  the  land  of  the  enemy.  The  first 
attack  they  made  was  on  an  island  on  the  south  shore  of 
Lake  Huron.  There  they  fell  on  a  large  body  of  the  Nah- 
doways,  who  had  been  dancing  and  feasting  for  several 
nights,  and  were  so  exhausted  as  to  have  sunk  into  a  pro 
found  sleep  the  night  on  which  they  ^vvere  killed.  The 
island  is  called  Pequahkoondebaymenis,  that  is,  skull 
island,  from  the  number  of  skulls  left  on  it.  In  one  of  my 
tours  to  the  north  I  visited  this  island,  and  lodged  on  it 
for  a  night.  Its  present  appearance  indicates  a  place 


WARS   OF   THE   OJEBWAYS.  113 

frequented  by  Indians,  the  smoothness  of  its  surface  being 

I  well  adapted  for  a  great  Indian  dance.  From  this  island 
they  extended  their  conquests  to  Lakes  Simcoe,  Ontario, 
Erie,  St.  Clair,  and  the  interior  parts  of  the  country :  wher- 

I  ever  they  went  they  conquered,  destroying  villages,  and 

|  leaving  dead  bodies  in  heaps. 

The  last  battle  that  was  fought  was  at  the  outlet  of  Bur 
lington  Bay,  which  was  at  the  south  end  of  the  beach,  where 

I  the  Government  House  formerly  stood.  Near  to  this  place 
a  mound  of  human  bones" is  to  be  seen  to  this  day ;  and  also 
another "ante-north  end,  close  to  the  residence  of  the  late 
Captain  Brant.  Besides  these,  there  are  traces  of  fortifica- 

i  tions  aTshort  distances  along  J:he  whole  length  of  the  beach, 
where  holes  had  been  dug  into  the  sand  and  a  breastwork 

I  thrown  round  them.  They  are  about  twenty  or  thirty  feet 
in  diameter,  but  were  originally  much  larger.  At  this 

|  finishing  battle  the  Ojebways  spared  a  few  of  their  enemies, 
whom  they  suffered  to  depart  in  peace,  that  they  might  go 
and  tell  their  brethren  on  the  south  side  of  Lake  Ontario 
the  fate  of  their  nation — that  all  the  country  between  the 
waters  of  the  Ontario,  Erie,  St.  Clair,  and  Huron,  was  now 
surrendered  into  the  hands  of  the  Ojebways.  After  this, 
the  conquering  remnant  divided  into  two  parties :  one  went 
westward,  and  settled  on  the  banks  of  the*  Detroit  river ; 
the  other  moved  eastward,  towards  the  shores  of  the  St. 
Lawrence.  A  treaty  of  peace  an,d  friendship  was  then 
made  with  the  Nahdoways  residing  on  tlje  south  side  of 
Lake  Ontario,  and  both  nations  solemnly  covenanted,  by 
going  through  the  usual  forms  of  burying  the  tomahawk, 
smoking  the  pipe  of  peace,  and  locking  their  hands  and 
arms  together,  agreeing  in  future  to  call  each  other  BRO 
THERS.  Thus  ended  their  wars  with  the  Nahdoways. 
The  territory  conquered  was  divided  among  the  victorious 

i 


114  WARS. 

Ojebways,  and  the  treaty  of  peace  and  friendship  mentioned 
has  from  time  to  time  been  renewed  at  general  councils.  Yet, 
notwithstanding  this  treaty,  there  has  been,  and  still  is,  a 
smothered  feeling  of  hatred  and  enmity  between  the  two 
nations ;  so  that  when  either  of  them  comes  within  the  haunts 
of  the  other  they  are  in  constant  fear.  Ever  since  my  re 
membrance,  I  have  frequently  known  the  Ojebways  to  be 
greatly  alarmed  at  the  idea  of  the  Nahdoways  lurking  about 
in  the  woods  near  them,  and  I  firmly  believe  that  nothing 
but  Christianity  and  a  good  sound  education  will  ever  era 
dicate  this  settled  hatred. 

I  shall  now  give  an  account  of  one  of  the  general  Councils 
convened  for  the  purpose  of  renewing  this  ancient  treaty, 
which  was  held  at  the  Credit  Mission,  U.C.,  January,  1840. 

GENERAL  COUNCIL,  Friday,  January  Yttli,  1840. 
After  singing  and  prayer  the  subject  of  appointing  a 
chairman  to  preside  during  the  council  was  discussed.  It 
was  stated  that  our  fathers  never  recognised  a  presiding ; 
chief  in  their  councils  ;  but,  as  we  were  imitating  the  good 
ways  of  the  white  people,  it  was  thought  proper  to  appoint 
one.  It  was  then  proposed  by  John  Sunday  that  Chief: 
Joseph  Sawyer  be  chosen  president  of  this  council.  Peter 
Jones  was  appointed  secretary.  The  subject  of  renewing 
the  treaty  of  friendship  with  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians  on* 
the  Grand  River  (whose  chiefs  intend  meeting  this  council 
on  Tuesday  next)  was  talked  over.  Joseph  Sawyer,  Chief 
Yellowhead,  and  John  Sunday,  were  named  the  speakers. 
Colonel  Jarvis,  Chief  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs,  met: 
the  chiefs  in  council  this  afternoon.  After  smoking  the  pipe 
of  peace*  with  the  Colonel,  Chief  Sawyer  proceeded  to 

*  The  pipe  used  on  this  occasion  was  the  beautiful  pipe  tomahawk  pre 
sented  to  Kahkewaquonaby  in  the  year  1838,  by  Colonel  Sir  Augustus 
D'Este,  son  of  the  late  Duke  of  Sussex. 


GENERAL   COUNCIL.  115 

inform  Colonel  Jarvis  that  the  object  of  convening  this 
council  was  to  talk  over  various  matters  which  related  to 
their  welfare.  These  were  :  Firstly,  To  smoke  the  pipe  of 
peace  with  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians  on  the  Grand  River, 
and  thus  renew  the  treaty  formed  with  them  by  our  fore 
fathers  many  winters  ago.  Secondly,  To  thank  the  British 
Government  for  the  annual  presents  and  other  tokens  of 
friendship  shewn  to  them,  and  to  solicit  the  continuance  of 
such  presents.  In  reply,  the  Colonel  solemnly  assured  the 
council  that  the  British  Government  had  no  intention  of 
discontinuing  the  presents,  nor  would  they  ever  violate  such 
a  pledge  as  was  made  between  the  Indian  tribes  and  the 
government.  Thirdly,  To  consider  whether  anything  can  be 
done  to  promote  their  civilization,  forming  manual  labour 
schools,  &c.  Colonel  Jarvis  expressed  his  happiness  to 
hear  that  the  attention  of  the  chiefs  had  been  directed  to 
this  subject;  thought  that  they  might  appropriate  part  of 
their  annuities  to  their  agricultural  pursuits ;  and  said  that 
the  Home  Government  was  now  considering  what  can  be 
done  for  the  central  manual  labour  schools.  Fourthly,  To 
renew  the  application  to  the  government  for  titles  for  their 
lands.  The  Colonel  replied,  that  he  was  opposed  to  the 
Indians  receiving  ?"itle-deeds ;  that  this  opposition  arose 
from  the  good-will  he  had  towards  them,  as  lie  feared  if  they 
had  deeds  many  of  them  would  soon  dispose  of  their  lands. 
He  also  stated  that  he  had  recommended  a  plan  to  the 
government,  which  he  thought  would  answer  every  pur 
pose  :  this  was  to  give  every  tribe  a  map  of  the  reserves, 
with  a  'full  description  of  it,  and  the  names  of  the  Indians 
to  whom  it  belongs ;  and  the  said  map  to  contain  the  seal 
of  the  province  and  the  government  signature.  He  added 
that  his  Excellency  Sir  George  Arthur  had  approved  of  this 
plan  ;  and  such  titles,  he  thought,  would  soon  be  granted 

i  2 


116  WARS. 

to  them.  Fifthly,  To  petition  the  government  to  extend 
the  Indian  reserve  at  the  Sangeeny  River,  for  the  benefit' 
of  all  the  Indian  tribes  who  might  hereafter  wish  to  emi 
grate  to  that  place.  This  subject  the  Colonel  said  was  j 
under  the  consideration  of  the  government.  Sixthly,  To 
enquire  of  the  Colonial  Government  in  what  relation  they 
stand  to  the  British  Government — whether  as  subjects  or 
allies.  Colonel  Jarvis  intimated  that  all  the  Chippeway 
Indians  were  considered  as  subjects,  and  added  that  this 
question  was  under  consideration.  The  Colonel  before 
leaving  the  council  expressed  the  pleasure  which  he  felt  in 
witnessing  such  a  large  and  well-behaved  body  of  people  as 
he  saw  before  him.  He  was  happy  to  know  that  all  were 
animated  by  one  feeling  of  attachment  to  Her  Majesty 
the  Queen,  and  her  government,  and  thought  their  de 
mands  were  quite  reasonable. 

Saturday,  18th  January. — Opened  by  singing  and  prayer. 
The  Muncey  chiefs  wrere  introduced,  and  the  chairman  con 
veyed  to  them  the  salutations  of  the  council,  and  expressed 
their  great  satisfaction  in  meeting  their  grandfathers.  Chief 
Westbrook,  the  Muncey  chief,  replied,  addressing  his 
grandchildren  through  John  Sumeko  as  interpreter.  Peter 
Jones  enquired  of  the  Muncey  chief  <!if  they  knew  the 
reason  why  they  called  the  Ojebways  their  grandchildren. 
Westbrook  answered  that  he  did  not  know  exactly,  but 
what  he  knew  he  would  tell  them.  He  said  that  they,  the 
Munceys,  formerly  lived  towards  the  sun-rising,  whence 
their  forefathers  were  driven  by  the  white  people ;  that 
when  they  came  to  this  part  of  the  country  they  met  the 
Ojebways ;  that  when  the  latter  had  observed  their  sedate 
and  quiet  disposition,  and  that  they  had  come  from  the 
east,  they  said  in  a  council  that  they  would  call  them  their 
grandfathers.  The  designation  has  continued  to  this  day. 


GEKEKAL  COUNCIL.  117 

I  The  council  disapproved  of  the  conduct  of  Kandoching  and 

j  his  people,  in  not  attending  this  assembly  after  having  been 

I  notified,  and  also  of  their  saying  that  they  supposed  they 

j  were  sent  for  in  order  to  be  talked  to  about  the  worthless 

Christianity.     During  the  day  the  council  took  into  con- 

isideration  the  necessity  of  malqng   greater   exertions  in 

( their  farming  operations.     The  speakers  were  Peter  Jones, 

John  Asance,    John    Riley,   William  Yellowhead,    Squire 

Markiii,  John  Sunday,  and  John  Simpson.     John  Sunday 

j  read  and  interpreted  a  communication  from  Sir  Augustus 

D'Este    and    Dr.    Hodgkin,    addressed    to    the    Indians 

[generally  in  this  province,  which  communication  contained 

I  much  wholesome  advice  to  them.     Peter  Jones  also  read  a 

!  letter  to  the  council  from  Sir  Augustus  D'Este.     With  the 

I  contents  of  these  letters  the  council  was  highly  pleased.* 

"Monday,  20th  January. — After  singing  and  prayer  a 
j  committee  was  appointed  to  draft  a  statement,  embodying 
those  matters  which  the  council  wished  to  lay  before  the 
government.  The  committee  consisted  of  nine  of  the 
principal  men.  Another  of  sixteen  was  appointed,  to  con 
sider  the  propriety  of  reprinting  the  old  Indian  Hymn 
Book,  corrected,  and  other  hymns  which  Peter  Jones  may 
have  translated,  and  to  report  to  this  council  on  the  same. 

"  Tuesday,  2lst  January. — Singing  and  prayer.  The  chiefs 

of  the  Six  Nations  of  Indians,  numbering  fifteen,  residing  on 

j  the  Grand  River,  having  arrived  in  the  village,  were  invited 

I  to  meet  their  Ojebway  brethren  in  council.     Having  come, 

;  and  being  seated  by  themselves,  the   chairman,   Joseph 

Sawyer,  addressed  them  in  behalf  of  the  council  to  this 

effect : — That  the  Great  Spirit  has  brought  us  together  in 

I  health  and  peace.     That  as  they,  the  Mohawk  chiefs,  had 

i  expressed  a  wish  to  meet  their  Chippeway  brethren,  he  had 

*   Vide  Appendix  I. 


118  WAES. 

sent  for  them  in  order  to  smoke  the  pipe  of  peace  together, 
and  thus  renew  the  treaty  of  friendship  which  had  been  made 
by  our  forefathers.  That  the  time  was  when  the  hearts  of 
our  forefathers  were  black  towards  each  other,  and  much 
blood  was  shed.  The  Good  Spirit  inclined  the  hearts  of 
our  forefathers  to  kindle  the  great  council  fires,  when  the 
pipe  of  peace  was  smoked,  the  tomahawk  buried,  and  they 
took  each  other  by  the  arms,  and  called  each  other  BEOTHEES, 
Thus  their  hearts,  formerly  black,  became  white  towards 
each  other.  He  had  sent  for  them  that  the  council  fire, 
kindled  by  our  forefathers,  might  be  rekindled  by  gathering 
the  brand  together,  as  the  fire  was  almost  extinguished. 
He  hoped,  when  it  was  lighted,  the  smoke  would  ever 
ascend  in  a  straight  line  to  the  Great  Spirit,  so  that  when 
the  eyes  of  all  our  people  looked  upon  it  they  might 
remember  the  treaty  of  our  forefathers.  The  council  fire 
was  then  struck  with  flint  and  steel,  and  the  pipe  of  peace 
having  been  filled,  it  was  lighted  with  the  new  fire,  and  the 
Mezhinuway  (Aide-de-camp)  presented  itto  each  of  the  chiefs 
of  the  Six  Nations,  then  to  the  Ojebway  chiefs,  and  after 
wards  to  the  warriors  present.  John  S.  Johnson,  one  of 
the  Mohawk  chiefs,  informed  the  council  that  the  Onondaga 
chief,  who  kept  the  council  fire  or  "  talk  "of  the  Six  Nations, 
would  then  speak  in  their  behalf.  The  purport  of  this 
speech  was,  that,  his  Ojebway  brethren  having  invited  them, 
they  had  been  brought  to  meet  together  ;  that  they  were 
much  pleased  with  the  words  contained  in  the  letter  sent 
them;  that  they  were  happy  to  meet  their  Ojebway  brethren, 
and  to  hear  them  speak  of  the  ancient  treaties  made  by  our 
forefathers,  and  requested  to  consult  among  themselves  for 
a  short  time.  This  request  was  granted. 

The  council  again  met  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  Onon 
daga  chief,  John  Buck,  made  a  speech  and  exhibited  the 


THE  OJEBWAYS  AND  THE  SIX  NATIONS.  119 

wampum  belts,  the  memorials  of  the  old  treaties,  and 
explained  the  talks  contained  in  them.  There  were  four 
belts  or  strings  of  wampum. 

The  first  contained  the  first  treaty  made  between  the 
Six  Nations  and  the  Ojebways.  This  treaty  was  made  many 
years  ago,  when  the  great  council  was  held  at  the  east  end 
of  Lake  Ontario.  The  belt  was  in  the  form  of  a  dish  or 
bowl  in  the  centre,  which  the  chief  said  represented  that 
the  Ojebways  and  the  Six  Nations  were  all  to  eat  out  of 
the  same  dish ;  that  is,  to  have  all  their  game  in  common. 
In  the  centre  of  the  bowl  were  a  few  white  wampums,  which 
represented  a  beaver's  tail,  the  favourite  dish  of  the 
Ojebways.  At  this  council  the  treaty  of  friendship  was 
formed,  and  agreement  was  made  for  ever  after  to  call  each 
other  BEOTHEBS.  This  treaty  of  friendship  was  made  so 
strong  that  if  a  tree  fell  across  their  arms  it  could  not 
separate  them  or  cause  them  to  unloose  their  hold.  The 
second  wampum  was  given,  as  the  chief  stated,  where 
Buffalo  is  now  situated,  at  which  place  the  original  treaty 
was  renewed.  The  third  wampum  was  given  at  a  great 
council  held  at  the  Maumee  River,  at  which  the  late  Captain 
Joseph  Brant  was  present.  There  were  a  great  number  of 
different  tribes  present,  who  met  the  chiefs  of  the  Six  Nations 
for  the  purpose  of  forming  alliances  with  ea^h  other ;  but  the 
strangers  acted  very  treacherously,  and  would  have  mur 
dered  the  ambassadors  of  the  Six  Nations,  had  not  a  noted 
Ottawa  chief,  by  the  name  of  Agwezheway,  honourably 
protected  them,  so  that  they  were  enabled  to  effect  a  treaty 
of  friendship  with  the  Shawneys  and  other  tribes. 
Agwezheway  had  formed  a  confederacy  with  twenty-one 
different  tribes,  whom  he  could  at  any  time  call  to  his 
assistance.  The  fourth  and  last  wampum  was  given  by  the 
Ojebways  and  Ottawas  in  confirmation  of  the  treaties  of  our 
fathers.  This  council  took  place  at  Wellington  Square 


120  WARS. 

t 

about  twenty-five  years  ago.  After  this  chief  had  rehearsed 
the  talks  contained  in  the  wampums  in  his  possession,  one 
of  the  Mohawk  chiefs,  John  Johnson,  addressed  the  council 
to  this  effect : — That  it  was  their  intention  to  renew  treaties 
of  peace  and  friendship  with  all  the  Indian  tribes  in  the 
dominions  of  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  :  that  the  interests  of 
all  the  Indians  were  one :  that  they  had  always  supported 
the  British  Government,  as  they  were  strongly  attached  to 
it,  and  if  even  that  attachment  should  be  lessened,  it  would 
not  be  their  fault,  but  the  fault  of  the  government,  in  not 
keeping  faith  with  the  Indians :  that  all  the  Indian  tribes 
ought  to  unite  in  obtaining  titles  to  their  lands,  as  all 
Indians  stood  in  the  same  situation  with  regard  to  their 
lands :  that  the  government  and  the  white  people  were 
taking  away  their  lands  ,by  fair  promises :  that  they  called 
the  Governor  brother,  and  not  father,  as  the  Ojebways  do. 
The  reason  why  they  called  the  Governor  brother  was, 
that  they  might  feel  themselves  equal  with  the  Governor, 
and  so  speak  more  freely  with  him,  which  they  could  not 
do  if  he  was  their  father :  that  they  called  the  ministers 
who  preached  to  them  fathers  only  in  spiritual  things. 

Wednesday,  22nd  January. — The  council  being  consti 
tuted,  proceeded  to  business.  Chief  Yellowhead  made  a 
speech,  exhibiting  the  great  wampum  belt  of  the  Six 
Nations,  and  explaining  the  talk  contained  in  it.  John 
Sunday  next  addressed  the  chiefs  of  the  Six  Nations,  and 
replied  to  the  several  particulars  related  yesterday  by  the 
Onondaga  chief,  and  concluded  by  stating  that  they  (the 
Ojebways)  a  few  years  ago  were  very  poor  and  miserable, 
but  the  Great  Spirit  had  been  pleased  to  smile  upon  them, 
and  now  they  had  begun  to  have  their  eyes  opened  to  see 
what  was  for  their  good,  and  hoped  that  their  brothers,  the 
Six  Nations,  would  now  look  upon  them  as  having  risen 
from  their  former  wretchedness  and  degradation. 


THE  OJEBWAYS  AND  THE  SIX  NATIONS. 

The  Ojebway  chiefs  having  closed  their  talk  concerning 
the  renewal  of  the  treaties,  the  wampum  belts  were  re 
turned  to  the  Onondaga  chief,  with  the  salutations  of  all 
the  Ojebway  chiefs,  their  warriors,  women,  and  children. 

John  S.  Johnson,  one  of  the  Mohawk  chiefs,  next  addressed 
the  council.  He  informed  the  Ojebway  chiefs  of  the  rela 
tion  existing  between  the  Six  United  Nations.  "  The 
Mohawks/7  he  said,  "are  considered  the  head  nation — next 
to  them  the  Onondagas  and  the  Senecas,  who  are  their 
brothers.  The  Oneidas,  the  Cayugas,  and  the  Tuscaroras 
were  their  children,  who  were  also  three  brothers.  The 
Tuttelees,  Nanticokes,  Mantuas,  and  Delawares  were  their 
nephews,  who  dwell  in  thejr  bosoms."  Johnson  then  ex 
plained  the  emblems  contained  in  the  wampum  belt  brought 
by  Yellowhead,  which,  he  said,  they  acknowledged  to  be 
the  acts  of  their  fathers.  Firstly,  the  council  fire  at  the  Sault 
St.  Marie  has  no  emblem,  because  then  the  council  was 
held.  Secondly,  the  council  fire  as  Mamtoulni  has  the  em 
blem  of  a  beautiful  white  fish ;  this  signifies  purity,  or  a 
clean  white  heart — that  all  our  hearts  ought  to  be  white 
towards  each  other.  Thirdly,  the  emblem  of  a  beaver, 
placed  at  an  island  on  Penetanguishew  Bay,  denotes 
idsdom — that  al\  the  acts  of  our  fathers  were  done  in 
wisdom.  Fourthly,  the  emblem  of  a  white  deer  placed  at 
Lake  Simcoe,  signified  superiority;  the  dish  and  ladles  at 
the  same  place  indicated  abundance  of  game  and  food. 
Fifthly,  the  eagle  perched  on  a  Fall  pine  tree  at  the  Credit 
denotes  watching,  and  swiftness  in  conveying  messages. 
The  eagle  was  to  watch  all  the  council  fires  between  the 
Six  Nations  and  the  Ojebways ;  and  being  far-sighted,  he 
might,  in  the  event  of  anything  happening,  communicate 
the  tidings  to  the  distant  tribes.  Sixthly,  the  sun  was 
hung  up  in  the  centre  of  the  belt,  to  show  that  their  acts 
were  done  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  by  whom  they  swore  that 


122  WARS. 

they  would  for  ever  after  observe  the  treaties  made  between 
the  two  parties. 

Mr.  Johnson  also  informed  the  Ojebways  that  they  would, 
at  some  future  day,  desire  to  hold  another  council  with  all 
the  Ojebways  and  Ottawas,  and  that  they  would  let  the 
eagle  know  that  he  may  take  the  message  to  the  white 
deer,  who  would  decide  when  the  council  should  be  held. 
Yellowhead  presented  the  Six  Nations  with  two  strings  of 
white  wampum,  as  a  memorial  or  pledge  of  this  council, 
and  of  what  had  been  transacted  between  the  two  parties. 
The  chiefs  of  the  Six  Nations  then  returned  the  wampum 
belt  to  Yellowhead,  and  so  parted,  shaking  each  other  by 
the  arm;  whkh  method  was  adopted  by  our  forefathers 
when  the  treaty  of  friendship  was  first  formed.  Thus 
ended  the  renewal  of  the  treaty,  with  which  all  present  were 
much  pleased. 

The  committee  appointed  to  report  on  the  subject  of  re 
printing  another  edition  of  the  old  Ojebway  hymns  met 
this  evening  (January  22nd),  J.  Sawyer  in  the  chair.  After 
a  good  deal  of  discussion  on  the  subject,  the  following 
motion  passed : — Yeas,  14;  Nay,  1. 

"  That  this  committee  recommend  to  the  general  council 
to  reprint  the  old  hymns  revised,  with  such  other  as  our 
brother  Peter  Jones  may  translate,  at  the  expense  of  the 
several  Ojebway  tribes." 

Thursday,  23rd  January. — In  the  evening  of  this  day  the 
duties  of  the  chiefs  to  their  people  and  property,  and  the 
duty  of  warriors  to  their  chiefs,  were  discussed ;  when  many 
of  the  chiefs  who  had  given  way  to  drink  solemnly  promised 
that  they  would  never  again  be  overcome  by  the  fire-waters. 

Friday,  24<th  January. — The  council  being  constituted, 
the  secretary,  Peter  Jones,  read  the  following  Address  to 
the  Governor-General,  and  moved  its  adoption.  This  was 
carried  unanimously  by  a  rising  vote  : — 


ADDRESS   TO   THE   GOVERNOR-GENERAL. 


"To  our  Great  Father  the  Right  Hon.  CHARLES  PAULETT 
THOMSON,  Governor-General  of  British  North  Ame 
rica,  &c.j  &c. 

"  The  Address  of  the  Ojebway  Nation  of  Indians  residing 
at  Eiver  Credit,  Aldersville,  Rice  Lake,  Mud  Lake,  Balsam 
Lake,  Nanows,  Snake  Island,  Coldwater,  Sangeeny,  St. 
Clair,  and  Muncey  Town,  in  general  council  assembled. 

"  Father,  —  We,  the  children  of  the  great  Mother,  the 
Queen,  who  sit  beyond  the  great  waters,  beg  leave  most 
respectfully  to  approach  you,  our  great  Father,  for  the 
purpose  of  congratulating  you. 

"Father,  —  We  are  the  original  proprietors  of  this  country, 
on  which  your  white  children  have  built  their  towns,  and 
cleared  their  farms. 

"Father,  —  Our  people  were  once  numerous,  free,  and 
happy,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  abundance  which  our 
forests,  lakes,  and  rivers  produced. 

"Father,  —  When  the  white  man  came  into  our  country, 
our  forefathers  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  gave  him  land 
on  which  to  pitch  his  wigwam.  Ever  since  that  time  he 
has  continued  to  flow  to  our  shores  ;  and  now  the  white 
man  is  greater  and  stronger  than  your  red  children. 

"Father,  —  For  many  years  we  have  *been  made  very 
poor  on  account  of  the  introduction  among  us  of  the  fire 
waters  and  other  evils,  which  have  killed  or  ruined  many  of 
our  fathers. 

"Father,  —  About  sixteen  years  ago  the  words  of  the 
Great  Spirit  were  preached  to  us  by  the  Methodists.  We 
opened  our  ears,  and  the  Good  Spirit  opened  our  hearts, 
to  receive  the  Gospel  ;  and  we  are  happy  to  inform  your 
Excellency  that  great  changes  have  taken  place  among  our 
people.  We  have  forsaken  our  old  ways  and  evil  habits, 
and  are  trying  to  live  like  good  Christians  and  good  far- 


124  WARS. 

mers.  We  have  churches,  school-houses,  and  fields.     These 
things  make  our  hearts  very  glad. 

"  Father,  —  The  presents  we  receive  from  our  good 
Mother,  the  Queen,  are  of  great  benefit  to  us  and  our 
people,  and  we  beg  to  convey  to  her  Majesty,  through 
your  Excellency,  our  unfeigned  gratitude  for  the  same, 
which  we  hope  may  ever  be  continued. 

"Father, — We  rejoice  to  assure  your  Excellency  that  we 
are  perfectly  satisfied  and  contented  to  live  under  the  good 
and  powerful  protection  of  the  British  Government,  who 
have  already  proved,  by  repeated  acts  of  kindness,  that 
they  are  the  true  friends  of  the  red  man ;  and  we  shall 
ever  hold  ourselves  in  readiness  to  obey  the  calls  of  our 
Great  Mother  the  Queen  to  defend  this  country. 

"Father, — We  are  also  glad  to  state  that  the  fame  of 
British  generosity  has  spread  far  to  the  west,  and  many  of 
our  red  brethren  living  within  the  territory  of  the  United 
States  have  experienced  a  desire  to  come  and  settle  in  the 
dominions  of  our  great  Mother  the  Queen. 

"Father, — As  her  Majesty  has  b6en  pleased  to  send  a 
chief  of  your  exalted  station  and  wisdom  for  the  purpose 
of  arranging  and  settling  the  affairs  of  these  provinces,  we 
lift  up  our  hearts  to  the  Great  Spirit  abdve  that  he  may 
bless  your  important  undertaking,  and  make  you  a  great 
blessing  both  to  the  white  and  red  men  of  this  country ; 
so  that  our  children  after  us  may  rise  up  and  call  you 
blessed. 

"  Father, — We  now  shake  hands  with  you  in  our  hearts, 
in  which  all  our  warriors,  women,  and  children  unite. 

"  This  is  ah1  we  have  to  say. 

(Signed)        JOSEPH  SAWYEK. 

"  In  General  Council,  PETER  JONES. 

River  Credit,  Jan.  24<th.  JOHN  JONES. 

And  thirty-six  other  chiefs  from  different  tribes." 


PETITION   TO   THE   QUEEN.  125 

Peter  Jones  moved  the  adoption  of  the  following  petition 
to  the  Queen,  through  his  Excellency  the  Governor-General, 
Carried  unanimously : — 

"  To  our  Great  Father,  the  Right  Hon.  CHARLES  PAULETT 
THOMSON,  Governor-General  of  British  North  America, 
&c.}  &c. 

"The  Ojebway  (Chippeway)  Nation  of  Indians,  in  general 
council  assembled,  beg  leave  most  respectfully  to  approach 
your  Excellency. 

"  Father, — We  have  heard  that  a  union  of  Upper  and 
Lower  Canada  is  about  to  take  place,  and  that  in  all  pro 
bability  the  great  council  fi>e  which  was  lighted  at  Mene- 
cing  (now  called  Toronto)  will  be  removed  farther  towards 
the  sun-rising. 

"Father, — We  beg  to  inform  you  that  the  great  body  of 
your  red  children  reside  towards  the  sun-setting,  from 
Menecing,  or  Toronto. 

"  Father, — Your  red  children  have  been  happy  and  con 
tented  to  live  within  sight  and  reach  of  the  smoke  of  your 
great  council  fire,  to  which  our  forefathers  and  ourselves 
have  resorted  for  wisdom,  protection,  and  assistance. 

"  Father, — It  Mis  our  hearts  with  fear  and  sorrow  when 
we  think  of  the  difficulties  and  expense  of  such  a  journey 
by  your  red  children,  when  any  of  them  may  desire  to  see 
their  great  Father. 

"Father, — We,  your  red  children,  humbly,  pray  that 
our  beloved  great  Mother,  the  Queen,  may  be  graciously 
pleased  to  allow  the  great  council  fire  of  our  great  Father 
to  remain  at  Toronto.  And  we,  as  in  duty  bound,  will 
ever  pray. 

"In  General  Council,  [SIGNED  AS  THE  FOREGOING 

Elver  Credit,  Jan.  24*7i."  ADDRESS.] 


126  WARS. 

Peter  Jones  moved  the  adoption  of  the  following  address. 
Carried  unanimously. 

"  To  our  Great  Father,  Sir  GEORGE  ARTHUR,  Lieutenant- 
Governor  of  Upper  Canada,  &c.,  &c. 

"Father, — We,  the  chiefs  representing  the  different  Indian 
settlements  in  this  province,  in  general  council  assembled, 
beg  leave  most  respectfully  to  address  your  Excellency. 

"  Father, — It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  we  have  learned 
from  the  Chief  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs  that  your 
Excellency's  attention  has  been  directed  to  those  matters 
which  relate  to  our  prosperity  and  happiness,  and  that  your 
Excellency  has  put  them  in  such  a  train  as  will  bring  about 
their  final  accomplishment. 

"  Father, — We  thank  your  Excellency  for  the  readiness 
which  you  have  always  manifested  in  promoting  our  welfare, 
and  we  hope  your  Excellency  will  continue  still  to  look 
after  the  interests  of  your  red  children,  and  to  secure  to  us 
and  to  our  children,  as  soon  as  convenient,  the  lands  on 
which  we  reside,  as  expressed  in  Lord  Glenelg's  despatches.* 

"  Father, — We  all  unite  in  praying  to  the  Great  Spirit, 
that  he  may  bless  your  Excellency  with  health  and  peace. 
We  also  send  our  good  wishes  to  her  Ladyship  and  family. 

"  Father, — All  our  warriors,  women  and  children,  join  us 
in  shaking  hands  with  you  in  our  hearts.  This  is  all  we 
have  to  say. 

"In  General  Council,  [SIGNED  AS  THE  FOREGOING 

River  Credit,  January,  2kth."  ADDRESSES.] 

Peter  Jones  moved  the  adoption  of  the  following  petition 
to  the  government,  through  the  Chief  Superintendent  of 
Indian  Affairs.  Carried  unanimously. 

*  Vide  Appendix  J. 


PETITION   TO   THE   GOVERNMENT.  127 

"  To  our  Father,  Col.  S.  P.  JARVIS,  Chief  Superintendent 
of  Indian  Affairs. 

"  Father, — We,  the  chiefs  representing  the  Indian  settle 
ments  in  this  province,  in  general  council  assembled,  beg 
leave  most  respectfully  to  submit,  through  you,  to  our 
Great  Father  the  Governor,  the  following  matters  for 
consideration. 

"  Father, — Being  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  making 
greater  exertions  in  our  agricultural  improvements,  and  in 
the  attainment  of  useful  trades,  we  are  willing  to  adopt  any 
measures  which  our  Great  Father  may  recommend  for  the 
accomplishment  of  these  objects. 

"Father, — It  is  our  earnest  desire  that  one  or  more 
manual  labour  schools  should  be  established  at  some  of 
our  settlements  for  the  religious  education  of  our  children, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  train  them  up  in  industrious  and 
domestic  habits.  And  we  beg  to  state  that  if  our  Great 
Father  would  render  assistance  in  the  formation  of  such 
schools,  we  are  willing  ourselves  to  appropriate  part  of  our 
land  payments  for  these  objects. 

"  Father, — We  would  again  humbly  solicit  our  Great 
Father  to  secure*  to  us  and  our  descendants  for  ever  the 
lands  on  which  we  reside. 

"  Father, — It  is  our  wish  to  be  informed  of  the  relation 
which  your  red  children  sustain  to  the  British  Government : 
whether  as  subjects  or  allies. 

"Father, — Having  considered  the  future  welfare  of  our 
children,  and  anticipating  the  time  when  your  red  children 
will  be  so  crowded  by  your  white  children,  as  to  be  com 
pelled  to  leave  their  present  settlement  and  seek  a  home 
elsewhere :  we  therefore  humbly  pray  that  our  beloved 
great  Mother  the  Queen  may  be  graciously  pleased  to 


128  WAES. 

rescue  a  sufficient  tract  of  land  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
Sangeeny  River,  as  the  future  home  of  all  your  red 
children. 

"  Father, — We  wish  to  be  informed  whether  the  white 
people  have  power  to  prevent  the  Indians  from  hunting  on 
their  wild  lands.  We  ask  this  question  on  account  of  our 
people  having  repeatedly  been  ordered  from  the  woods 
when  they  had  gone  to  hunt,  and  in  some  instances  have 
had  their  venison  taken  away,  by  white  men. 

"  Father, — We  have  taken  into  consideration  the  practice 
of  our  people  removing  from  one  tribe  to  another,  and  in 
order  to  have  a  proper  understanding  on  the  subject,  we 
have  agreed  that  any  of  our  people  leaving  their  tribe  shall 
forfeit  their  portion  of  the  land  payments,  and  on  presenting 
a  certificate  from  the  chief  or  chiefs  to  whom  they  belonged 
shall  henceforth  become  one  of  the  tribe  to  which  they 
remove,  and  be  entitled  to  all  the  allowances  received  by 
them.  It  is  further  agreed  that  when  any  of  our  people 
leave  their  tribe,  they  shall  be  paid  for  the  buildings  they 
may  have  put  upon  the  land  where  they  have  resided ;  and 
after  having  left  their  tribe  and  been  adopted  into  another, 
they  shall  not  be  allowed  to  return  to  their  former  residence 
without  the  sanction  of  the  chiefs  in  council. 

"  Father, — Last  winter  an  act  was  passed  by  the  Parlia 
ment  of  this  country  for  the  preservation  of  game  and  for 
the  better  observance  of  the  Sabbath  day,  imposing  fines 
and  penalties  upon  any  person  or  persons  shooting  game  on 
the  Sabbath.  It  is  our  desire  that  our  Great  Father  may 
be  pleased  to  recommend  that  the  said  Act  may  be  so^ 
amended  as  to  impose  the  same  fines  and  penalties  upon 
any  person  or  persons  fishing  on  the  Lord's  day. 

"In  General  Council,  [SIGNED  AS  THE  FOREGOING 

River  Credit,  January  24<th"  ADDRESSES.] 


TREATIES  WITH  EUROPEANS.  129 

There  is  a  tradition  among  the  Ojebways,  that  many 
generations  ago  their  fathers  made  extensive  war  excursions 
in  the  country  of  the  Flat-head  Indians  beyond  the  Rocky 
Mountains ;  but  with  what  success  I  have  not  learned. 
For  many  years  past  a  wasting  war  on  a  small  scale  has 
been  kept  up  between  the  Ojebways  and  Sioux  or  Nahdo- 
waseh  Indians.  This  originated  in  encroachments  made 
by  either  nation  upon  the  hunting-grounds  of  the  other. 
When  any  hunter  was  found  trespassing,  he  was  imme 
diately  killed  and  scalped.  This  called  for  revenge  on  the 
part  of  the  relatives  of  the  person  killed,  who  would  pursue 
the  murderer  until  they  had  satisfied  the  calls  of  their 
friend's  blood.  This  warfare  is  still  kept  up  ;  it  is  both  trea 
cherous  and  cruel ;  every  year  they  are  thinning  each  other's 
numbers ;  and  the  author  sincerely  wishes  that  the  British 
and  American  Governments  would  unite  to  put  it  down. 

I  have  been  informed  that  when  the  French  came  to  this 
country,  a  treaty  of  friendship  was  made  between  them  and 
the  Ojebways.  This  treaty  bound  their  hands  together 
l)y  a  steel  chain.  But  when  the  English  conquered  the 
French  in  Canada,  they  broke  this  steel  chain,  and  entered 
into  a  treaty  of  friendship  with  the  Ojebways,  stating  to 
them  that  the  chain  which  had  bound  their  hands  with  the 
French  was  one  that  would  soon  rust  and  break,  and  was 
of  little  value  ;  but  the  chain  that  they  (the  British)  would 
use  should  never  rust  nor  break,  and  would  be  of  great  value. 
This  would  be  a  silver  chain,  and  this  chain  has  kept  their 
hands  bound  together  to  this  day. 

During  the  last  American  war  the  Ojebways,  as  well  as 
other  Indian  tribes,  rendered  the  British  great  assistance 
in  fighting  the  Americans.  In  that  war  many  of  our  fathers 
fell,  sealing  their  attachment  to  the  British  Government 
with  their  blood.  As  to  the  wars  of  other  Indian  tribes,  I 

K 


130  WARS. 

am  not  prepared  to  give  an  account.  Many  historians  have 
noticed  the  wars  of  the  Six  Nations,  and  their  conquests. 
The  following  are  the  names  of  the  chiefs  who  distinguished 
themselves  during  the  Indian  wars : — King  Philip,  Pontiac, 
Captain  Joseph  Brant,  Tecumseh,  Black  Hawk,  Osceola, 
and  Yellowhead. 

MODE   OF  WARFARE. 

In  their  war  excursions  the  war  chiefs  take  the  lead,  and 
act  as  captains  over  their  respective  warriors.  These  chiefs 
direct  the  order  of  the  march  and  mode  of  attack,  and  are 
men  who  have  distinguished  themselves  for  their  bravery, 
and  consequently  obtain  the  confidence  of  their  tribe.  The 
civil  chiefs,  who  in  general  inherit  their  chieftainship  by 
descent,  are  not  expected  to  go  to  the  field  of  action.  They 
seldom,  however,  neglect  a  good  opportunity  of  displaying 
their  wisdom,  skill,  and  bravery,  and  often  accompany  their 
people  and  engage  in  the  conflict.  The  more  scalps  they 
take,  the  more  they  are  revered  and  consulted  by  their 
tribe.  Their  mode  of  action  is  entirely  different  from  that  of 
civilized  nations.  They  have  no  idea  of  meeting  the  enemy 
upon  an  open  plain  face  to  face,  to  be  shot  at  like  dogs,  as 
they  say.  Their  aim  is  to  surprise  the  enemy  by  darting  upon 
them  in  an  unexpected  moment,  or  in  {he  dead  of  night. 
They  always  take  care,  in  the  first  place,  to  ascertain  the 
position  of  the  enemy.  When  they  find  them  unprepared 
or  asleep,  they  creep  up  slowly  and  stealthily,  like  panthers 
in  pursuit  of  their  prey ;  when  sufficiently  near,  they  simul 
taneously  raise  the  war  whoop,  and  before  the  enemy  awake 
or  have  time  to  defend  themselves,  the  tomahawk  is  rattling 
over  their  heads.  When  a  village,  a  wigwam,  or  a  party 
is  thus  surprised,  there  is  seldom  any  mercy  shown  either 
to  age  or  sex :  all  are  doomed  to  feel  the  weight  of  the 
tomahawk  and  the  deep  incision  of  the  bloody  scalping- 


:  2 


x ,  2,Spear\?.  3  iA&e  and;  tSfrear  heads /¥•  Jiw  ,•  6t4rrvw3  ; 6 ,  Tomahawk 
and  pipe  of  Peace/,  7  Ornamented.'  PKxr  (?&/>    rV  <Sltaljrinq  fijitfe. ,  ff  ^.tfrrvw  TifcuLs  • 


MODE   OF  WARFARE.  131 

knife.  Such  close  battles,  if  they  may  be  so  called,  seldom 
last  long,  not  more  than  a  few  minutes.*  If  they  have  a 
regular  pitched  battle,  they  endeavour  to  get  behind  the 
trunks  of  trees,  whence  they  shoot  the  enemy.  Sometimes 
a  few  are  taken  captives  and  conveyed  home,  where  they 
are  adopted  by  some  family  who  have  lost  a  relative  in  the 
war.  The  prisoner  then  either  becomes  like  a  member  of 
the  family,  enjoying  perfect  freedom,  or  is  doomed  to  serve 
as  a  slave.  If  the  captive  is  not  thus  adopted,  he  is  com 
pelled  to  undergo  the  most  painful  death,  by  being  burnt 
alive  either  at  the  stake  or  tree,  when  a  war  dance  is  gene 
rally  performed.  It  is  stated  that  the  Indian  victims  thus 
burnt  have  never  betrayed  any  weakness  in  complaining  of 
the  severity  of  their  punishment  by  shedding  a  tear,  or 
littering  a  groan ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  when  undergoing 
the  greatest  suffering,  have  been  known  to  upbraid  their 
tormentors,  telling  them  that  they  did  not  know  how  to 
give  pain ;  that  they  were  not  men,  but  a  set  of  old  women. 

WEAPONS   OF  WAR. 

Before  the  introduction  of  guns,  swords,  &c.,  by  Euro 
peans,  their  weapons  of  war  consisted  of  boivs  and  arrows. 
These  are  too  welj  known  to  require  description.  Spears  : 
These  are  about  eight  or  nine  feet  long,  pointed  with  sharp 
stone,  flint,  or  bone.  Tomahaivk :  This  instrument  was  made 
of  hard  grey  stone,  sharpened  at  one  end,  and  fastened  into  a 
wooden  handle.  The  pipe  tomahawk  now  in  use  among 
the  Indians,  is  of  recent  date,  being  made  by  Europeans. 

*  Carver  says — "  The  greatest  blemish  in  the  Indian  character  is  that  savage 
disposition  which  impels  them  to  treat  their  enemies  with  a  severity  other 
nations  shudder  at.  But  if  they  are  thus  barbarous  to  those  with  whom  they 
are  at  war,  they  are  friendly,  hospitable  and  humane  in  peace.  It  may  in 
truth  be  said  of  them,  that  they  are  the  worst  enemies  and  the  best  friends 
of  any  people  in  the  world." 

K  2 


132  WARS. 

It  is  of  iron,  steel,  or  silver.  At  one  end  is  a  pipe  ;  the 
other  serves  as  a  hatchet.  It  is,  therefore,  used  for  three 
purposes — war,  luxury,  or  husbandry.  The  handle  is  of 
wood,  and  is  pierced  from  end  to  end  that  the  smoke  may 
escape.  Some  of  these  are  fantastically  ornamented.  Puh- 
guhmaguns  or  war  clubs :  One  kind  is  cut  out  of  a  solid 
piece  of  wood  which  had  a  knot  in  the  end  of  it;  the 
other  is  made  of  a  flat  piece  of  hard  wood  in  the  shape  of 
an  obtuse  angle ;  and  to  this  is  fastened  a  sharp  flint  or 
bone.  Scalping  knife :  This  originally  consisted  of  a  sharp 
flint  or  bone,  but  those  now  in  use  resemble  a  large 
butcher's  knife  pointed  and  sharpened.  When  scalping  any 
one,  they  take  hold  of  the  hair  of  the  head,  making  an 
incision  with  the  knife  round  the  head  to  the  skull,  and  then 
jerk  off  the  scalp.  This  must  be  a  very  painful  operation 
when  performed  on  a  living  person,  yet  some  have  survived. 
I  have  seen  an  Indian  woman  at  Lake  Huron,  who  had 
been  both  tomahawked  and  scalped  by  the  Sioux.  She  had 
recovered  from  her  wound  when  I  saw  her,  but  was  obliged 
to  wear  a  wig  of  cloth.  The  scalps  are  stretched  on  round 
hoops  and  carefully  dried.  They  are  then  painted,  and 
decorated  with  wampum  beads  and  ribbons. 

WAR  WHOOP. 

This  is  a  sudden  raising  of  the  voice  to  its  highest 
pitch,  repeated  in  rapid  succession,  sometimes  causing 
a  vibration  by  beating  the  hand  against  the  mouth. 
When  the  voices  of  a  hundred  brave  warriors  are  thus 
raised,  it  is  indeed  a  terrific  sound,  well  calculated  to  strike 
terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  enemies. 


WAR  SONG. 

This  is  what  is  used  at  their  war  dance.  The  words  refe 
to  their  invincible  bravery,  and  the  manner  in  which  th 


; 


WAR  SONG   AND   DANCE.  133 

will  treat  their  enemies.  They  invoke  their  gods,  rehearse 
their  war  dreams,  and  exhort  their  women  not  to  weep  for 
them. 

WAR  DANCE. 

The  war  dance  is  designed  to  kindle  the  passion  for  war 
in  every  breast ;  and  certainly,  when  we  consider  their  war 
.song,  painted  bodies,  war  implements,  and  the  warriors7 
antics  performed  on  such  occasions,  nothing  could  be  better 
calculated  to  rouse  the  feeling  to  the  highest  state  of  excite 
ment.  A  smooth  piece  of  ground  is  chosen  for  the  exhi 
bition,  in  the  centre  of  which  a  pole  is  placed.  The  singers 
take  their  seats  and  begin  to  beat  on  their  drums,  to  which 
they  keep  time  by  singing  in  a  most  monotonous  tone. 
The  warriors,  fully  equipped,  dance  round  and  round  the 
pole,  brandishing  their  tomahawks,  throwing  their  bodies 
into  all  sorts  of  postures,  and  raising  at  intervals  the 
hideous  war  whoop.  A  warrior  will  occasionally  strike  the 
pole,  which  is  a  signal  that  he  is  about  to  make  a  speech. 
On  a  sudden  the  dancing  and  singing  cease,  and  all  atten 
tion  is  given  to  the  speaker  while  he  relates  his  war  ex 
ploits,  and  receives  the  hearty  responses  of  the  assembly. 
At  these  dances  they  also  have  a  sham  fight,  in  which  they 
exhibit  the  manner  of  surprising  the  enemy — tomahawking, 
scalping,  and  drinking  the  blood  of  the  foe. 

BURYING  THE   TOMAHAWK. 

This  is  a  figurative  speech,  signifying  the  cessation  of 
hostilities,  and  the  entering  into  a  treaty  of  peace  and 
friendship,  so  that  past  differences  are  forgiven  and  for 
gotten. 


CHAPTER  XL 

AMUSEMENTS,   ETC. 

Dancing — Foot  Races — Ball  Playing— Bow  and  Arrow — Bow]  Plays— Jumping 
and  Leaping— Smoking — Mode  of  keeping  Time — Toodaims — Wampum. 

DANCING  is  a  favourite  amusement,  in  .which  both  men 
and  women  participate.  The  men  begin  with  a  slow  step, 
and  quicken  their  motions  as  the  singing  and  beating  rise, 
till  every  muscle  is  strained  to  its  greatest  tension,  stamping 
and  shaking  most  violently.  The  women  scarcely  ever  raise 
their  feet  from  the  ground,  but  glide  along  sideways. 

The  Ojebways  have  two  kinds  of  drums.  One,  called 
mahdwauhkoquon,  is  made  from  the  trunk  of  a  hollow 
tree,  about  two  feet  long,  having  one  end  headed  with  a 
board,  and  the  other  covered  with  undressed  deer-skin,  on 
which  they  strike.  These  drums  are  used  principally  for 
sacred  purposes.  The  other  kind,  called  tawaegun,  is  made 
in  the  form  of  English  drums.  These  are  used  on  festival 
occasions  and  at  amusements.  They  have  no  other  musical 
instruments,  except  a  rude  kind  of  flute,  which  makes  a 
monotonous  sound. 

Foot  races,  in  which  they  show  much  swiftness,  are 
common  among  them.  Ball  playing  is  another  favourite 
amusement.  Their  principal  play  during  the  winter  season 
is  the  snow  snake,  which  is  made  of  hard  smooth  timber, 
about  six  feet  long,  having  eyes  and  mouth  like  a  snake. 
The  manner  of  playing  is  to  take  the  snake  by  the  tail,  and 
throw  it  along  the  snow  or  ice  with  all  their  strength. 
Whoever  sends  his  snake  the  farthest  a  certain  number  of 


/  Drum  ,   ?  Tcltflccc  Potick  .    3 ,  >Sncw  £n<*Mu    i  > 
6".  AkcccwJrtt    Anl .  7  fa/tie  Jirnilw  t<    Ci<f> 


AMUSEMENTS.  135 

times  gains  the  prize.  Shooting  with  bow  and  arrow  forms 
the  first  amusement  of  little  boys,  who  grow  up,  as  it  were, 
with  bows  and  arrows  in  their  hands.  They  shoot  at 
marks,  birds,  and  squirrels,  and  in  this  way  become  good 
marksmen.  They  have  also  their  swimming  and  diving 
raceSj  and  are  in  general  good  swimmers,  thinking  nothing 
of  crossing  a  river  a  mile  wide.  In  their  bowl  plays  they 
use  plum  stones.  One  side  is  burnt  black,  and  the  other  is 
left  of  its  natural  colour.  Seven  of  these  plums  are  placed 
in  a  wooden  bowl,  and  are  then  tossed  up  and  caught.  If 
they  happen  to  turn  up  all  white,  or  all  black,  they  count 
so  many.  This  is  altogether  a  chance  game.  Wrestling, 
jumping,  and  leaping  are  practised  by  the  young  people. 
The  women  have  a  game  called  uhpuhsehthivon,  which  is 
played  with  two  leathern  balls  tied  with  a  string  about 
two  feet  long.  These  are  placed  on  the  ground,  and  each 
woman,  with  a  stick  about  six  feet  long,  tries  to  take  up 
uhpuhsekuhicon  from  her  antagonist,  throwing  it  in  the 
air.  Whichever  party  gets  it  first  to  their  respective  goals 
or  stakes  counts  one.  Smoking  the  pipe  is  a  very  favourite 
occupation  of  the  men.  They  mix  the  tobacco  with  sumach 
leaves  or  red  willow  bark,  which  greatly  sweetens  the 
fragrance.  The  old  men  are  passionately  fond  of  their 
pipes,  and  oftentimes  spend  many  hours  in  the  course  of  the 
day  in  raising  the  smoke.  While  thus  employed  they  think 
a  great  deal  of  their  munedoos,  which  causes  them  to 
attach  a  kind  of  sacredness  to  this  practice,  as  if  it  were 
pleasing  in  their  sight. 

MODE   OP   KEEPING   TIME. 

Indians  divide  the  year  into  four  quarters,  which  they 
designate  seegwun  (spring),  or  the  sap  season ;  neebin 
(summer),  or  the  abundant  season  ;  tuhgwuhgin  (autumn), 


136  AMUSEMENTS,  ETC. 

the  fading  season ;    and  peboon  (winter),  which  signifies 
cold  freezing  weather. 

They  also  reckon  by  moons,  the  names  of  which  are  as 
follow : — 

January  moon — Keche  Munedoo  keezis  (the  Great  Spirit 
moon). 

February — Nuhmabene  keezis  (the  mullet  fish  moon). 

March — -Neke  keezis  (the  wild  goose  moon). 

April — Omuhkulikee  keezis  (the  frog  moon). 

May — Walibegwunee  keezis  (blooming  moon). 

June — Odcemin  keezis  (strawberry  moon). 

July — Mesquemene  keezis  (red  raspberry  moon). 

August — Meen  keezis  (huckleberry  moon). 

September — Alitabuhgali  keezis  (fading  leaf  moon). 

October — Penahqueewene  keezis  (falling  leaf  moon). 

November — Kulishkulidene  keezis  (freezing  moon). 

December — Munedoo  keezis  (Spirit  moon). 

They  have  no  division  of  time  into  weeks  or  days  of  the 
month,  nor  have  they  any  knowledge  of  the  number  of 
days  in  a  year.  They  divide  the  day  into  morning,  noon, 
and  afternoon.  Morning  commences  at  sun-rising,  and 
ends  at  noon;  when  afternoon  begins,  and  ends  at  sun- 
setting.  They  divide  the  night  into  evening,  midnight 
(which  they  know  from  the  position  of  certain  stars),  and 
dawn  of  day.  Having  no  timepieces,  they  are  quite 
ignorant  of  hours,  minutes,  and  seconds.  They  reckon 
their  ages  by  the  number  of  winters  they  have  passed  since 
certain  remarkable  events  happened ;  and  the  time  of  the 
year  by  some  particular  circumstance,  such  as  planting- 
time,  hoeing,  or  gathering  Indian  corn,  the  time  when  the 
different  fruits  of  the  country  are  ripe,  the  croaking  of  the 
frogs  in  spring,  the  falling  of  the  leaf,  and  the  snow  or 
cold  of  winter.  Mothers  often  number  the  days  of  their 


MODE   OF  KEEPING  TIME.  137 

children's  ages  by  cutting  a  small  notch  each  day  on  some 
part  of  the  infant's  cradle,  but  they  seldom  keep  up  this 
register  beyond  two  or  three  months,  and  from  that  time 
reckon  by  moons  and  winters.  It  is  a  notorious  fact  that 
very  few  Indians  know  their  exact  age,  and  when  asked, 
"  How  old  are  you  ?"  will  reply,  "  I  do  not  know ;  I 
cannot  remember  when  I  was  born."  I  once  asked  an 
Indian  of  about  fifty  how  old  he  was.  He  replied,  "  I  do 
not  know."  "  Are  you  fifty  ?"  "A  great  way  beyond 
that ;  I  think  I  am  more  than  one  hundred."  I  heard  of 
a  young  man  about  twenty  who  positively  declared  he  was 
one  hundred  years  old.  This  ignorance  is  not  at  all 
surprising  when  we  consider  they  have  no  correct  standard 
for  computing  time.  When  our  Indians  were  first  con 
verted  to  Christianity  we  were  obliged  to  make  a  sort  of 
hieroglyphic  almanac  for  them,  so  that  they  might  know 
when  the  Sabbath  returned.  We  did  this  by  making  six 
marks  alike,  to  represent  working  or  hunting  days,  and  the 
seventh  different,  thus :  000000+  These  they  took 
with  them,  and,  as  each  successive  week-day  returned,  they 
pierced  a  hole,  until  it  reached  the  Sabbath  mark.  In  this 
way  the  Christian  Indians,  far  in  the  wilderness,  kept 
holy  day,  and  worshipped  the  Christian's  God. 

As  to  the  value  of  time,  it  never  enters  their  thoughts 
that  it  is  a  gift  which  every  human  being  ought  to  make 
a  good  use  of,  and  endeavour  to  improve,  both  for  his  own 
benefit  and  that  of  others.  The  poor  Indian  lives  as  if  he 
were  to  remain  on  this  earth  for  ever, — as  though  each  day 
would  necessarily  supply  all  his  wants.  It  may  truly  be 
said  of  the  Indians  that  they  are  "careful  for  nothing." 
Indians  can  count  to  any  number,  but  have  no  idea  of 
arithmetic,  figures  as  well  as  letters  being  quite  unknown 
to  them. 


138  AMUSEMENTS,  ETC. 

OF   THEIR   TOODAIMS. 

Their  belief  concerning  their  divisions  into  tribes  is,  that 
many  years  ago  the  Great  Spirit  gave  his  red  children  their 
toodaims,  or  tribes,  in  order  that  they  might  never  forget 
that  they  were  all  related  to  each  other,  and  that  in  time 
of  distress  or  war  they  were  bound  to  help  each  other. 
When  an  Indian,  in  travelling,  meets  with  a  strange  band 
of  Indians,  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  seek  for  those  bearing  the 
same  emblem  as  his  tribe  ;  and  having  made  it  known  that 
he  belongs  to  their  toodaim,  he  is  sure  to  be  treated  as  a 
relative.  Formerly  it  was  considered  unlawful  for  parties 
of  the  same  tribe  to  intermarry,  but  of  late  years  this 
custom  is  not  observed.  I  have  remarked  that  when  the 
English  speak  of  the  different  nations  of  Indians  they  gene 
rally  call  them  tribes ;  which  term  is  quite  erroneous,  as  each 
nation  is  subdivided  into  a  number  of  tribes  or  clans,  called 
"  toodaims,"  bearing  some  resemblance  to  the  divisions  of 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  mentioned  in  Scripture;  and 
each  tribe  is  distinguished  by  certain  animals  or  things,  as, 
for  instance,  the  Ojebway  nations  have  the  following  too 
daims  :  —  the  Eagle,  Reindeer,  Otter,  Bear,  Buffalo, 
Beaver,  Catfish,  Pike,  Birch-bark,  White  Oak  Tree,  Bear's 
Liver,  &c.,  &c.  The  Mohawk  nation  have  only  three 
divisions,  or  tribes — the  Turtle,  the  Bear,  and  the  Wolf. 

The  tribe  to  which  I  belong  is  the  Eagle,  called  by  us 
Mesdssauga,  a  term  commonly  used  by  the  English  when 
speaking  of  the  Indians  residing  at  the  River  Credit,  Rice 
Lake,  Grape  Island,  Mud  Lake,  and  those  in  the  vicinity 
of  Kingston,  but  it  is  incorrect  when  applied  to  them  as  a 
body,  for  in  these  bands  are  found  remnants  of  almost  all 
the  tribes  existing  among  the  Ojebways;  and  the  Eagle 
tribe,  or  Messissauga,  does  not  form  more  than  about  one 


TRIBES.  139 

quarter  of  the  whole  number  of  Indians  residing  at  the 
above-mentioned  places.  Another  common  mistake  is, 
that  the  Messissauga  Indians  are  distinct  from  the  Ojeb- 
ways,  whereas  they  are  a  part  of  that  nation,  and  speak 
the  same  language. 

From  the  great  number  of  tribes,  or  toodaims,  found 
among  the  different  natiohs,  many  of  which  are  now  ex 
tinct,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  were  once  far  more 
numerous  than  they  are  now. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  the  origin  of  the  toodaims  might, 
were  it  possible,  be  traced  back  to  the  time  when  our  fore 
fathers  first  came  into  the  continent  of  America,  and  that  it 
has  been  handed  down  from  one  generation  to  another 
from  time  immemorial.  Coming  into  a  vast  wilderness 
country,  and  fearing  that  in  their  wanderings  they  might 
lose  their  relationships  to  each  other,  they  probably  held  a 
general  council  on  the  subject,  agreeing  that  the  head  of 
each  family  should  adopt  certain  animals  or  things  as  their 
toodaims,  by  which  their  descendants  might  be  recognized 
in  whatever  part  of  the  world  they  were  found,  and  that 
those  of  the  same  tribe  should  ever  be  considered  as 
brethren  or  relations. 

WEEGIS,    OR  WAMPUM. 

Wampum  was  first  introduced  at  Plymouth,  New  Eng 
land,  as  an  article  of  commerce,  by  Isaac  De  Razier,  a 
Dutch  merchant,  in  the  year  1627.  It  was  made  by  the 
Indians  residing  on  the  sea  coast.  The  following  is  ex 
tracted  from  the  "  History  of  Plymouth,"  p.  70  :— "  Wom- 
pompagne,"  says  Mr.  Gookin,  "  is  made  artificially  of  a 
part  of  the  wilk's  shell ;  the  black  is  double  the  value  of 
the  white.  It  is  made  principally  by  the  Marraganeet  and 
Long  Island  Indians.  Upon  the  sandy  flats  and  shores 


140  AMUSEMENTS,  ETC. 

of  those  coasts  the  wilk-shells  are  found."  In  Roger 
William's  Key,  wampum  is  considered  as  the  Indian 
money,  and  is  described  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of 
that  interesting  work.  "  One  fathom  of  this  thin-stringed 
money  is  worth  five  shillings.  Their  white  money  they 
call  wampum,  which  signifies  white  ;  their  black,  suckaw- 
hook  ;  suki  signifying  black."  The  editor  of  the  memorial 
says  he  received  from  the  late  Professor  Peck  a  reply  to 
some  inquiries  on  this  subject.  He  was  satisfied  that 
wampum  was  made  from  the  shell  of  the  paquawhock  or 
quahog.  A  traveller  in  this  country  in  the  year  1760, 
describing  his  journey  from  Newark  to  New  York,  by  the 
way  of  Staten  Island,  has  the  following  remark  : — "  In  my 
way  I  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the  method  of  making 
wampum.  It  is  made  of  the  clam-shell ;  a  shell  consisting 
within  of  two  colours,  purple  and  white,  and  in  form  not 
imlike  a  thick  oyster-shell.  The  process  of  manufacturing 
it  is  very  simple.  It  is  just  clipped  to  a  proper  size,  which 
is  that  of  a  small  oblong  parallelopipedon ;  then  drilled, 
and  afterwards  ground  to  a  smooth  round  surface  and 
polished.  The  purple  wampum  is  much  more  valuable 
than  the  white,  a  very  small  part  of  the  shell  being  of  that 
colour." 


CHAPTER   XII. 

DISEASES. 

Original — Introduced  "by  Whites — Pow-wows  and  Medicine  Men — Mode  of 
performing  Cures — Opposition  to  the  Missionary — Interesting  Conversion 
of  a  Pow-wow — A  strange  story,  by  Captain  Anderson — Another — Jesuh- 
kon,  or  Conjuring-house — Medicines — Great  variety  in  their  Woods — 
Minerals — Medicine  Bag— Hunter's  Medicine — Warriors'  Love  Powder. 

THE  diseases  most  common  among  the  aborigines  of 
America  before  the  landing  of  the  Europeans  were  few,  in 
comparison  with  those  now  debilitating  their  constitutions, 
and  so  rapidly  thinning  their  numbers.  There  is  a  saying 
among  our  people,  that  our  forefathers  were  so  exempt 
from  sickness,  that,  like  the  cedar  which  has  withstood  the 
storms  of  many  ages,  and  shows  the  first  signs  of  decay  by 
the  dying  of  the  top  branches,  so  the  aged  Indian,  sinking 
under  the  weight  of  many  winters,  betokens,  by  his  gray 
hairs  and  furrowed  cheeks,  that  life  is  declining. 

The  diseases  most  common  to  the  Indians  were,  con 
sumption,  fever,  pleurisy,  cough,  worms,  and  dysentery. 
The  measles,  small-pox,  hooping-cough,  and  other  con 
tagious  disorders,  were  unknown  to  them  before  the 
landing  of  the  white  man.  But  now  they  are  subject  to 
all  these  maladies,  and  suffer  greatly  from  them,  not 
knowing  their  nature.  Being  also  much  exposed  to  winds 
and  storms,  they  are  very  liable  to  colds,  which  increase  the 
virulence  of  the  complaint,  and  thus  hurry  thousands  off 
the  stage  of  life.  I  am  happy  to  say,  however,  that  the- 
small-pox  does  not  now  make  such  havoc  as  it  did  on  its 


142  DISEASES. 

first  appearance.  The  English.  Government  have  from 
time  to  time  sent  medical  gentlemen  to  vaccinate  the 
Indians ;  and  this,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  has  tended 
much  to  check  the  progress  of  that  loathsome  and  fatal 
distemper.  Blessed  be  the  memory  of  Dr.  Jenner,  the 
discoverer  of  this  valuable  antidote,  by  which  thousands  of 
lives,  not  only  among  my  own  people,  but  in  all  parts  of 
the  world,  have  been  prolonged.  Oh  that  it  may  be  to 
show  forth  the  praise  of  Him  in  whom  we  live,  move,  and 
have  our  being ! 

The  Indians  die  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs  and  con 
sumption,  more  frequently  than  of  other  diseases.  The  seeds 
of  them  are  often  sown  in  the  constitution  when  they  are 
young,  owing,  partly  to  insufficient  or  unwholesome  diet, 
and  partly  to  exposure  to  all  kinds  of  weather.  Many  of 
them  linger  but  a  short  time ;  others  gradually  waste  away 
till  they  are  reduced  to  skeletons,  and  at  length  the  little 
spark  of  life  quits  the  enfeebled  and  emaciated  frame. 
Other  existing  causes  are,  the  fatigues  which  they  often 
undergo  in  chasing  the  deer ;  sometimes  using  the  utmost 
exertion  for  a  whole  day,  before  they  can  tire  out  the 
animal,  and  then,  when  enduring  the  extremes  of  heat  and 
thirst,  taking  large  draughts  of  cold  spring  water.  Another 
injury  arises  from  the  carrying  of  heavy  burdens,  which 
often  causes  inward  strains.  I  have  known  some  Indians 
carry  a  whole  deer,  weighing  about  200  Ibs.  on  their  backs 
for  several  miles.  Then,  again,  their  exposure  to  frost  and 
cold  during  a  state  of  intoxication,  and  the  wounds  and 
internal  injuries  they  receive  by  fighting  when  in  this  sad 
condition,  are  frequent  causes  of  mortality. 

It  is  painful  for  me  to  relate,  that  of  all  the  children  that 
have  been  born  among  those  tribes  with  which  I  am 
acquainted,  more  than  one  half  die  before  even  reaching  the 


MOETALITY   OF   CHILDREN.  143 

period  of  youth ;  it  is  only  those  who  have  the  strongest 
constitutions  that  survive  the  shocks  and  exposures  to  which 
they  are  subjected  during  infancy  and  childhood.  The 
poor  mothers  are  very  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  diseases 
common  to  children,  and  of  the  proper  treatment  of  them  ; 
sometimes  their  clothing  is  very  scanty,  at  other  times  they 
are  almost  smothered  in  blankets.  The  food  which  they  eat 
is  often  injurious,  and  thus  disease  is  generated  by  the  very 
means  used  to  subdue  it.  These  evils  can  be  remedied  only 
by  the  benign  influence  of  the  gospel,  the  precepts  of  which 
teach  men  to  be  sober  and  industrious,  to  cultivate  the 
earth,  and  provide  for  their  families.  By  these  means  they 
would  soon  possess  everything  necessary  for  the  supply  of 
their  temporal  wants,  and  at  the  same  time  be  inspired 
with  gratitude  to  the  bountiful  Giver  of  all  good. 

POW-WOW,    OE  MEDICINE  MEN. 

Each  tribe  has  its  medicine  men  and  women, — an  order 
of  priesthood  consulted  and  employed  in  all  times  of  sick 
ness.  These  pow-wows  are  persons  who  are  believed  to 
have  performed  extraordinary  cures,  either  by  the  applica 
tion  of  roots  and  herbs,  or  by  incantations.  When  an 
Indian  wishes  to  be  initiated  into  the  order  of  a  pow-wow, 
in  the  first  place  he  pays  a  large  fee  to  the  faculty.  He  is 
then  taken  into  the  woods,  where  he  is  taught  the  names 
-and  virtues  of  the  various  useful  plants ;  next  he  is  instructed 
how  to  chaunt  the  medicine  song,  and  how  to  pray :  which 
prayer  is  a  vain  repetition  offered  up  to  the  master  of  life, 
or  to  some  munedoo  whom  the  afflicted  imagine  they  have 
offended. 

The  pow-wows  are  held  in  high  veneration  by  their 
deluded  brethren ;  not  so  much  for  their  knowledge  of 
medicine,  as  for  the  magical  power  which  they  are  supposed 


144  DISEASES. 

to  possess.  It  is  for  their  interest  to  lead  these  credulous 
people  to  believe  that  they  can  at  pleasure  hold  intercourse 
with  the  munedoos,  who  are  ever  ready  to  give  them  what 
ever  information  they  require.* 

I  am  acquainted  with  a  noted  medicine  man,  a  chief 
residing  at  the  River  St.  Glair,  who,  by  his  subtle  art  and 
cunning,  has  impressed  with  fear  all  the  Indians  who  know 
him,  insomuch  that  the  other  chiefs  never  undertake  any 
thing  of  importance  without  consulting  him.    If  he  approve, 
it  is  well ;  if  not,  the  object  is  abandoned.  This  chief  is  quite 
like  a  patriarch  among  his  people,  and  may  be  considered  a 
rich  pagan  Indian,  as  he  possesess  many  horses,  which  run 
wild  on  the  plains,  and  are  only  caught  as  he  wishes  to  use 
or  sell  them.     It  is  said  that  he  has  obtained  most  of  his 
possessions  by  his  pow-wowism  on  the  sick,  and  by  curing 
those  who  are  bewitched.     The  pow-wows  are  generally 
paid  well  for  their  performances,  either  by  a  gun,  kettle, 
blanket,  coat,  or  a  gallon  or  two  of  whisky.     When  the 
last  article  is  demanded  and  paid,  the  performance  of  the 
pow-wow  is  sure  to  be  crowned  by  a  drunken  frolic,  in 
which  the  doctor  joins  with  his  companions  for  a  whole 
night,  singing,  yelling,  and  beating  a  drum,  much  to  the 
annoyance  of  the  afflicted  person,  whose   sufferings  are 
aggravated   and   his   death   hastened   by  this  barbarous 
custom.    I  have  visited  this  chief  and  his  people  three  or 
four  times  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  the  Gospel  among 
them ;  but,  like  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  he  has  by  subtlety 
and  mischief  resisted  our  endeavours  and  prevented  his 
tribe  from  embracing  the  truth. 

The  greatest  opposition  which  missionaries  encounter  in 
the  spreading  of  the  Gospel  is  from  these  medicine  men  and 
conjurors,  who  well  know  that  if  the  Indians  become  Chris- - 

*  Vide  Appendix  K. 


*        I 


\ 


/ ', Wooden;  God ;  2  Snake  ST<tn,  (red. -,  ~tnedrritit-  ttfd  up  in/  a  wtaeeLi  #lan>  at  iff  Ti 
&YtJb,  •/•  JJnitatoan/  at  alb  tv  ywimis  Oetwte ,  S  Iwal*  l?y  Ccnjutvrs  tv  lwl< mtc  fiutut 


OPPOSITION   TO   THE   MISSIONARIES.  145 

tians  there  will  be  an  end  to  their  craft  and  gains.  In 
reading  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  find  that  their  preach 
ing  was  greatly  opposed  by  the  same  sort  of  persons,  and 
for  similar  reasons.* 

WITCHCRAFT. 

As  the  pow-wows  always  unite  witchcraft  with  the  appli 
cation  of  their  medicines,  I  shall  here  give  a  short  account 
of  this  curious  art. 

Witches  and  wizards  are  persons  supposed  to  possess  the 
agency  of  familiar  spirits,  from  whom  they  receive  power 
to  inflict  diseases  on  their  enemies,  prevent  the  good  luck 
of  the  hunter,  and  the  success  of  the  warrior.  They  are 
believed  to  fly  invisibly  at  pleasure  from  place  to  place  ;  to 
turn  themselves  into  bears,  wolves,  foxes,  owls,  bats,  and 
snakes.  Such  metamorphoses  they  pretend  to  accomplish 
by  putting  on  the  skins  of  these  animals,  at  the  same  time 
crying  and  howling  in  imitation  of  the  creature  they  wish 
to  represent.  Several  of  our  people  have  informed  me  that 
they  have  seen  and  heard  witches  in  the  shape  of  these 
animals,  especially  the  bear  and  the  fox.  They  say  that 
when  a  witch  in  the  shape  of  a  bear  is  being  chased,  all  at 
once  she  will  run  round  a  tree  or  a  hill,  so  as  to  be  lost 
sight  of  for  a  time  by  her  pursuers  ;  and  then,  instead  of 
seeing  a  bear,  they  behold  an  old  woman  walking  quietly 
along,  or  digging  up  roots,  and  looking  as  innocent  as  a 
lamb.  The  fox  witches  are  known  by  the  flame  of  fire  which 
proceeds  out  of  their  mouths  every  time  they  bark. 

Many  receive  the  name  of  witches  without  making  any 
pretensions  to  the  art,  merely  because  they  are  deformed  or 
ill-looking.  Persons  esteemed  witches  or  wizards  are 
generally  eccentric  characters,  remarkably  wicked,  of  a 

*   Vide  Appendix  L. 


146  DISEASES. 

ragged  appearance  and  forbidding  countenance.  The  way 
in  which  they  are  made  is  either  by  direct  communication 
with  the  familiar  spirit  during  the  days  of  their  fasting, 
or  by  being  instructed  by  those  skilled  in  the  art.  The 
method  they  take  to  bewitch  those  who  have  offended  them 
is  this : — The  necromancer  in  the  first  place  provides  himself 
with  a  little  wooden  image,  representing  an  Indian  with  a 
bow  and  arrow.  Setting  this  figure  up  at  a  short  distance 
before  him,  he  will  name  it  after  the  person  whom  he  wishes 
to  injure ;  he  then  takes  the  bow  and  arrow  and  shoots  at  the 
image,  and  wherever  the  arrow  strikes,  at  that  instant,  they 
say,  the  person  is  seized  with  violent  pain  in  the  same  part. 

The  causes  that  urge  them  to  take  revenge  by  witchcraft 
often  arise  from  quarrels,  or  from  supposed  injuries  done  to 
them,  and  not  unfrequently  has  it  led  to  murder.  A  rela 
tive  of  the  person  thought  to  be  bewitched  will  go  secretly 
and  put  the  necromancer  to  death.  Many  instances,  which 
have  come  under  my  own  observation,  have  arisen  out  of 
disappointments  in  marriage.  If  the  witch  or  wizard  is 
denied  the  object  of  his  or  her  desire,  then  the  poor  crea 
ture  in  request  is  immediately  threatened  with  some  severe 
disease,  and  from  fear  of  being  bewitched  they  are  often 
induced  to  give  their  consent  to  marry.  In  this  way  it  is 
that  many  of  the  old  noted  conjurors  obtain  more  than  one 
wife.  Frequently,  when  I  have  enquired  the  cause  of  a 
disease,  the  reply  has  been  that  it  originated  in  offence 
given  to  some  witch  or  wizard. 

I  have  been  informed  that  formerly,  when  any  notorious 
necromancer  was  suspected  of  having  bewitched  any  one, 
they  were  often  condemned  by  the  councils  of  the  different 
tribes  to  execution ;  but  this  was  always  done  with  great 
caution,  lest  the  conjuror  should  get  the  advantage  over 
them,  and  thus  bewitch  the  whole  assembly. 


WITCHCKAFT.  147 

I  have  sometimes  been  inclined  to  think  that,  if  witchcraft 
still  exists  in  the  world,  it  is  to  be  found  among  the  abori 
gines  of  America.  They  seem  to  possess  a  power  which,  it 
would  appear,  may  be  fairly  imputed  to  the  agency  of  an 
evil  spirit. 

The  conjurors  not  only  pretend  to  have  the  powers 
already  specified,  but  they  profess  also  to  have  the  gift  of 
foretelling  future  events.  The  following  curious  account 
on  this  subject  I  received  from  a  respectable  gentleman  who 
has  spent  most  of  his  life  in  the  Indian  country,  and  who 
is  therefore  well  acquainted  with  their  character  and  pre 
tensions.  He  is  now  one  of  the  Government  Indian  Agents 
in  Upper  Canada.  He  thus  relates  : — 

"  In  the  year  1804,  wintering  with  the  Winebagoes  on 
the  Rock  river,  I  had  occasion  to  send  three  of  my  men  to 
another  wintering  house,  for  some  flour  which  I  had  left 
there  in  the  fall  on  my  way  up  the  river.  The  distance 
being  about  one  and  a  half  day's  journey  from  where  I 
lived,  they  were  expected  to  return  in  about  three  days. 
On  the  sixth  day  after  their  absence  I  was  about  sending 
in  quest  of  them,  when  some  Indians,  arriving  from  the 
spot,  said  that  they  had  seen  nothing  of  them.  I  could 
now  use  no  means  to  ascertain  where  they  were  :  the  plains 
were  extensive,  the  paths  numerous,  and  the  tracks  they 
had  made  were  the  next  moment  covered  by  the  drift  snow. 
Patience  was  my  only  resource ;  and  at  length  I  gave  them 
up  for  lost, 

"  On  the  fourteenth  night  after  their  departure,  as 
several  Indians  were  smoking  their  pipes,  and  telling 
stories  of  their  war  parties,  huntings,  &c.,  an  old  fellow, 
who  was  a  daily  visitor,  came  in.  My  interpreter,  a 
Canadian  named  Felix,  pressed  me,  as  he  had  frequently 
done  before,  to  employ  this  conjuror,  as  he  could  inform  me 

L  2 


148  DISEASES. 

about  the  men  in  question.  The  dread  of  being  laughed  at 
had  hitherto  prevented  my  acceding  to  his  importunities ; 
but  now,  excited  by  curiosity,  I  gave  the  old  man  a 
quarter-pound  of  tobacco  and  two  yards  of  ribbon,  telling 
him  that  if  he  gave  me  a  true  account  of  them,  I  would, 
when  I  ascertained  the  fact,  give  him  a  bottle  of  rum.  The 
night  was  exceedingly  dark  and  the  house  situated  on  a 
point  of  land  in  a  thick  wood.  The  old  fellow  withdrew, 
and  the  other  Indians  retired  to  their  lodges. 

"  A  few  minutes  after,  I  heard  Wahwun  (an  egg)  begin 
a  lamentable  song,  his  voice  increasing  to  such  a  degree 
that  I  really  thought  he  would  have  injured  himself.  The 
whole  forest  appeared  to  be  in  agitation,  as  if  the  trees  were 
knocking  against  each  other ;  then  all  would  be  silent  for  a 
few  seconds  ;  again  the  old  fellow  would  scream  and  yell, 
as  if  he  were  in  great  distress.  A  chill  seized  me,  and  my 
hair  stood  on  end ;  the  interpreter  and  I  stared  at  each 
other  without  power  to  express  our  feelings.  After  remain 
ing  in  this  situation  a  few  minutes  the  noise  ceased,  and  we 
distinctly  heard  the  old  chap  singing  a  lively  air.  We 
expected  him  in,  but  he  did  not  come.  After  waiting  some 
time,  and  all  appearing  tranquil  in  the  woods,  we  went  to 
bed.  The  next  morning  I  sent  for  my  friend  Wahwun  to 
inform  me  of  his  jaunt  to  see  the  men. 

"  '  I  went/  said  he,  '  to  smoke  the  pipe  with  your  men 
last  night,  and  found  them  cooking  some  elk  meat,  which 
they  got  from  an  Ottawa  Indian.  On  leaving  this  place 
they  took  the  wrong  road  on  the  top  of  the  hill ;  they 
travelled  hard  on,  and  did  not  know  for  two  days  that  they 
were  lost.  When  they  discovered  their  situation  they  were 
much  alarmed,  and,  having  nothing  more  to  eat,  were  afrak 
they  would  starve  to  death.  They  walked  on  withoi 
knowing  which  way  they  were  going  until  the  seventh  day, 


WITCHCRAFT.  149 

when  they  were  met  near  the  Illinois  river,  by  the  Ottawa 
before  named,  who  was  out  hunting.  He  took  them  to  his 
lodge,  fed  them  well,  and  wanted  to  detain  them  some  days 
until  they  had  recovered  their  strength ;  but  they  would 
not  stay.  He  then  gave  them  some  elk  meat  for  their 
journey  home,  and  sent  his  son  to  put  them  into  the  right 
road.  They  will  go  to  Lagothenes  for  the  flour  you  sent 
them,  and  will  be  at  home  in  three  days.'  I  then  asked 
him  what  kind  of  place  they  were  encamped  in  when  he 
was  there  ?  He  said  '  they  had  made  a  shelter  by  the  side 
of  a  large  oak  tree  that  had  been  torn  up  by  the  roots,  and 
which  had  fallen  with  the  head  towards  the  rising  sun/ 

"  All  this  I  noted  down,  and  from  the  circumstantial 
manner  in  which  he  related  every  particular, — though  he 
could  not  possibly  have  had  any  personal  communication 
with  or  from  them  by  any  other  Indians, — I  began  to  hope 
my  men  were  safe,  and  that  I  should  again  see  them.  On 
the  appointed  day  the  interpreter  and  myself  watched  most 
anxiously,  but  without  effect.  We  got  our  suppers,  gave 
up  all  hopes,  and  heartily  abused  Wahwun  for  deceiving 
us.  Just  as  we  were  preparing  for  bed,  to  my  great  joy 
the  men  rapped  at  the  door,  and  in  they  came  with  the 
flour  on  their  backs.  My  first  business  was  to  enquire  of 
their  travels.  They  told  me  the  whole  exactly  as  the  old 
Indian  had  before  stated,  not  omitting  the  tree  or  any  other 
occurrence ;  and  I  could  have  no  doubt  but  the  old  fellow 
had  got  his  information  from  some  evil  or  familiar  spirit. 

"  Not  long  after  this  I  had  another  opportunity  of  trying 
Wahwun's  witchcraft,  which  was  shewn  in  the  following 
occurrence  : — I  had  occasion  to  send  my  interpreter  Felix 
to  Millwurkie,  a  distance  of  about  ninety  miles.  He  was 
to  have  returned  on  the  fourth  clay.  On  the  seventh  I  got 
very  uneasy  about  him,  and  applied  to  my  friend  Wahwun, 


150  DISEASES. 

to  tell  me  what  had  become  of  him.  I  paid  him  as  I  had 
done  before,  but  heard  nothing  of  the  noise  which  had 
so  terrified  me  on  the  former  occasion.  At  daylight  the 
next  morning  the  old  fellow  came  in,  and,  making  a  great 
noise,  woke  me  up,  and  said : — '  Tell  the  cook  to  put  on  the 
kettle  quick  and  get  something  ready  for  Felix  to  eat ;  he 
is  close  by  and  is  very  hungry.  Make  some  broth  for  him ; 
he  has  not  eaten  anything  for  two  days.7  The  tea-kettle 
had  scarcely  time  to  boil  when  in  came  Felix.  He  told 
me  that  they — himself  and  another  man — had  started  from 
MiUwurkie  with  a  gallon  of  rum,  of  which  they  drank 
pretty  freely  during  the  first  day's  march.  At  night  they 
got  very  drunk,  and  whilst  a  drop  remained  they  continued 
in  the  same  encampment,  and,  like  all  improvident  men,  they 
ate,  drank,  and  were  merry,  as  long  as  their  means  lasted. 
The  tea,  broth,  &c.,  were  not  spared  ;  and  indeed  it  required 
no  small  quantity  to  replenish  the  void  made  by  a  two-days' 
fasting.'7 

On  the  9th  of  August,  1828, 1  was  engaged  in  preaching 
to  the  Indians  at  Lake  Simcoe,  at  which  time  the  Great 
Spirit  began  in  a  very  powerful  manner  to  convert  them 
from  paganism  to  Christianity.  During  the  day  some  of 
the  Christian  Indians  informed  me  that  a  certain  pagan 
pow-wow  had  intimated  his  intention  of  consulting  his 
munedoos,  to  ascertain  from  them  whether  it  was  right  for 
Indians  to  forsake  the  religion  of  their  fathers,  and  take 
hold  of  the  white  man's  religion.  I  requested  them  to  let 
me  know  when  he  would  begin  his  performance,  as  I  wished 
to  go  and  hear  him  for  myself.  Shortly  after  dark  they 
brought  me  word  that  the  pow-wow  had  gone  towards  the 
pine-grove  to  commence  his  incantations.  I  immediately 
accompanied  them  in  that  direction,  and  we  soon  heard  the 
rattling  of  his  conjuring  wigwam,  called  in  Ojebway 


INCANTATIONS.  151 

jeesuhkon;  which  is  made  by  putting  seven  poles  in  the 
ground  to  the  depth  of  about  a  cubit,  in  a  circle  of  about 
three  or  four  feet  in  diameter,  and  about  six  feet  high, 
with  one  or  more  hoops  tied  fast  to  the  poles,  to  keep  them 
in  a  circle.  The  sides  were  covered  with  birch  bark,  but  the 
top  was  left  open.  Into  this  the  pow-wow  had  entered,  and 
was  chaunting  a  song  to  the  spirit  with  whom  he  wished  to 
converse.  The  jeesuhkon  began  to  shake  as  if  filled  with 
wind.  Wishing  to  see  and  hear  his  performance  without 
his  knowing  we  were  present,  we  proceeded  towards  him 
as  softly  as  we  could,  and  placed  ourselves  around  the 
jeesuhkon.  On  our  approach  we  heard  the  muttering  talk 
of  one  of  the  familiar  spirits,  in  answer  to  questions  he  had 
put  to  him.  This  spirit  told  him  that  it  was  right  for 
Indians  to  become  Christians,  and  that  he  ought  to  go  to 
the  meetings  and  hear  for  himself.  The  next  spirit  he  in 
voked  spoke  decidedly  against  Indians  becoming  Christiains, 
and  exhorted  him  to  adhere  to  the  religion  of  his  fathers. 
The  third  spirit  spoke  nearly  as  the  first ;  with  this  addition, 
— that  he,  the  conjuror,  was  quite  wrong  in  supposing  the 
Christian  Indians  to  be  crazy,  as  if  they  were  under  the 
effects  of  the  fire-waters ;  that  they  were  not  as  they 
appeared  to  be,  but  that  all  the  time  they  were  crying  and 
praying,  they  were  in  their  right  minds  and  worshipping 
the  Great  Spirit  in  their  hearts,  and  according  to  His  will. 
The  fourth  spirit  informed  him  that  shortly  one  of  his  chil 
dren  would  be  taken  from  him  by  death.  One  of  the 
Christian  Indians  standing  near  whispered  to  me,  saying, 
"  If  we  kneel  down  and  begin  to  pray  to  the  Great  Spirit, 
his  enchantment  will  be  broken,  and  all  his  devils  will  have 
to  fly."  I  replied,  "  We  had  better  not  disturb  him,"  as  I 
wished  to  hear  the  end  of  it.  My  friend  then  in  a  low 
whisper  prayed  that  the  Great  Spirit  would  have  mercy  on 


152  DISEASES. 

this  poor  deluded  Indian.  That  very  instant  the  jeesuhJcon 
ceased  shaking,  and  the  muttering  talk  stopped,  as  if  the  evil 
spirits  had  all  been  put  to  flight. 

The  juggler  then  spoke  to  himself:  "  I  suppose  the 
Christian  Indians  are  praying  at  my  wigwam  ?"  He  then 
began  to  sing  with  all  his  might,  and  presently  his  jee- 
suhkon  was  filled  with  wind,  and  began  again  to  shake  as 
if  it  would  fall  to  pieces.  Then  a  grumbling  voice  spoke 
and  said,  "The  Christian  Indians  are  standing  all  around 
you."  Upon  this  the  conjuror  came  out  of  his  jeesuhJcon. 
We  then  asked  him  what  news  the  spirits  had  communicated 
to  him  ?  He  replied,  "  Some  have  forbidden  me  to  become 
a  Christian,  and  encourage  me  to  live  as  my  forefathers 
have  done ;  but  others  inform  me  that  it  is  perfectly  right 
to  be  a  Christian,  and  that  I  ought  to  go  and  hear  the 
missionaries  for  myself ;  this  I  shall  now  do,  and  to-morrow 
I  shall  go  and  hear  you  at  your  meetings." 

I  have  now  stated  what  came  under  my  own  observation 
in  this  one  instance,  and  I  leave  the  reader  to  form  his 
own  judgment  as  to  the  power  by  which  these  deluded 
Indians  perform  their  incantations.  This  Indian,  according 
to  promise,  attended  worship  the  next  day. 

Another  story  of  a  conjuror  I  received  from  John 
Sunday.'* 

THEIR    MEDICINES. 

In  describing  the  medicines  used  by  the  North  American 
Indians,  I  am  led  to  admire  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of 
the  Almighty,  in  supplying  them  with  such  a  variety  of 
remedies  every  way  applicable  to  the  diseases  common  to 
their  country  and  climate.  Their  forests  abound  with 
medicinal  plants  ;  so  that  the  pow-wow  who  has  obtained 

*  Vide  Appendix  M. 


INDIAN   MEDICINES.  153 

a  knowledge  of  the  virtue  of  roots  and  herbs  is  never  at  a 
loss  for  a  supply  during  the  summer  season,  when  he  lays 
up  a  store  for  winter  use.  I  doubt  not  that  our  woods, 
plains,  and  marshes,  could  furnish  a  specific  for  every 
disease,  if  the  virtues  of  the  plants  were  better  known ;  for, 
even  with  the  limited  knowledge  which  the  pow-wows 
possess,  they  are  enabled  to  perform  wonderful  cures.  I 
have  known  instances  of  persons  who  had  been  given  up 
by  regular  physicians,  being  restored  to  health  by  the 
simple  administration  of  Indian  medicines ;  and  many  of 
the  white  people,  who  have  great  confidence  in  their  bene 
ficial  effects,  will  travel  miles  to  place  themselves  under  the 
care  of  an  Indian  doctor. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  principal  medicinal  plants 
in  common  use  : — 

Of  Roots: — Sassafras,  spignet,  Seneca  snake,*  alecam- 
paine,  wild  turnip,  coltsfoot,  skunk  Cabbage,  lady  slipper, 
poke-root,  gold  thread,  liverwort,  white  root,  milkweed, 
white  pond  lily,  thistle,  sassafrilla. 

Of  Herbs : — Pennyroyal,  lobelia  or  emetic  herb,  balm, 
winter  green,  Oswego  bitters. 

Of  Barks: — White  oak,  butternut,  elder,  hemlock,  spotted 
alder,  red  willow,  wild  cherry,  iron-wood,  slippery  elm. 

Of  Leaves : — Beech,  sumach,  hemlock,  basswood. 

Of  Minerals: — Gypsum,  and  native  lead.       ;/  • 

They  also  use  yellow  ochre,  and  other  substances,  which 
they  find  in  the  crevices  of  steep  rocks  and  mountains,  and 
mix  with  other  medicines.  There  are  several  poisonous 
plants;  the  most  noted  is  the  wild  parsnip,  generally 
resorted  to  when  an  Indian  wishes  to  poison  either  his 
enemy  or  himself.  Many  of  the  healing  plants  are  held  in 

*  A  sure  remedy  for  the  bite  of  the  rattlesnake. 


154  '  DISEASES. 

religious  veneration ;  so  much  so  that  even  the  muhslike- 
mood,  or  medicine-bag,  is  considered  to  possess  supernatural 
power  to  injure  any  who  may  dare  to  examine  its  sacred 
contents.  So  afraid  are  the  Indians  of  it,  that  it  might  lie 
for  months  in  the  wigwam  without  being  touched.  The 
pow-wows  are  very  careful  to  instil  this  feeling  of  dread 
and  veneration  for  the  bag  and  its  contents,  that  they 
may  the  more  easily  work  upon  the  credulity  of  their 
subjects. 

There  are  also  roots,  which  the  Indians  term  medicines, 
and  suppose  to  act  as  charms. 

First.  The  hunter's  medicine. — This  is  held  in  great  esteem 
by  all  hunters.  It  is  made  of  different  sorts  of  roots,  which 
he  takes  with  him  on  his  hunting  excursions,  a  little  of  which 
he  puts  into  his  gun,  that  it  may  make  the  first  shot  take 
effect.  He  will  also  place  a  small  portion  of  it  in  the  first 
deer  or  bear's  track  he  meets  with,  supposing  that  if  the 
animals  be  two  or  three  days'  journey  off,  they  will  come 
in  sight  of  it  in  a  short  time,  the  charm  possessing  the 
power  of  shortening  the  journey  from  two  or  three  days  to 
two  or  three  hours.  To  render  the  medicine  more  effectual 
he  will  frequently  sing  the  hunter's  song ;  and  I  have  known 
many  a  hunter  sit  up  all  night  beating  his  tawagun,  and 
then  at  daylight  take  his  gun  and  go  in  quest  of  the  game. 
This  is  generally  done  when  an  Indian  imagines  he  has 
displeased  the  god  of  the  game,  by  not  paying  him  that 
reverence  which  secures  his  success  in  the  chase.  The  first 
animal  he  takes  he  then  devotes  to  the  god  of  the  game, 
making  a  feast,  and  offering  part  in  sacrifice,  by  which  he 
thinks  to  appease  his  wrath. 

Secondly.  The  warrior's  medicine.  —  This  the  Indians 
highly  esteem,  and  never  fail  to  take  with  them  when  they 
go  out  to  war,  believing  that  the  possession  of  this  medicine 


MEDICINE-CHARMS.  155 

renders  their  bodies  invulnerable  to  the  bullet,  the  arrow, 
and  the  spear. 

Thirdly.  Love  powder. — This  is  a  particular  kind  of 
charm  which  they  use  when  they  wish  to  obtain  the  object 
of  their  affections.  It  is  made  of  roots  and  red  ochre.  With 
this  they  paint  their  faces,  believing  it  to  possess  a  power 
so  irresistible  as  to  cause  the  object  of  their  desire  to  love 
them.  But  the  moment  this  medicine  is  taken  away,  and 
the  charm  withdrawn,  the  person  who  before  was  almost 
frantic  with  love,  hates  with  a  perfect  hatred. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

INDIAN    NAMES. 

Fairies — Waindegoos,  or  Giants — Indian   Names— Derivation — Specimen  of 
Indian  Names — Ojebway  Words  in  common  use,  and  their  signification. 

THE  heathen  Indians  all  believe  in  the  existence  of  those 
imaginary  little  folks  called  Fairies.  The  Ojebways  call 
them  Mamagwasewug,  the  hidden  or  covered  beings.  They 
believe  them  to  be  invisible,  but  possessed  of  the  power  of 
showing  themselves.  Many  old  Indians  affirm  that  they 
have  both  seen  and  talked  with  them.  They  say  that  they 
are  about  two  or  three  feet  high,  walk  erect,  and  have  the 
human  form,  but  that  their  faces  are  covered  over  with 
short  hair.  The  following  are  some  of  the  stories  related 
concerning  them : — 

A  hunting  party  were  once  encamped  near  a  river ; 
finding  that  their  powder  and  shot  gradually  decreased 
every  night,  and  being  unable  to  account  for  the  fact,  one 
of  the  party  determined  to  lie  awake,  in  order,  if  possible, 
to  discover  the  thief.  Sometime  after  midnight,  as  the  fire 
was  going  out,  a  fairy  entered  the  wigwam,  and  began 
very  softly  to  help  herself  to  the  powder  and  shot.  The 
Indian  then  macle  a  noise,  upon  which  the  little  elf  ran 
towards  the  door,  but  as  she  was  passing  over  the  legs  of 
the  Indian  he  raised  them  suddenly,  and  she  tripped  up. 
The  moment  she  found  herself  caught  she  covered  her  face 
with  the  blanket  belonging  to  the  Indian,  and  could  not  be 
prevailed  upon  to  show  it  until  he  promised  to  give  her  a 
quantity  of  powder  and  shot.  When  she  uncovered  her  face 


FAIRIES.  157 

he  saw  that  it  was  grown  over  with  short  soft  hair,  and  it 
was  on  this  account  that  the  fairy  was  so  reluctant  to 
disclose  her  countenance.  After  keeping  her  a  prisoner  for 
a  short  time,  and  receiving  a  promise  that  good  luck  should 
attend  him  in  hunting,  he  released  her,  and  she  soon 
vanished  out  of  sight,  According  to  agreement,  success 
attended  him. 

The  Indians  say  that  fairies  are  very  fond  of  shooting,  and 
that  they  frequently  hear  the  report  of  their  guns.  How 
they  obtain  them  is  a  mystery,  unless  they  steal  them  from 
the  hunters,  or  take  them  from  the  graves  of  the  dead. 

Several  places  have  been  pointed  out  to  me  as  their 
residence  before  the  white  people  became  numerous.  One 
is  a  large  pond  near  Burlington  Bay,  where  the  old  Indians 
say  they  frequently  saw  them  in  a  stone  canoe.  When 
pursued  they  would  paddle  to  a  high  bank;  and  the 
moment  the  canoe  struck  the  bank  all  would  disappear,  and 
nothing  be  heard  but  a  distant  rumbling  noise.  The 
Indians  supposed  they  had  their  abode  inside  the  bank. 
Another  tribe  of  fairies  were  said  to  have  formerly  resided 
on  the  east  bank  of  the  River  Credit,  about  a  mile  from 
the  lake,  where  they  often  showed  themselves. 

They  are  reported  to  be  extravagantly  fond  of  pieces  of 
scarlet  cloth  and  smart  prints;  and  whenever  they  appear  to 
an  Indian,  if  he  can  only  bestow  some  such  gaudy  present 
upon  them,  however  small,  the  giver  is  sure  to  be  rewarded 
either  with  long  life  or  success  in  hunting.  In  all  my 
travels  through  the  wilderness  I  have  never  been  favoured 
with  a  visit  from  these  invisible  beings. 

The  following  story  is  related  of  fairies  on  the  River  St. 
Clair  : — In  the  year  1824,  a  Scotch  family,  residing  on  the 
banks  of  the  River  St.  Clair,  were  visited  by  some  strange 
invisible  agencies.  The  first  attack  was  made  on  their 


158  INDIAN   NAMES. 

poultry,  which  were  taken  as  if  with  fits,  and  soon  died  ; 
then  the  cattle,  pigs,  and  horses  were  seized  in  the  same 
manner,  and  died.  After  this  the  house  was  attacked, 
and  stones  and  pieces  of  lead  were  thrown  against  the 
windows,  breaking  them  and  entering  the  house.  The  pots 
and  kettles  were  then  moved  from  their  places  without  any 
one  being  near  them.  An  attempt  was  next  made  to  burn 
the  house.  Live  coals  of  fire  were  found  tied  up  in  tow 
and  rags  in  different  parts  of  the  chambers,  which  were 
extinguished  as  soon  as  discovered ;  but  eventually  the 
house  was  burned  down.  While  these  occurrences  were 
taking  place,  a  vigilant  watch  was  kept  up  by  the  family 
and  neighbours,  who  flocked  in  to  witness  these  strange 
scenes ;  but  no  clue  could  be  discovered  as  to  the  cause. 
It  was  finally  declared  to  be  the  work  of  witchcraft. 
Accordingly,  a  celebrated  witch  doctor,  by  the  name  of 
Troyer,  residing  near  Niagara  Falls,  was  sent  for,  to  expel 
all  the  witches  and  wizards  from  the  premises.  Being  on  a 
missionary  tour  to  the  Walpool  Island  Indians  at  the  time 
these  incidents  were  going  on,  I  went  to  the  enchanted 
house,  and  preached  the  ever-blessed  Gospel ;  but  the  mis 
chievous  spirits  were  all  very  quiet,  so  that  I  saw  nothing 
out  of  the  common  order  of  things.  But  the  Eev.  R. 
Phelps  was  more  fortunate,  for  he  told  me  that  when  he 
visited  the  family,  and  attempted  to  preach,  they  kept  throw 
ing  in  small  stones  and  bits  of  lead,  one  of  which  struck 
his  body.  This  ne  picked  up,  and  showed  to  me.  On  my 
return  from  the  St.  Clair,  I  met  an  old  man  who,  from  his 
appearance,  wearing  a  long  flowing  beard,  I  judged  must 
be  the  witch  doctor.  I  therefore  asked  him  if  he  were  Mr. 
Troyer.  He  replied,  "  I  am."  He  then  positively  stated 
that  he  knew  the  whole  affair  was  witchcraft,  and  that  he 
would  soon  make  a  finish  of  the  witches.  I  was  after- 


FAIRIES.  159 

wards  informed  that  he  began  to  expel  them  by  firing  off 
guns  loaded  with  silver  bullets,  which  he  stated  were  the 

!  only  kind  of  weapons  which  could  take  effect  upon  a 
witch.  Whilst  he  was  in  the  midst  of  his  manoeuvring, 

i  the  neighbouring  magistrate,  hearing  of  what  was  going 
on,  issued  a  warrant  to  take  him  into  custody.  The 
great  doctor,  being  apprised,  quickly  made  his  escape  to  his 
own  quiet  home.  Thus  ended  the  whole  affair  of  the 
supposed  witches  and  fairies. 

In  conversation  with  a  noted  pow-wow  chief,  Pashegee- 
ghegwaskum  of  Walpool  Island,  I  asked  him  what  he  thought 
of  these  strange  occurrences  among  the  white  people.  He 
replied,  "  O,  I  know  all  about  it.  The  place  on  which  the 
white  man's  house  now  stands  was  the  former  residence  of 
the  Mamagwasewugj  or  fairies.  Our  forefathers  used  to  see 
them  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  When  the  white  man  came 
and  pitched  his  wigwam  on  the  spot  where  they  lived,  they 
removed  back  to  the  poplar  grove,  where  they  have  been 
living  for  several  years.  Last  spring  this  white  man  went 
and  cleared  and  burnt  this  grove,  and  the  fairies  have  again 
been  obliged  to  remove ;  their  patience  and  forbearance 
were  now  exhausted  ;  they  felt  indignant  at  such  treatment, 
and  were  venting  their  vengeance  at  the  white  man  by 
destroying  his  property."  The  old  chief  uttered  these 
words  as  if  he  fully  believed  in  the  existence  of  these 
imaginary  beings,  and  in  their  power  to  harm  those  who 
dared  to  disturb  their  habitations. 

GIANTS,    OR   WAINDEGOOS. 

In  my  early  days  I  have  often  listened  with  wonder  and 
deep  attention  to  the  stories  related  of  the  waindegoot,  or 
giants.  They  are  represented  as  beings  tall  as  pine  trees, 
and  powerful  as  the  munedoos.  In  their  travels  they  pull 


160  INDIAN   NAMES. 

down  and  turn  aside  immense  forests,  as  a  man  would  the  , 
high  grass  he   passes  through.     They  are   said  to   live  .! 
on  human  flesh,  and  whenever  they  meet  an   Indian  are 
sure  to  have  a  good  meal ;  being  also  invulnerable  to  the 
shot  of  an  arrow  or  bullet,  they  are  the  constant  dread  of 
the  Indians.     Persons  who  have  been  known  to  eat  human  t 
flesh  from  starvation  are  also  called  waindegoos,  after  the 
giants. 

INDIAN   NAMES. 

The  Indians  have  but  one  name,  which  is  derived  either 
from  their  gods  or  some  circumstance  connected  with  their 
birth  or  character.  Many  of  their  names  are  taken  from 
the  thunder  gods,  who,  they  suppose,  exist  in  the  shape  of 
large  eagles.  My  Indian  name  Kalikewaquonaby  belongs  to 
this  class,  and  signifies  "  Sacred  Feathers"  This  name  was 
given  me  by  my  grandfather  when  I  was  a  few  days  old.  1 1 
was  named  after  my  mother's  brother,  who  died  at  the  age  of 
seven.  These  feathers  plucked  from  the  eagle  represent  the 
plumes  of  the  supposed  thunder  god,  by  which  it  flies  from 
one  end  of  the  heavens  to  the  other.  When  my  name  was 
given  me,  a  bunch  of  eagles'  feathers  was  prepared  for  the  \ 
occasion.  It  was  considered  sacred,  as  it  represented  the 
speed  of  the  thunder  and  the  eagle.  At  the  same  time  I 
received  a  war-club,  to  which  they  tied  a  little  bunch  of 
dried  deers'  hoofs,  denoting  the  power  with  which  I  should 
be  invested  by  the  thunder  to  become  a  brave  and  mighty 
warrior ;  and  a  little  canoe,  to  show  that  I  should  have 
success  in  crossing  the  waters. 

Their  names  are  generally  derived  from  the  following 
objects, — the  sun,  moon,  stars,  sky,  clouds,  wind,  lakes, 
rivers,  trees,  animals,  fowls,  snakes. 

As  the  wise  and  aged  Indians  have  the  best  knowledge  of 


MISCOCOMON        CHIEF 

(THE        RED        KNIFE.) 


INDIAN  NAMES.  161 

the  ancient  names  of  their  forefathers  and  are  the  most 
capable  of  inventing  new  ones,  the  office  of  giving  names  is 
I  generally  invested  with  them. 

When  a  child  is  to  be  named,  the  parents  make  a  feast, 
and  invite  all  the  old  people  to  come  and  eat  at  their 
;  wigwam.  A  portion  of  the  meat  is  offered  as  a  burnt 
sacrifice.  During  the  time  this  is  burning,  the  giver  of  the 
name  makes  a  prayer  to  the  god  to  whom  he  is  about  to 
;  dedicate  the  child,  and  towards  the  close  proclaims  what 
;  it  is  to  be.  There  is  no  particular  time  observed  for  this 
ceremony  to  take  place ;  it  is  left  with  the  parents,  who  some 
times  have  their  children  named  when  a  few  months  old,  at 
other  times  not  till  they  are  two  or  three  years  of  age. 

Almost  every  young  person  receives  a  nickname  either 
characteristic'  or  arising  from  some  peculiarity ;  these  names 
they  often  retain  after  they  have  arrived  at  maturity.  It  is 
the  custom  of  the  Indians  on  extraordinary  occasions  to 
change  their  names.  Eor  instance,  if  a  sick  person,  or  his 
friends,  suppose  that  the  grim  monster  Death  has  received  a 
commission  to  come  after  an  Indian  bearing  a  certain  name, 
they  immediately  make  a  feast,  offer  sacrifices,  and  alter  the 
name.  By  this  manoeuvre  they  think  to  cheat  Death 
when  he  comes  for  the  soul  of  the  Indian  of  such  a  name, 
not  being  able  to  find  the  person  bearing  it. 

The  following  are  specimens  of  Indian  names,  with  their 
literal  translations : — 

Nawalijegezliegwabej  masculine ;  the  sloping  sky. 

Pepoonahbay,  m. ;  the  god  of  the  north,  who  makes  the 
winter. 

Manoonooding,  m. ;  the  pleasant  wind. 

Kezhegoowinenej  m. ;  sky  man,  or  man  of  the  sky. 

Pamegaliwayalising,  m. ;  the  blown  down. 

Sahswayalmgog,m. ;  the  scatteringlight  by  the  sun  or  moon. 


162  INDIAN   NAMES. 

Maliyaliwegezliegwaby,  m. ;  the  upright  sky. 

Kanahwahbahmind,  m. ;  he  who  is  looked  upon. 

Oominwahjeiowij  m.  ;  the  pleasant  stream. 

Naningalmga,  m. ;  the  sparkling  light. 

Pahoombwawindung,m. ;  the  approaching  roaring  thunder. 

AJizliahwahnaliguahdicaby,    m. ;     the    cloud    that    rolls 
beyond. 

Madwayalishe,  m.  ;  the  whistling  wind. 

OozhaJiwaJishkoogezhig,  m. ;  the  blue  sky. 

Shahwundais,  m. ;  the  god  of  the  south,  who  makes  the 
summer. 

Wahbegivuhna,  m. ;  white  feathers. 

Wawanosh,  m. ;  the  beautiful  sailor. 

Wahbahnoosay,  m.  ;  morning  walker. 

Naliwaliquayahsega,  m. ;  the  noon-day,  or  shining  sun. 

Kechegalimewinene,  m. ;  man  of  the  lake. 

The  female  names  ,are  distinguished  from  the  males  by 
the  feminine  termination,  quay,  or  gooquay.     Any  of  the  • 
above  names  can  be  rendered  feminine  ;  for  example : — 

Naningalisegaquay,  f.  :  the.  sparkling  light  woman. 

Oozlialiwalislikoogezldgooquay,  f. ;  the  blue  sky  woman. 

Oogenebaligooquay,  f. ;  the  wild  rose  woman. 

Mesquahqualidooquay,  f. ;  the  red  sky  woman. 

A  singular  fancy  prevails  among  the  Ojebways  with 
respect  to  mentioning  their  own  names.  When  an  Indian 
is  asked  his  name  he  will  look  at  some  bystander  and 
request  him  to  answer.  This  reluctance  arises  from  an 
impression  they  receive  when  young,  that  if  they  repeat 
their  own  names  it  will  prevent  their  growth,  and  they 
will  be  small  in  stature.  On  account  of  this  unwillingness 
to  tell  their  names,  many  strangers  have  fancied  that  they 
either  nave  no  names  or  have  forgotten  them.  Husbands 
and  wives  never  mention  each  other's  names,  it  not  being 
in  accordance  with  Indian  notions  of  etiquette. 


NAMING   OF   PLACES.  163 

I  received  the  following  letter  from  Thomas  G.  Ridout, 
iEsq.,  of  Toronto,  requesting  some  Indian  names  for  places. 
:As  it  gave  me  great  pleasure  to  furnish  them,  I  take  the 
liberty  of  inserting  his  communication,  wishing  more  places 
an  Canada  were  named  after  the  aborigines  of  this  great 
i  country. 

"  Bank  of  Upper  Canada, 

"  TORONTO,  24th  March,  1855. 
"  MY  DEAR  SIR, 

"  There  is  to  be  a  station  of  the  Great  Western  Rail 
way  Company's  line  on  some  land  that  I  own  on  the  River 
;  Thames,  in  the  township  of  North  Dorchester ;  and  as  it 
is  on  the  site  of  an  ancient  Indian  town,  I  have  a  great 
I  desire  to  give  the  place  an  Indian  name,  and  so  perpetuate 
I  some  landmark  of  that  noble  and  ancient  race,  who  for 
*  ages  past  were  the  rightful  owners  of  this  great  country. 
May  I  beg  of  you  to  inform  me  the  Chippewa  name  of  the 
River  Thames,  or  some  other  appropriate  name  ?    Perhaps 
you  may  know  the  name  of  some  Indian  town  on  the  banks 
of  the  Thames,  which  would  please  the  ear,  and  be  easily 

f  spoken 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

"THOMAS  G.  RIDOUT." 
"  The  Rev.  PETER  JONES." 

In  answer  the  following  names  were  sent : — 

As-kun-e- See-be  ;  the  Horn  River,  or  Chippewa  name  for 

the  River  Thames. 
Wau-bun-o ;  *  the  morning  light. 
Torn-e-co  ;  the  name  of  the  head  chief  of  the  Chippeways 

of  the  River  Thames. 
0-je-bway ;  the  proper  name  for  Chippewa. 

*  Name  of  a  celebrated  chief— my  grandfather. 

M2 


164 


INDIAN   NAMES. 


0-da-nuli  ;  the  name  of  any  town. 

Ta-kuh-mo-say  ;  he  who  walks  over  the  water. 

The  following  Ojebway  words  being  in  common  use 
among  the  white  settlers  in  Canada,  it  may  be  deemed 
interesting  to  give  their  signification  : — 


As  spelt  in  English  . 

As  pronounced  by  Indians. 

Signification. 

Chippewa  

Ojebway  
Ma-se-sau-gee  

The  puckered  moccasin  people 
The  eagle  totem,  clan,  or  tribe 

Etobicoke  

A-doo-pe-kog  
Ash-qua-sing    

Place  of  the  black  alder 
That  which,  lies  at  the  end 

Nassagaweya  
Chinguacousy  .... 
Schoogog 

Nan-zuh-zau-ge-wa-zog  .  .  . 
Shing-wau-koons-see-be  .  .  . 
Wuh-yau-wus-ke-wuh-gog 

Two  outlets,  16-mile  creek 
Young  pine  river 
Shallow  muddy  lake 

Otonabee 

0-doon-ne-be  

Mouth-  water 

Napanee  

Nau-pau-na  

Sau-^eeng.         . 

Flour 
Mouth  of  a  river 

Mun-e-doo-me-nis  . 

Spirit  Island 

Mun-e  -  do  o-  wah-ning 

The  abode  of  a  spirit  god 

Manito 

Mun-e-doo  

Sr>irit,  or  god 

Moccasin  
Penetanguishene. 
Notawasaga 

Muli-ke-zin  

Pe-nuh-dau-wung-o-sheeng 
Nau-do  •  wa-sau-ge  .      ...... 

Indian  shoe 
Caving  sandbank 
Mohawk  outlet 

Oshawa  

Tecumseth 

Au-zhuh-wuh  
Ta-kuh-mo-sah.      

Ferry  him  over 
He  who  walks  over  water 

Shebenaning  
Gananoque  
Squaw*  

Consecon  . 

Shee-ban-o-nau-ning  
Gau-nuh-nau-queeng  
Equa  
0-gons-e-kong  

Straight  narrow  passage 
Place  of  residence 
Woman 
Place  of  small  pickerel  (fish) 

A  Mohawk  word 

Looming  of  trees 

Brant's  ford  .           

Capt.  Brant's  place  of  crossing 

Mackinaw  

Mesb-e-ne-mah-ke-noong 

The  great  turtle 

The  Indians  generally  consider  this  word  a  term  of  reproach. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

CONNECTION   WITH  THE   WHITES,    AND   EYILS   INTRODUCED. 

Indian  Fur  Companies  and  Traders. 

THE  intercourse  which,  has  long  subsisted  between  the 
;  red  man  and  the  white  man  has  to  a  great  extent  changed 
j  the  character  of  the  former  as  regards  native  simplicity, 
moral  habits,  language,  and  dress.  Some  of  the  aged 
relate  that  their  forefathers  informed  them  that  previously 
to  the  arrival  of  the  white  man  in  America  the  Indians 
were  far  more  virtuous  than  they  are  now,  and  that  the 
fire-waters  have  tended  to  demoralize  them  in  every  re 
spect.  Indeed,  every  traveller  who  has  written  on  the 
-condition  of  the  Indians  affirms  that  their  intercourse  with 
Europeans  has  sadly  corrupted  their  morals  and  lowered 
their  dignity. 

Carver  states: — "The  southern  tribes,  and  those  that 
have  held  a  constant  intercourse  with  the  Erench  and 
English,  cannot  have  preserved  their  manners  or  customs 
in  their  original  purity.  They  could  not  avoid  acquiring 
the  vices  with  the  language  of  those  they  conversed  with  ; 
and  the  frequent  intoxications  they  experienced  through  the 
baneful  juices  introduced  among  them  by  the  Europeans, 
have  completed  a  total  alteration  in  their  character." 

The  reason  is  obvious.  The  first  adventurers  into  the 
Indian  territory  were,  in  general,  destitute  of  moral  prin 
ciple,  "  neither  fearing  God  nor  regarding  man."  Such 
persons  would  naturally  introduce  vice  instead  of  virtue ; 
I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  had  they  then  in- 


166  CONNECTION   WITH   THE   WHITES. 

culcated  the  holy  principles  of  the  pure  word  of  God,  my 
countrymen  would  long  since  have  become  prosperous  and 
happy.  A  circumstance  which  happened  in  my  early  days 
will  prove  that  their  dark  minds  were  at  that  time  ready 
to  receive  the  light  of  the  gospel  had  there  been  any  one  to 
instruct  them. 

Our  wigwam  was  pitched  by  the  shore  of  Lake  Ontario, 
and  our  little  band  consisted  principally  of  poor  Indian 
women,  who  got  their  living  by  making  baskets  and 
brooms,  which  they  sold  to  the  white  people  then  settled 
in  the  country.  One  evening,  after  the  return  of  the 
women,  they  began  to  relate  what  some  white  woman  had 
been  telling  them  about  the  Son  of  the  Great  Spirit. — "  A 
long  time  ago  the  Great  Spirit  sent  his  Son  into  this  world, 
in  order,  as  they  understood,  to  make  the  white  people 
good  and  happy,  but  that  the  wicked  people  hated  him, 
and  after  he  had  been  here  a  little  while,  they  took  him 
and  killed  him.  While  this  was  being  related,  all  in  the 
wigwam  listened  with  deep  attention,  when  one  of  them 
spoke  with  a  heavy  sigh,  and  said — "  0,  that  the  Son  of  the 
Great  Spirit  had  not  been  killed,  for  had  he  lived  till  this 
day  lie  might  have  had  compassion  on  us  poor  Indians,  as 
ivell  as  on  the  white  people,  but  now  ice  are  so  poor  " 

Mr.  Harman  states,  as  to  the  whites  corrupting  the 
Indians :  "  The  tribes  that  are  the  most  enlightened,  and 
that  have  advanced  the  farthest  towards  a  state  of  civiliza 
tion,  are  the  Sauteux,  or  Chippeway,  the  Muskagoes,  and  the 
Crees,  or  Knisteneux.  The  white  people  have  been  among 
the  above-mentioned  tribes  for  about  150  years.  To  this  cir 
cumstance  it  is  probably  to  be  attributed  that  the  knowledge 
of  these  Indians  is  more  extensive.  But  I  very  much  ques 
tion  whether  they  have  improved  in  their  character  or  con 
dition  by  their  acquaintance  with  civilized  people.  In  their 


DRUNKENNESS.  167 

savage  state  they  were  contented  with  the  mere  necessaries 
of  life  which  they  could  procure  with  considerable  ease ; 
but  now  they  have  many  artificial  wants,  created  by  the 
luxuries  which  we  have  introduced  among  them ;  and  as 
they  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  these  luxuries,  they  have 
become,  to  a  degree,  discontented  with  their  condition,  and 
practise  fraud  in  their  dealings.  A  half-civilized  Indian  is 
more  savage  than  one  in  his  original  state.  The  latter  has 
some  sense  of  honour,  while  the  former  has  none.  I  have 
always  experienced  the  greatest  hospitality  and  kindness 
among  those  Indians  who  have  had  the  least  intercourse  with 
white  people.  They  readily  discover  and  adopt  our  evil  prac 
tices  ;  but  they  are  not  as  quick  to  discern  and  as  ready  to 
follow  the  few  good  examples  which  are  set  before  them." 

I  shall  now  state  some  of  the  evils  introduced  by  the 
white  people. 

First.  Drunkenness. — This  was  the  polluted  source  whence 
flowed  poisonous  waters  that  contaminated  and  deadened 
every  good  feeling  of  the  heart.  No  people,  as  a  body, 
can  be  more  addicted  to  this  crying  sin  than  the  natives 
of  America.  Previously  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity 
among  them,  I  have  often  seen  such  scenes  of  degradation 
as  would  sicken  the  soul  of  a  good  man  ;  such  as  husbands 
beating  their  wives,  and  dragging  them  by  the  hair  of  the 
head;  children  screaming  with  fright,  the  older  ones  running 
off  with  guns,  tomahawks,  spears,  knives,  and  other  deadly 
weapons,  which  they  concealed  in  the  woods  to  prevent  the 
commission  of  murder  by  their  enraged  parents ;  yet,  not 
withstanding  this  precaution,  death  was  not  unfrequently 
the  result.  Dr.  Schofield  related— "  That  when  he  first 
settled  in  Canada,  there  were  many  Indian  families  who 
gradually  disappeared.  He  knew  twelve  children  perish 
iu  one  drunken  frolic,  their  mothers  being  too  intoxicated 


168  CONNECTION   WITH   THE   WHITES. 

to  take  care  of  them."  When  an  Indian  gets  a  taste  for 
the  fire-ivaters,  his  craving  appetite  knows  no  bounds,  and 
in  order  to  get  them  he  will  part  with  anything  which  the 
white  trader  will  receive  from  him.  I  knew  an  Indian 
woman  named  Nawich,  who,  when  drunk,  would  sell  her  little 
daughter  for  a  quart  of  whisky !  because  she  had  nothing 
else  wherewith  to  procure  what  her  soul  thirsted  after. 

Second.  The  habit  of  taking  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  is 
another  evil  taught  the  Indian  by  his  wrhite  brother,  tn 
their  own  language  they  have  no  words  by  which  they  can 
blaspheme  the  name  of  the  Lord ;  but  I  have  often 
observed,  that  among  the  very  first  things  which  they 
learn  in  English  or  French,  is  to  swear.  There  is  this, 
however,  in  their  favour, — that  many  of  them  do  not  know 
the  meaning  of  the  words  they  utter. 

Third.  Introduction  of  contagious  diseases,  such  as  small 
pox,  measles,  whooping  cough.  In  P.  J.  De  Smet's 
"Sketches"  we  have  the  following  notice  of  a  nation  nearly 
destroyed  by  small-pox : — "  Next  day  we  crossed  the 
forest,  the  winter  quarters  of  the  Gros  Ventres  and  Ari- 
karas,  in  1835.  It  was  there  that  those  unfortunate  tribes 
were  nearly  exterminated  by  the  small-pox.  We  saw  their 
bodies  wrapped  up  in  buifalo  robes,  tied  to  the  branches  of 
the  largest  trees.  It  was  truly  a  sad  and  mournful  spec 
tacle.  Two  days  later  we  met  the  miserable  survivors  of 
these  unhappy  tribes." 

Fourth.  Dishonesty,  lying,  and  deception,  are  too  often 
taught  them  by  the  traders.  Cases  have  often  occurred 
where  the  Indian  has  received  credit  from  a  trader  ;  but 
should  another  trader  meet  him,  in  order  to  save  some 
skins  for  the  one  to  whom  he  is  indebted,  he  will  conceal 
part  of  them,  and  then  say  he  has  no  more.  Their  furs  are 
often  taken  from  them  by  force,  or  a  very  poor  remunera- 


DISHONESTY.  169 

lion  paid  for  them.  When  an  Indian  first  arrives  at  a 
trading-post  with  his  pack  of  skins,  he  will  begin  by  asking 
a  fair  price  for  his  peltries.  The  trader,  knowing  wherein 
his  weakness  lies,  will  appear  indifferent  about  closing  the 

t  bargain,  and  treat  him  with  some  rum.  No  sooner  does 
the  Indian  taste  the  fire-waters  than  his  thirst  becomes 

'  insatiable ;  so  that  the  trader,  by  a  little  manoeuvring,  will 
get  all  the  skins  he  wishes  at  his  own  price. 

Eifth.  The  loss  of  their  country  and  game,  for  a  trifling 
remuneration.  This  the  poor  Indian  feels  keenly,  and  often 
has  he  thirsted  for  revenge  on  his  encroaching  neighbour. 
This  has  been  seen  lately  in  the  south,  in  the  case  of  the 
Seminoles  struggling  in  vain  against  the  power  of  the 
United  States.  The  warrior  may  raise  the  war  whoop, 

j  whirl  the  tomahawk,  and  brandish  his  scalping  knife ;  but 
how  can  a  handful  of  braves  compete  with  a  well  conducted 

!  army  ?  They  may  annoy  and  slaughter  their  intruders  for 
a  time,  but  ruin  and  degradation  will  be  the  result  of  these 
unequal  struggles,  and  the  poor  Indians  will  be  obliged  to 

,  lay  down  the  tomahawk  with  shame  and  disgrace.  Every 
traveller  in  the  Indian  country  has  borne  ample  testimony 
to  the  fact  that  injury  after  injury  has  been  inflicted  on  the 
red  man  by  the  adventurers  who  first  penetrated  the 
American  forests. 

INDIAN   FUR  COMPANIES  AND   TRADERS. 

History  informs  us,  that  soon  after  the  discovery  of 
America  by  Europeans,  the  adventurous  traders  penetrated 
far  into  the  interior,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  furs  from 
the  Indians ;  in  exchange  for  which  they  gave  them  trinkets, 
guns,  ammunition,  clothes,  prints,  knives,  whisky ! 

The  French  were  the  first  who  established  regular 
trading-posts  along  the  chain  of  the  great  lakes  in  Canada. 
After  its  conquest  by  the  English  the  Honourable  Hudson's 


170  CONNECTION   WITH   THE    WHITES. 


Bay  Company  was  formed,  which  has  been  in  successful 
operation  ever  since,  and  I  have  been  informed  that  they 
have  amassed  great  wealth.  A  celebrated  person  in  New 
York  has  made  an  immense  fortune  by  his  Indian  trade.  It 
is  reported  that  he  commenced  business  a  comparatively 
poor  man,  but  that  now  he  is  one  of  the  richest  men  in 
New  York,  and  owns  the  famous  Astor  House  in  Broadway. 
Persons  acquainted  with  the  enormous  profits  made  on 
these  skins  are  not  at  all  surprised  that  so  many  get  rich  in 
this  trade.  A  beaver  skin  worth  eight  hundred  dollars  is 
often  bought  for  one  hundred  dollars,  and  so  in  proportion.* 

*  The  Poor  Indian. — In  the  splendid  regions  of  the  "  far  west  "  which  lie 
between  Missouri  and  the  Rocky  Mountains,  there  are  living  at  this  moment 
on  the  prairies,  various  tribes  who,  if  left  to  themselves,  would  continue  for 
ages  to  live  on  the  buffalo  which  cover  the  plains.  The  skins  of  these 
animals,  however,  become  valuable  to  the  whites,  and  accordingly  this  beauti 
ful  verdant  country  and  these  brave  and  independent  people  have  been 
invaded  by  white  traders,  who  by  paying  them  a  pint  of  whisky  for  each 
skin,  (or  "  robe,"  as  they  are  termed  in  America,)  which  sell  at  New  York  for 
ten  or  twelve  dollars,  induce  them  to  slaughter  these  animals  in  immense 
numbers,  leaving  their  flesh,  the  food  of  the  Indian,  to  rot  and  putrify  on  the 
ground.  No  ambition  or  caution  can  arrest  for  a  moment  the  propelling 
power  of  the  whisky  ;  accordingly,  in  all  directions  these  poor  thoughtless 
beings  are  seen  furiously  riding,  under  its  influence,  in  pursuit  of  their  game, 
or,  in  other  words,  in  the  fatal  exchange  of  food  for  poison.  It  has  been 
attentively  calculated  by  the  traders,  who  manage  to  collect  about  150,000 
buffalo  skins  per  annum,  that  at  the  rate  at  which  these  animals  are  now  dis 
posed  of,  in  ten  years  they  will  be  killed  off.  Whenever  that  event  happens, 
Mr.  Catlin  very  justly  prophecies  that  250,000  Indians,  now  living  in  a  plain 
of  nearly  three  thousand  miles  in  extent,  must  die  of  starvation,  and  become 
a  prey  to  wolves  ;  or  they  must  either  attack  the  powerful  neighbouring  tribes 
of  the  Rocky  Mountains  ;  or,  in  utter  frenzy  of  despair,  rush  upon  the  white 
population,  in  the  forlorn  hope  of  dislodging  it.  In  the  two  latter  alter 
natives  there  exists  no  chance  of  success  ;  and  we  have,  therefore,  the  appal 
ling  reflection  before  us,  that  these  250,000  Indians  must  soon  be  added  to 
the  dismal  list  of  those  who  have  already  withered  and  disappeared,  leaving 
their  country  to  bloom  and  flourish  in  the  possession  of  the  progeny  of 
another  world  ! — Quarterly  Eeview. 


THE   AMERICAN   FUR   COMPANY.  171 

The  American  Fur  Company  have  also  extended  their 
operations  far  to  the  west ;  and  I  am  happy  to  state  that, 
as  far  as  my  information  goes,  with  respect  to  the  conduct 
pursued  by  these  companies  towards  the  Indians,  it  is  now 
as  honourable  as  circumstances  will  permit ;  and  I  rejoice 
to  add,  that  since  they  have  seen  the  evils  occasioned  by 
the  fire-waters,  they  have  abolished  them  as  an  article  of 
traffic.  This  speaks  loudly  for  their  humanity. 

Many  of  the  factors  are  now  taking  an  active  part  in 
assisting  the  missionary  to  civilize  and  christianize  the 
Indians  within  the  bounds  of  their  territory.  The  factors 
and  servants  of  the  Fur  Company  have  almost  universally 
adopted  the  custom  of  marrying  Indian  wives,  from  whom 
a  numerous  offspring  of  half-breeds  have  sprung  up.  These 
intermarriages  have  produced  a  kind  of  half  civilization, 
which,  without  importing  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  only 
makes  the  poor  Indian  "  ten  times  more  the  child  of  the 
devil  than  he  was  before/7  his  superior  worldly  knowledge 
enabling  him  to  be  a  skilful  worker  in  all  kinds  of  iniquity. 
The  traders  exert  a  powerful  influence  over  the  Indians, 
who  invariably  get  greatly  indebted  to  them,  and  thus 
become  subservient  to  their  creditors. 

Their  servants,  who  are  mostly  Canadian  French,  profess, 
the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  and  have  their  priests  in 
different  parts  of  the  western  wilderness.  These  mission 
aries  are  most  persevering  and  self-denying  men  ;  they  will 
compass  sea  and  land  to  make  proselytes  to  their  faith. 
The  ceremonies  and  gaudy  show  connected  with  the 
services  of  the  Romish  Church,  resembling  much  his  own 
heathen  rites  and  ceremonies,  are  well  calculated  to  strike 
the  untutored  mind  of  the  Indian.  Hence  he  readily 
adopts  the  Papist  religion  in  preference  to  the  Protestant, 
which  requires  the  renunciation  of  idolatry,  witchcraft,  and 


172  CONNECTION    WITH   THE   WHITES. 

drunkenness.  No  barbarous  people  will  forsake  their  old 
customs  and  manners  till  the  rays  of  Divine  revelation  dis 
sipate  the  mists  of  ignorance,  and,  by  enlightening  the 
conscience,  show  them  the  vanity  of  Pagan  worship. 
Then,  and  not  till  then,  will  they  "  cast  their  idols  to  the 
moles  and  to  the  bats."  I  have  never  discovered  any  real 
difference  between  the  Roman  Catholic  Indian  and  the 
pagan,  except  the  wearing  of  crosses. 

As  the  country  becomes  peopled  by  the  whites,  the 
Indian  traders  disappear,  the  game  is  destroyed,  and  what 
little  fur  may  be  taken  the  Indians  dispose  of  to  the  shop 
keepers  or  merchants. 

Desirous  of  the  welfare  of  our  Christian  Indians,  I  have 
often  longed  for  the  time  when  the  game  and  fur  shall  be 
so  destroyed  as  to  leave  no  inducement  for  them  to 
abandon  their  farms  and  houses.  This,  coming  from  the 
pen  of  an  Indian,  may  appear  strange ;  but  I  have  good 
reasons  for  saying  so.  No  one  acquainted  with  the  hunting 
propensities  of  Indians  will  deny  that  the  little  game  now 
left  is  rather  a  source  of  injury  than  benefit  to  them.  It 
induces  them  to  leave  their  homes,  and  fosters  indolent 
and  lounging  habits.  So  long  as  they  depend  upon  this 
precarious  mode  of  subsistence  they  must  continue  in  wretch 
edness  and  want.  The  sooner,  therefore,  they  abandon 
hunting  the  better.  They  will  then  from  necessity  be  com 
pelled  to  devote  their  attention  to  the  more  primitive, 
healthy,  and  profitable  employment  of  man,  and  become 
tillers  of  the  ground. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

WHISKY   AND   THE   INDIANS. 

(Indians'  love  for  the  Fire-waters  before  conversion — Firmness  in  resisting- 
after. 

THE  Rev.  S.  Waldron,  when  missionary  at  Muiicey  Town,, 
stated,  at  a  missionary  meeting,  that  Rufus  Turkey  was  so 
fond  of  the  fire-waters  that  he  went  by  night  to  the  still- 
house,  and  when  he  could  not  get  in  at  the  door  or  window 
i  climbed  upon  the  roof,  thinking  to  descend  by  the  chimney; 
but  when  he  got  half-way  down  he  stuck  fast,  and  was 
1  obliged  to  remain  there  till  morning.      The  whisky-maker^ 
i  when  he  came  to  make  his  fire,  heard  an  unaccountable 
|  noise  of  groaning ;    and,  looking  up,  he  saw  the  Indian, 
who  was  almost  suffocated.      He  flogged  the  intruder,  and 
sent  him  away.     Poor  Rufus  soon  after  died. 

An  Indian,  who  was  a  notorious  drunkard,  on  one  occa 
sion,  after  taking  a  dram  of  the  fire-waters,  exclaimed,  "  O 
that  my  throat  were  two  miles  long,  that  I  might  have- 
tasted  it  all  the  way  as  it  went  down  1" 

An  Indian  came  to  an  agent  at  Mackinaw,  and  began  to 
beg  for  a  dram  of  fire-water.  The  agent  said  to  him  he 
never  gave  drunken  Indians  any  drams.  The  Indian  then 
said,  "Me  very  good  Indian."  The1  agent  replied  that 
good  Indians  never  asked  for  drams,  and  it  was  only  bad 
Indians  who  drunk  or  asked  for  whisky.  The  Indian  re 
plied,  "  Den  me  be  d rascal." 


174  WHISKY  AND   THE   INDIANS. 

FIRMNESS   OF  THE    INDIANS   IN     RESISTING  THE   FIRE-WATERS, 
AFTER   THEIR  CONVERSION. 

Shortly  after  the  work  of  God  commenced  among  the 
Indians  of  Schoogag  Lake,  an  Indian  trader  bought  a 
barrel  of  whisky  to  sell  to  them.  The  Indians  requested 
him  to  take  it  away,  as  they  were  resolved  not  to  purchase 
any.  He  persisted  in  offering  it.  The  brave  Christian 
Indians  then  went  in  a  body  to  the  trader,  and  demanded 
the  barrel,  which  he  reluctantly  delivered.  They  rolled  it 
to  the  lake,  cut  a  hole  through  the  ice,  into  which  they 
tumbled  it,  sinking  it  to  the  bottom. 

A  similar  circumstance  occurred  to  my  mother  when  re 
turning  from  Toronto  in  a  canoe,  in  company  with  other 
Indian  women.  She  informed  me  they  were  overtaken 
by  a  boat-load  of  white  men,  who  came  alongside,  and  then 
pulled  out  a  bottle  of  whisky,  asking  them  to  drink.  The 
women  told  them  that  they  did  not  drink ;  but  the  men 
were  urgent,  saying,  "  Surely  a  little  will  do  you  no 
harm."  The  former  still  refusing,  and  the  latter  persisting, 
my  mother  held  out  her  hand,  saying,  "  Hand  me  the, 
bottle."  This  being  done,  the  white  men  thought  they  had 
prevailed.  But,  instead  of  that,  my  mother  poured  out 
the  liquid  fire  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  canoe  into  the 
lake,  and  then  returned  the  bottle  empty  to  their  tempters. 
The  white  men  laughed  and  applauded,  saying  they  had 
done  perfectly  right. 

The  Rev.  Thomas  Hurlbert  informed  me  that  four  Indians 
from  Muncey  Town  went  to  the  white  settlement  to  trade. 
The  trader  tempted  them  to  drink  some  whisky,  but  they 
refused,  saying  they  were  Christians.  Finding  he  could 
not  succeed,  he  thought  perhaps  they  were  afraid  lest  some 
•one  should  see  them  drink  and  tell  the  missionary,  and 


AN   ANECDOTE.  175 

that  if  they  could  take  it  slily  they  would  drink  as  formerly. 
Knowing  the  road  they  would  return  home,  he  put  a  small 
keg  of  whisky  by  the  side  of  the  Indian  path,  at  the  edge 
of  a  sloping  bank,  and  hid  himself  in  the  bushes  beneath, 
thinking  to  enjoy  the  sport  of  seeing  them  drink  when  all 
alone.  At  length  they  came  along  following  in  Indian 
file ;  when,  suddenly,  the  first  one  stopped,  and  exclaimed, 
*'  O,  mah-je-mun-e-doo  sah-oomah  ahyah: — Lo  !  the  evil 
spirit  (the  devil)  is  here."  The  second,  on  coming  up, 
said,  "  Aahe,  nebejemahmahsah : — Yes,  me  smell  him." 
The  third  shook  the  keg  with  his  foot,  and  said,  "  Kaguit, 
nenoondahwahsah : — of  a  truth  me  hear  him."  The  fourth 
Indian  coming  up,  gave  the  keg  a  kick,  and  away  went 
the  fire-waters  tumbling  down  the  hill.  The  four  Indians 
went  on  their  way  like  brave  warriors,  leaving  the  mortified 
wltite  heathen  to  take  up  his  keg  and  drink  the  devil 
himself. 

The  Rev.  Elijah  Hedding  mentions  the  following  incident 
occurring  just  before  his  visit  to  the  Grape  Island  Mission, 
W.  C.,  which  shows  how  strong  had  become  their  hatred 
of  whisky  drinking : — "  A  Christian  Indian  had  gone  out 
in  the  bay  in  a  canoe,  and  been  driven  off  in  a  storm ;  and 
in  his  danger  had  been  picked  up  by  a  steam-boat.  The 
poor  Indian  was  almost  exhausted,  and  the  captain  of  the 
•  steam-boat  made  him  drink  a  glass  of  whisky.  When  he 
came  back  to  the  village  the  Indians  were  so  afflicted  that 
he  should,  under  any  circumstances,  drink  whisky,  that 
they  took  up  a  discipline  with  him;  and  for  one  whole 
afternoon  and  evening,  alternately,  one  would  exhort  him, 
and  another  pray  for  him,  and  then  they  would  make  him 
promise  that  he  would  drink  no  more  whisky." 


176  WHISKY   AND   THE    INDIANS. 

A  CURIOSITY. 

Our  red  brothers,  the  Indians,  are  curious  people — very. 
The  extract  below  is  an  illustration  in  point. 

"  Memorial  of  the  Onondaga  Nation  in  favour  of  the  Maim  • 

Law. 

"  To  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representatives,  Albany,  N.  Y. 

"  Dear  Fathers  and  Brothers : — We  understand  that  you  \ 
are  at  the  great  Council  House  at  Albany,  and  that  the  • 
great    council  fire   is  now  burning,  and  that  our  white- 
brothers  all  over  the  State  are  sending  wood  to  put  on  the 
council  fire,  but  we  'fraid  the  council  fire  will  not  burn  i 
bright  and  clear  without  more  help ;   so  we  send  this  to  < 
make  it  burn.      Now  brothers,  what  we  want  to  say  is- 
this  : — We  hear  about  our  brothers  in  the  State  of  Maine — 
we  hear  that  they  find  Great  Rogue — this  Rogue  he  get*- 
folks'  money,  sometimes  he  burns  houses,  sometimes  he 
kill  people,  sometimes  he  make  a  family  very  poor,  some-  • 
times  he  take  'way  senses,  sometimes  he  make  'em  very 
cross  and  ragged  and  dirty,  and  sometimes  he  freeze  7em  i 
to  death. 

"  Now,  we  hear  our  brothers  there — they  try  to  stop  it — 
they  try  talk  about  it,  see  if  can  stop  it  little — but  he  won't 
stop  it.  We  hear  at  last  our  brothers  wont  bear  it  no 
longer — so  they  make  law  to  'knock  him  on  the  head,  any 
where  they  find  him — in  barrel,  or  jug,  or  bottle ;  in 
tavern,  grocery,  or  barn:  anywhere — knock  him  on  the 
head.  Now  we  want  to  tell  you  brothers,  that  this  big 
Rogue  has  been  here  to  Onondago ;  he  has  made  us  great 
tiouble.  Some  of  our  people  would  be  very  good  if  this 
bad  fellow  would  keep  away.  We  try — our  people  try 
some,  but  he  will  not.  Now  what  we  ask  you  is  to  make 


THE   MAINE   LAW.  177 

us  laws — such,  as  our  brothers  in  the  State  of  Maine  have 
made.  We  have  tried  to  coax  him,  but  he  wont  be  coax  ; 
we  try  scare — he  wont  scare  much ;  he  still  make  great 
deal  trouble ;  we  think  better  make  law  to  knock  him  on 
head — then  he  make  us  no  more  trouble.  We  Christian 
party  ask  it,  and  Pagan  too — most  all  ask  it — you  make 
this  law. 

"  Now  brothers,  our  people  sold  our  land  to  white  people, 
and  white  people  make  treaty — he  say  he  be  good  to 
Indian.  But  he  let  this  Rogue  trouble  us  most  too  long. 
Now,  brothers,  we  was  one  great  people,  and  we  have 
gone  to  war  for  our  white  brother ;  but  now  we  are  few, 
and  our  white  brothers  are  strong.  We  want  you  help 
us — we  want  you  make  this  law,  so  when  we  find  this 
Rogue  we  will  keep  him.  We  see  him  great  many  times, 
but  we  mean  to  be  good  and  peaceable,  and  so  he  got 
away ;  but  if  you  make  this  law  then  we  kill  him,  and  then 
we  live  happy  and  friendly — no  more  cross — no  more 
ragged — no  more  fight,  but  raise  corn,  wheat,  oats,  beans, 
cattle,  horses,  and  some  children  too ;  no  more  get  drunk — 
no  more  freeze  to  death — work  and  get  good  things  like 
white  men. 

"  DAVID  HILL,   )       . 
it  T\          o  c  Chiefs. 

•'  DAVID  SMITH,  J 

"  And  61  more  of  the  Onondagas." 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE   INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 

Two  Roots — Peculiar  Construction — Capable  of  being  arranged  grammatically 
— Specimen  of  Conjugations — Lord's  Prayer  in  Ojebway. 

AFTER  minute  observation  on  the  various  Indian  dialects 
I  have  heard  spoken,  I  have  only  discovered  two  distinct 
or  leading  languages,  and  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
all  others  bear  affinity  to  them  both  in  sound  and  idiom. 
These  two  roots  I  should  call  the  Ojebway  and  the  Mohaivk, 
which  are  entirely  different  from  each  other.  The  former 
comprehends  the  following  tribes,  viz. : — Ojebicay,  Odahiuah; 
PotawaJiduhmee ;  Minoomenee ;  Kenistenoo,  or  Cree ;  Dela 
ware  ;  Muncey ;  Saukie ;  Kicapoo ;  Muskeegoo ;  Moliegan, 
backwoods  men  ;  Miskwukeeyuk,  red  earthmen,  from 
wearing  red  blankets  ;  Juskivaugume ;  Weali ;  Shaivnee ; 
Miamee ;  Peoria ;  Aubinaukee ;  Kaskaskia ;  and  Piangeshau: 
The  Rev.  Thomas  Hurlbert,  who  has  travelled  extensively 
in  North  America,  has  met  with  large  tribes  whose  nationality 
and  language  is  entirely  distinct  from  the  above-mentioned, 
for  instance  : — Saux  ;  Assinebwaunuk ;  Osage  ;  Kansas ; 
Quaupaw  ;  Oto  ;  Pawnee ;  and  Omuhaw. 

The  Mohawk  includes  the  Oneida ;    Onondaga ;   Seneca 
Cayuga ;   Tuscarora ;   Wyandot ;  and  Cherokee. 

It  is  allowed  by  all  travellers  in  the  Indian  country,  th 
the  Ojebway  is  the  most  extensive  of  any  of  the  Nort 
American  languages,  being  understood  and  spoken  by  a 
the  tribes  found  on  both  sides  of  the  lakes  Huron,  Michigan, 


THE  OJEBWAY  LANGUAGE.  179 

and  Superior,  and  so  on  to  the  head-waters  of  the  Missis 
sippi  and  Eed  River.  It  is  true  that  some  of  the  tribes 
find  it  difficult  to  understand  each  other  when  they  first 
meet,  but  after  a  short  intercourse  they  are  enabled  to  con- 
i  verse  with  one  another.  This  establishes  the  fact  that 
there  is  one  common  origin  to  the  different  dialects  of  the 
Ojebway  and  Mohawk  languages.  The  following  are  some 
,  examples  :  [See  pp.  180-1.] 

All  the  Indian  languages  abound  in  polysyllables,  and, 
owing  to  the  affixes  and  prefixes,  some  of  the  words  are 
enormously  long.  A  whole  sentence  is  often  expressed  by 
|  one  compound  word,  as  for  example  : — 

Ki-fai-we-iin-too-tu-mau-ga-tu-mo-wau-nau-nik. 

We  will  desire  to  ask  alms  for  those  persons. 

Ki-ku-we-ni-ta-ivau-bu-mau-nau-nik. 

We  will  try  on  the  way  to  be  in  time  to  see  them. 

The  following  is  a  definition  of  the  word  Conscience  in 
Ojebway : 

Kekandahmauwin ;  knowing,  or  knowledge. 

Kekanedezowin ;  knowing  one's  self. 

Mooshetumown ;  internal  feeling  or  consciousness. 

The  Ojebway  language  is  capable  of  being  arranged  into 
grammatical  order.  It  possesses  great  strength,  and  is  full 
of  imagery,  as  the  words  express  the  nature,  use,  or  resem 
blance  of  the  things  spoken  of.  On  this  account  it  makes 
a  deeper  impression  on  the  mind  of  both  speaker  and 
hearer  than  a  language  composed  of  arbitrary  or  unmeaning 
sounds.  I  shall  now  give  a  specimen  of  the  conjugation  of 
an  Ojebway  verb.  (This  verb  was  left  unfinished  by  the  Rev. 
P.  Jones,  but  it  is  deemed  proper  to  insert  it  as  his  pro 
duction.  At  the  same  time  the  editor  is  greatly  indebted  to 
the  Rev.  Thomas  Huiibert  for  his  kindness  in  furnishing  a 
complete  verb,  which  with  his  observations  on  the  intricacies 


180 


INDIAN    LANGUAGES. 


| 

o 

^ 

1 

M 
1  '? 

.2   .2 
J    |    1 

la 

1  1 

^ 

"a  |< 

C3        GD 

A     0 

i 

^     <x> 

"-3        rC 

g 

g 

O 

1 

i! 

J  "2  5 

^  H 

0       "? 
ra      O 

a* 

I 

II 

I  » 

<?  i 

CD     £72 
^ 

i 

1 

6 

^ 

t3 

Munsee. 

o 

Oorh-quaiwh 
Um-ee-minz 

Skah-in-zoowh 
Oorh-qua-zis 
Uh-ke 

Keesh-koowh 
Kee-shoorqh 

| 

1 
^4 

I 

Uh-lon-qua 
Pah-tumowhwoz 

Owhwozuhkuma 
Ne-be 

Ne-bee-zis 
See-poowh 

II 

1 

Uh-toowh 
Mwah-kun-a 

[S3 

M 

CD       ,£4 

•| 

,  r 

rt 

S 

s 

rt 

Delaware. 

| 
1 

11 
I     ? 

?ee-lowh-wa 
Orh-qua-ch 
Kuk-keh 

a-mah-pun- 
Kee-shoorq 

1 
| 

O 

o 

Uh-lun-quj 
ahtum-owhi 

whwossahkl 
Ne-bi 

Me-no-paig 
See-poh 

II 

| 

Uh-toowh 
Mvvah-kun 

OH 

PH 

O 

§ 

• 

0 

bo 

s 

^ 

odawahduhi 

Enin-uh 

Ke-kah-ba 
3eg-yug-koo 
Uh-ka 

Kee-zheeg 
Kee-zas 

Te-bik-zas 

Uh-nung 
ezhamunad 

Ish-pee-min 
Na-beesh 

| 

l| 
1  <* 

o 

Me-tig 
iVe-gee-wau 

Mah-koo 

Suk-ke-cee 
TTh-na-moos 

£ 

M 

W 

W 

•S 

s    „ 

.3 

1 

bo 

§ 

g 

|   ^ 

Od  ah  wah 

E-ne-ne-za 

E-qua 
Uh-be-noo-je 

Quee-we-zar 
E-qua-zani 
Uh-ke 

.9  a 

1  1 

<D     M 

M  p 

Te-bik  kee-z 

bo    o 
§     § 
?     S 

rd          03 

P        -g 

0) 

M 

Ish-pe-min 
Nee-beesh 

Ke-che-guh-i 
See-be 

.£P  | 

0       0^ 

Muh-quah 

Wah-wah-shke 
Un-r\e-moof 

0 

1 
5s 

CD 
R 

i 

Mi 

E-qua 
Uh-be-noo-jeeb 

Quee-we-zans 
E-qua-zans 
Uh-ke 

.SP   « 

*?       0 

o    M 

M  p 

Te-bik-kee-zis 

Uh-nung 
Kezha-munedoc 

!i 

i—  i 

a 

<b 

M 

Me-tig 
Weo-ge-waum 

Muh-quuh 

\Yah-wah-shka-  s] 
TTVi-^o-moosh 

| 

g 

§s 

>>  -   5 

1 

S3   ^ 

a    «-, 

^    S 

0       § 

f-i 

%     tc 

tU) 

O     -"       ^-t 

M*    r^ 

^ 

^       0 

^       "rrt 

"«    > 

Q        pj 

• 

CD       C 

a 

S 

f  s 

PQ       O       r^ 

CQ    OQ 

S 

02     O 

CD      t> 

w  * 

i—  i  j^ 

EH    ^ 

" 

P    £ 

INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 


181 


iiilti 


iiiif 


's  9   ra    5 

rSsO-Jf'C1:-J-' 


182 


INDIAN  LANGUAGES. 


of  the  Indian  verb  will  give  a  more  satisfactory  insight  into 
the  peculiarities  of  the  language.  Much  difficulty  has  been 
found  in  writing  the  Ojebway  with  the  English  Alphabet 
from  the  fact  that  there  are  many  sounds  between  b  and  p, 
d  and  t,  g  hard  and  k,  ch  and  j,  s  and  z.  The  writer  often 
interchanges  these  letters  in  writing  the  same  word.  It 
will  be  observed  that  the  orthography  of  the  following 
verbs  differs  in  this  respect.) 

CONJUGATION  OF  THE  VERB  To  WALK,  Chebemosung. 


INDICATIVE   MOOD. 

PRESENT   TENSE. 


Singular. 

1.  Nebemosa I  walk. 

2.  Kebemosa Thou  walkest. 

3.  Bemosa He  walks. 


I  Plural. 

\    1 .  Nebemosamin We  walk. 

1    2.  Kebemosam Ye  walk. 

3.  Bemosawug They  walk. 


PAST    TENSE. 


1.  Ningeebemosa  ...I  walked. 

2.  Kegeebemosa  ...Thou  walkedst. 

3.  Keebemosa   He  walked. 


1.  Ningeebemosamin  ...We  walked. 

2.  Kegeebemosam Ye  walked. 

3.  Keebemosawug They  walked 


FUTURE   TENSE. 

1.  Ninguhbemosa  ...I  shall  walk. 


2.  Keguhbemosa   ...Thou  shalt  walk. 

3.  Duhbemosa He  shall  walk. 


1.  Ninguhbemosamin   ...  We      shall 

walk. 

2.  Keguhbemosam  . .  .Ye  shall  walk. 

3 .  Duhhemosawug  ...  They  shall  walk. 


PERFECT   TENSE. 


1.  Ningeebemosanahbun...!  have 

walked. 

2.  Kegeebemosanahbun  ...Thou  hast 

walked. 

3.  Keebetnosabun He       has 

walked. 


1.  Ningeebemosaminahbun.We   have 

walked 

2.  Kegeebemosamwahbun..Ye   have 

walked. 

3 .  Keebemosabuneeg They  have 

walked. 


INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 


183 


POTENTIAL    MOOD. 

PRESENT  TENSE. 

Singular.  Plural. 

1.  Nindahbemosa..!  may  walk.  I    1.  Nindahbemosa  ....We  may  walk. 


2.  Kedahbemosa.  .Thou  may est  walk. 

3.  Dahbemosa He  may  walk. 


2.  Kedahbemosam...Ye  may  walk. 

3.  Dahbemosa wug... They  may  walk. 


PAST   TENSE. 


1.  Nindahgeebemosa  . .  .1  might  walk. 

2.  Kedahgeebemosa. .  .Thou  mightest 

walk. 

3.  Dahgeebemosa He       might 

walk. 


1.  Nindahgeebemosamin.'We     might 

walk. 

2.  Kedahgeebemosam....Ye     might 

walk. 

3.  Dahgeebemosawug They  might 

walk. 


PERFECT   TENSE. 


1.  Nindahgeebemosame- 

dook...I  may  have  walked. 

2.  Kedahgeebemosame- 

dook. .  .Thou  may  est  have  walked. 
•3.  Dahgeebemosadoog... 

He  may  have  walked. 


1.  Kedahgeebemosaminah- 

doog...We  may  have  walked. 

2.  Kedahgeebemosamwah- 

doog...Ye  may  have  walked. 

3.  Dahgeebemosadooya- 

nug  ....They  may  have  walked. 


SUBJUNCTIVE   MOOD. 

PRESENT  TENSE. 


1.  Bemosawahnan  ...If  I  walk-. 

2.  Bemosawuhnan  ...If  thou  walkest. 

3.  Bernosagwan If  he  walk. 


1.  Bemosawungwan If  we  walk. 

2 .  Bemesawagwan If  ye  walk. 

3.  Bemosawahgwan If  they  walk. 


IMPERATIVE    MOOD. 
2.  Bemosan *.Walk  thou.   j    2.  Bemosayook Walk  ye. 

(Thus  ends  the  verb  unfinished  by  the  Rev.  Peter  Jones. 
The  following  is  furnished  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Hurlbert : — ) 

SPECIMEN  OF  AN  OCIIEPWA  VERB. — Root,  Waubi,  He  sees. 

Waubing ...To  see.    Infinitive 

Waubim To  see.    Infinitive  absolute. 


184 


INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 


Singular. 
1.  Niwaub  ... I  see. 


2.  Kiwaub    Thou  seest. , 

3.  Waubi He  sees. 

4.  Waubiwun*  Him  or  his  sees. 


INDICATIVE    MOOD. 

PRESENT   TENSE. 

Plural. 
1.  Niwaubimin...We  see, 

exclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

1.  Kiwaubimin.-.We  see, 

inclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

2.  KiwauWm You  see. 

3.  Waubiwug  They  see. 

4.  Waubiwun  ....Them  or  theirs  see. 


PAST   TIME,   OB  IMPERFECT  TENSE. 


1 .  Niwaubinaubun  . .  I  saw. 


2.  Kiwaubinaubun . . .  Thou  sawest. 

3.  Waubebun    He  saw.         , 

4.  Waubebunen Him  or  his  saw. 

PERFECT 

1.  Ninkewaub.  ..I  have  seen. 

2.  Kikewaub    ...Thou  hast  seen. 

3.  Kewaubi He  has  seen. 

4 .  Kewauwun  . . .  Him  or  his  has  seen . 


Note. — Thei-e  are  no  pronouns   in  the  third  and  fourth  persons  in 
Intransitive  Verbs. 


1.  Niwaubiminnaubun..We  saw, 

exclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

1.  Kiwaubiminnaubun..We  saw, 

inclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

2.  Kiwaubimwaubun....You  saw. 

3.  Waubebunneg    They  saw. 

4.  Waubebunen Them       or 

theirs  saw. 

TENSE. 


Ninkewaubinaubun 
Ninguwaub  


I  had  seen. 
I  will  see. 


Ningukewaub    I  will  have  seen. 


Nintauwaub  , 

Niwewaub 

Nimpewaub 


I  may  or  can  see. 
I  wish  to  see. 
I  come  seeing. 


*  Anomalous  as  it  may  seen,  this  language  has  four  persons.     For  want  of 
pronouns  in  the  English  we  cannot  express  it  better  than  above. 


INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 


185 


,•  Niwepewaub 

i  Ningunipimon  

]  Ninguniwaub    

I  Nintaukewaub    

i  Nintawaub 

|  Niwetawaub    

i  Ninguwepetawaub 


I  wish,  to  come  seeing. 
I  will  go  walking. 
I  will  go  seeing. 
I  should  have  seen. 
I  am  able  to  see. 
I  wish  to  be  able  to  see. 
I  will  desire  to  be  able  to  come 
seeing. 


SUBJUNCTIVE    MOOD. 


PRESENT  TENSE. 


Singular. 
1.  Waubiyaun If  I  see. 


2.  Waubiyun If  thou  seest. 

3.  Waubit  If  he  see. 

4.  Waubinit If  him  or  his  see. 


Plural. 
1.  Waubiyaung.Jf  we  see, 

exclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

1.  "Waubiyung...If  we  see, 

inclusive  of  the  party  addressed. 

2 .  Waubiy  ag    ...  If  you  see. 

3.  V7aubiwaud...If  they  see. 

4.  Waubinit If  them  ortheirs  see. 


Chiwaubiyaun    That  I  may  see. 

"Wewaubiyaun    If  I  wish  to  see. 

Piwaubiyaun     If  I  come  seeing. 

I  Kauwaubiyaun    When  I  had  seen. 

Chiwewaubiyaun   That  I  may  desire  to  see. 

Chipewaubiyaun  That  I  may  come  seeing. 

Chitawaubiyaun That  I  may  be  able  to  see. 

Chiwetawaubiyaun    That  I  may  desire  to  be  able  to  see. 


PASSIVE   VERBS. 


1.  Niwaubumigoo  I  am  seen. 


2.  Kiwaubumigoo Thou  art  seen. 

3.  Waubumau  He  is  seen . 

4.  Waubumimaun Him  or  his  is 

seen. 


1.  Niwaubumigoomin    We     are 

seen, 
exclusive  of  the  party  addressed 

1.  Kiwaubumigoomin    We     are 

seen, 


inclusive  of  the  party 

2.  Kiwaububigoom  You  are  seen. 

3.  Waubumauwug They  are  seen. 

4.  Waubumimaun Them  or  theirs 


186  INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 


SUBJUNCTIVE    MOOD. 

1.  Waubumigooyaun  I  If  I  am  seen. 

2.  Waubumigooyun I   If  thou  aft  seen. 


3.  Waubumint.... 

4.  \Vaubumimint 


If  he  is  seen. 

If  him  or  his  is  seen. 


(io.) 


Ni  wewaubumigos  


I  am  desirous  of  being  seen. 


I  show  myself. 

(&c.) 

Niwaubumigoowiz     I   I  am  providentially,  fortunately,  or 

luckily  seen. 

(&c.) 

Niwaubumawiz The  same  as  ahove. 

Niwaubikauz I  pretend  to  see. 

Okimaukauzo  He  pretends  to  be  a  chief. 

Niwaubundis I  see  myself. 

Niwaubuntimin We  see  each  other. 

Niwaubunjiga  I  see,  I  look  on. 

Niwaubuntumau   I  see,  it  is  not  dark. 

TRANSITIVE    VERBS. 


Singular. 

Niwaubumau I  see  him. 

Niwaubiau I  cause  him  to  see. 

Niwaubunduau Icause  him  to  see  it. 

Niwaubundumowau I  see  it  with 

or  for  him. 


Plural,  transitive  object. 

Niwaubumaug I  see  them. 

Niwaubiaug I  cause  them 

to  see. 


INVERSE   TRANSITION. 


1.  Niwaxibumik  ... 

2.  Kiwaxibumik  ... 

3.  Owaubumigoon 


He  sees  me,  or  rather  him  sees  I. 

He  sees  thee. 

He  sees  him,  or  him  sees  he. 


4.  Owaubumigoni This  form  implies  the  return  action 

from  a  second   transitive  object  to  which  the  first  objective  case  is 
nominative,  thus — 

345 
He     Him 

3  4 

Owaubumaun He  sees  him 

4 
Omaubumaune Him  sees.     No.  5. 


INDIAN  LANGUAGES.  187 

The  form  above  is  the  inverse  or  return  action  from 
No.  5  to  4.  To  attempt  to  express  these  inflections  by 
using  English  pronouns,  obscures  instead  of  elucidating 
the  subject. 

Niwaubumigoog    They  see  me. 

JNiwiwaubiigoog    They  cause  me  to  see. 

Niwaubunduigoog     They  cause  me  to  see  it. 

Niwaubundumaugoog They  see  it  with  or  for  me. 

TRANSITIVE   OBJECT   INANIMATE. 

Niwaubundaun I  see  it. 

Niwaubundaunun    -  I  see  them. 

,  Niwaubumigon    It  sees  me. 

1  Niwetookaugon    It  assists  me. 

Ninoojimoigon It  cures  me  as  a  medicine. 

jNinoojimoigowaun  His  medicine  cures  me. 

\  Mmetookaugowaun They  assist  me. 

I  have  given  the  most  important  forms  of  conjugation. 

JThe   inflections   arising  from   one  root  amount   to  many 

millions.     This  language  has  more  moods  of  time  than  the 

Greek,  and  more  pronouns  and  forms  of  conjugation  than 

any  other  known  language. 

TlIOS.    HURLBERT. 

None  of  the  North  American  Indians,  when  first  visited 
by  Europeans,  had  any  written  language ;  consequently, 
they  were  entirely  destitute  of  anything  like  literature, 
Some  years  ago,  a  Cherokee  Indian,  named  George  Guess, 
invented  an  alphabet  for  that  language,  which  has  been 
|  adopted  by  the  nation.  The  following  is  an  account  of 
this  singular  fact : — 

"The  Cherokees,"  said  John  Ridge,  in  his  late  speech, 

i  "  are  the  only  modern  nation  who  can  claim  the  honour  of 

•  having  invented  an  alphabet.      George  Guess,  a  Cherokee 

Indian,  who  did  not  understand  a  single  letter  within  a  few 


188  INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 

years,  had  invented  an  alphabet  in  which  a  newspaper  is 
published  in  the  Cherokee  nation,  and  their  children  taught 
to  read  and  write.     He  was  a  poor  man,  living  in  a  retired 
part  of  the  nation,  and  he  told  the  head  men  one  day  that 
he  could  make  a  book.     The  chiefs  replied  it  was  impos 
sible,  because,  they  said,  the  Great  Spirit  at  first  made  a 
red  and  a  white  boy  ;    to  the  red  boy  he  gave  a  book,  and 
to  the  white  boy  a  bow  and  arrow,  but  the  white  boy  came 
round  the  red  boy,  stole  his  book,  and  went  off,  leaving 
him  the  bow  and  arrow,  and  therefore  an  Indian  could  not 
make  a  book.      But  George  Guess  thought  he  could.     He 
shut  himself  up  to  study ;   his  corn  was  left  to  weeds,  and 
he  was  pronounced  a  crazy  man  by  the  tribe. — His  wife 
thought  so  too,  and  burnt  up  his  manuscripts  whenever 
she   could  find  them.      But    he   persevered.        He   first 
attempted  to  form  a  character  for  every  word  in  the  Chero 
kee  language,  but  was  forced  to  abandon  it.      He  then  set  j 
about  discovering  the  number  of  sounds  in  the  language,  I 
which  he  found  to  be  sixty-eight,  and  for  each  of  these  he 
adopted  a  character,  which  forms  the  alphabet,  and  these  f 
characters   combined   like   letters  %  form   words.      Having  j 
accomplished  this  he  called  together  six  of  his  neighbours,  j 
and  said,  '  Now  I  can  make  a  book.'    They  did  not  believe  | 
him.     To  convince  them,  he  asked  each  to  make  a  speech,  j 
which  he  wrote  down  as  they  spoke,  and  then  read  to 
them,  so  that  each  one  knew  his  own  speech,  and  they  then 
acknowledged  he  could  make  a  book,  and  from  this  inven 
tion  of  this  great  man,  the   Cherokees   have   become   a 
reading  people." 

With  regard  to  the  Ojebway  language,  I  was  the  first 
person  who  attempted  to  reduce  it  to  a  written  form  ;  and, 
in  so  doing,  I  made  use  of  the  Roman  characters.  I  first 
translated  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Apostles'  Creed,  and  the 


THE  LORD'S  PRATER.  189 

Ten  Commandments.  After  this  I  wrote  a  small  spelling- 
;  book,  and  then  translated  a  few  of  Wesley's  and  Watts' 
5  hymns,  with  the  following  portions  of  Holy  Scripture  :— 
j  Genesis,  Matthew,  and  John.  In  these  I  was  assisted  by 
I  my  brother  Mr.  John  Jones,  and  others. 

Dr.  James  and  John  Tanner  have  translated  the  whole 
of  the  New  Testament  into  the  Ojebway ;  but,  owing  to  an 
I  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  language,  I  regret  to  say  they 
have  not  given  correct  translations. 

The  Rev.  S.   Hall,  and   George   Copway,   Indian  mis 
sionary,  have  translated  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.     In  the 
i  year  1851  I  translated  additional  hymns  for  the  use  of  our 
!  missions.    The  late  Rev.  James  Evans,  and  George  Henry, 
Indian,  also  translated  a  number  of  hymns,  which  have 
I  been  printed  by  the  Canada  Missionary  Society.     There 
I  are  a  few  other  minor  translations  which  have  been  printed. 
1  A   translation   of   the   Lord's   Prayer,  in  Ojebway,  may 
interest  some  of  my  readers. 

Noo-se-non  ish-pe-ming-a-yah-yan  ;  tuh-ge-che-e-nain-dah-gwud 

Our  Father  in  heaven       who  art ;  supremely         adored 

I    ke-de-zhe-ne-kah-ze-win.     Ke-doo-ge-mah-we-win  tuh-be-tuh-give-she-noo-muh- 

be  thy  name.  Thy          kingdom          let        it  come. 

j    gud.     A-nain-duh-mun  o-mah  uh-keeng    tuh-e-zhe-che-gaim,  te-be-shkoo  go 
Thy      will  here     on  earth      let       it    be  done,  as         it 

;    a-zhe-uh-yog  e-we-de  ish-pe-ming-.    Meen-zhe-she-nom  noong-com  kee-zhe-guk 
:    is  yonder    in  heaven x  Give  us  this  day 

ka-o-buh-qua-zhe-gun-e-me-yong.     Kuh-ya  wa-be-nuh-muh-we-she-nom  e-newh 
that  which  will  be  our  bread.         And  forgive  us 

nim-bah-tah-e-zhe-wa-be-ze-we-ne-nah-nin,      a-she    ko     wa-be-nuh-muh-wung- 

our  sins,  as  we  forgive 

e-dwah     e-gewh     ma-je-doo-duh-we-yuh-min-ge-jig.        Ka-go     ween     kuh-ya 

them          who  have  done  us  evil.  Do  not  (and) 

uh-ne-e-zhe-we-zhe-she-kong-ain    e-mah    zhoo-be-ze- win-ing ;      mfih-noo    suh 

lead  us  into  temptation  ;  but          do 


190  INDIAN   LANGUAGES. 

go       ke-de-skee-we-ne-she-nom.          Keen  mah  ween     ke-de -bain-don  ewh 

thou        deliver  us  from  evil.  For   thine    is  the 

o-ge-mah-we-win,      kuh-ya       e~wh       kuh-shke-a-we-ze-win,       kuh-ya  ewfo 

kingdom,  and          the  power  and  the 

pe-she-gain-dah-go-ze-win,  kah-ge-nig  kuh-ya  kah-ge-nig. 

glory,  for  ever      and       for  ever.         Amen. 

The  Mohawk  Indians  Jiave  had  portions  of  the  Word  of 
God  iii  their  language  for  many  years,  such  as  the  Gospels 
of  Mark  and  John,  and  a  few  chapters  in  Genesis,  with 
some  Psalms  in  metre ;  also  portions  of  the  Church  of 
England  service.  St.  Mark  was  translated  by  Captain 
Joseph  Brant,  and  St.  John  by  Major  John  Norton. 

It  cannot  be  expected  that  any  of  these  are  perfect. 
After  more  mature  experience  and  knowledge,  I  see  many 
defects  in  my  own  translations.  I  have,  however,  this 
satisfaction,  that  I  did  my  best,  and  I  am  happy  to  say  that 
the  errors  are  not  of  vital  importance  ;  but,  were  I  to  revise 
them,  many  improvements  could  be  made  both  in  transla 
tion  and  orthography.  It  is  my  opinion  that  if  it  be  desir 
able  to  form  a  written  standard  of  the  language,  new 
characters  should  be  invented,  something  like  the  Cherokee* 

Some  years  ago  the  Kev.  J.  Evans  and  Rev.  T.  Hurl- 
bert  commenced  a  syllabic  character  for  the  Ojebway, 
which  they  have  since  applied  to  the  Cree  language  at 
Hudson's  Bay,  and  I  am  informed  that  it  is  well  adapted 
for  that  language,  being  both  easy  and*  simple.  All  that 
the  Indian  has  to  do  is  to  learn  the  characters,  and  when 
he  has  done  so  he  can  read  and  write  the  language. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

CAPACITY  OF  THE   INDIANS   FOK   RECEIVING   INSTRUCTION. 

Indians'  Desire  and  Capacity  to  Receive  Instruction — Illustrations — Indian 
Eloquence,  "Wit,  and  Shrewdness. 

As   "facts  are   stubborn  things/7   the  best  method  of 

establishing  our  position  is,  to  relate  facts.     Those  who 

read  the  statement  of  them  will  be  able  to  decide,  whether 

;  the  Indian  has  not  the  same  capacity  to  learn  as  the  white 

man.  All  that  is  wanting  is,  the  proper  means  of  instruction. 

William  Wilson,  an  Indian  youth  of  superior  abilities, 

i  was  sent  to  Cobourg  College,  and  whilst  there,  stood  at  the 

i  head  of  the  first-class.     He  made  rapid  progress  in  the 

classics,  and  wrote  poetry  with  great  ease.     On  leaving 

College,  he  went  to  New  York,  where  he  was  seized  with 

small-pox,  which  terminated  fatally. 

The  following  respecting  him  is  taken  from  the  Christian 
Guardian,  dated  May  23rd,  1838  :— 

"  INDIAN   IMPROVEMENT. 

"  On  our  first  page  will  be  found  an  original  poemr 
on  '  England  and  British  America.7  The  author,  William 
Wilson,  is  an  Indian  youth,  whose  educational  oppor 
tunities  have  been  exceedingly  limited,  but  whose  praise 
worthy  assiduity  is  as  creditable  to  him  and  to  his  too 
much  despised  countrymen,  as  it  is  gratifying  to  his  friends 
and  instructors.  The  poem  is  far  from  being  faultless,  but 
we  hazard  nothing  in  saying  that  it  exhibits  an  incipient 
genius  which  deserves  cultivation,  and  which,  under  due 
religious  influence,  may  yet  be  of  essential  service  to  a 


192  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

people  who  are  nobly  desirous  to  emerge  from  the  bar 
barism  and  wretchedness  in  which  they  have  long  been 
enveloped." 

ENGLAND   AND   BRITISH   AMERICA. 

BABEL  !  whose  primal  empire  erst  did  rise 
In  peerless  pomp  'neath  fair  and  fervid  skies, 
Where  now  thy  lofty  tower,  whose  siimmit  proud 
Attempted  heav'n,  and  pierc'd  the  ambient  cloud  ? 
Assyria  where  ?  against  whose  vices  bold 
The  prophet's  ire  in  dread  denouncement  told, — 
Along  whose  streets  betimes  his  warnings  swept, 
And  o'er  her  doom  in  plaintive  accents  wept, — 
Till,  loudly  echoing,  flash'd  the  bolts  of  heav'n, 
Launch'd  by  Jehovah's  arm  in  thunder  giv'n, 
And  dire  revenge  from  giant  slumber  burst, 
Hurling  her  smitten  fabrics  to  the  dust  ! 
"Where  Carthage  now  ?  against  whose  rival  coast 
Triumphant  Rome  led  forth  her  conquering  host, 
Ere  warring  Scipio  bends  her  prostrate  walls, 
And  Romans  shout  exulting  as  she  falls  ! 
Where  do  the  myriad  spires  of  Egypt  gleam 
Along' the  banks  of  Nile's  extended  stream, — 
Rearing  aloft  her  monumental  pyre, 
Whose  cloudy  top  would  fain  to  heaven  aspire  ? 
And  where  her  halls  by  learned  Magi  grac'd, 
Whose  gifted  minds  the  path  of  science  trac'd  ? 
Where  too  her  sceptred  kings  that  proudly  shone 
In  pomp  barbaric  on  th'  empurpled  throne, 
Commanding  nations  far,  by  stern  decree, 
In  adoration  low  to  bend  the  knee  ? 
And  Greece  !  oh  where  that  mighty  empire  now 
That  bade  the  Perse  with  trembling  homage  bow  ? 
Bright  clime  of  that  immortal  bard,  whose  name 
With  deathless  hues  shall  live  in  brightest  fame, 
Who  tun'd  his  hallow'd  harp,  all  wild  and  free, 
To  rapturous  strains  of  heav'nly  harmony, — 
Of  him  whose  thunder  did  the  forum  shake, 
And  made  the  throne  of  haughty  Philip  quake, 
While  rude  Oppression  from  his  seat  was  huii'd 
And  Freedom's  banner  o'er  his  corse  unfurl'd ! 


POEM   BY   AN    INDIAN.  193 

Where  now  her  classic  field,  her  sylvan  grove, 

Made  vocal  with  the  muses'  lays  of  love  ? 

Arcadia  where,  where  sacred  Science  dwelt, 

At  whose  fair  shrine  exalted  sages  knelt  ? 

Alas  !  the  lamp  that  brightly  shone  of  yore 

On  her  its  light  effulgent  sheds  no  more  ; 

No  more  with  her  doth  Genius  rear  his  throne, 

And  fondly  view  a  realm  from  zone  to  zone  : 

For  lo  !  her  sons  by  Moslem  tyrants  fall, 

And  slavish  chains  their  captive  minds  enthrall. 

Where  is  the  mighty  Alexander  now, 

Who  fought  the  world  to  deck  ambition's  brow, 

Who  dar'd  in  arms  to  match  all-conquering  Jove, 

And  boldly  spurn  the  laws  of  Heaven  above  ? 

Rolling  his  chariot  fierce  to  realms  afar, 

And  with  rebellious  arms  wag'd  dastard  war  ; 

While  nations  wild  with  consternation  stare, 

And  groans  of  slaughter'd  millions  fill  the  air  ; 

Until  he  made,  by  more  than  mortal  skill, 

A  fated  world  obsequious  to  his  will. 

Th'  Eternal  City  where,  imperial  Rome, 

Whose  standard  proudly  wav'd  o'er  realms  unknown, 

And  through  the  earth  her  battling  legions  bore, 

To  glut  their  madden'd  ranks  with  human  gore  ? 

Where  now  those  rock-built  tow'rs  that  darkly  frown'd. 

In  mystic  awe  o'er  Tiber's  stream  profound, 

And  rear'd  their  impious  heads  in  height  sublime, 

Scowling  defiance  'gainst  the  blasts  of  time  ? 

To  this  bless'd  land  I  turn  from  Empires'  fall, 
O'er  which  stern  fate  has  stretch'd  oblivion's  pall,  — 
Have  fled  like  ocean's  spray  before  his  nod, 
That  dar'd  the  brunt  of  his  relentless  rod. 
Here  would  the  muse  kneel  at  Apollo's  shrine, 
In  votive  strains  t'  invoke  the  tuneful  Nine, 
Perchance  t'  imbibe  alike  th'  enlivening  fire 
Of  him  who  did  the  early  bards  inspire. 
But  Britain  first  behold,  that  "  sea-girt  isle," 
With  pow'r  and  wealth  as  boundless  as  the  Nile, 
With  genius,  learning,  art,  and  science  bless'd, 
And  reason's  nobler  ray  at  her  behest ; 
Her  sons,  the  first  in  glory's  hallow'd  field, 
The  last  in  battle's  darker  hour  to  yield, 


194  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

Behold,  in  firm  recluse  from  tyrants'  shock, 

Around  the  standard  of  their  countiy  flock, — 

A  formidable  front  to  despots  show, 

While  to  the  field  they  dare  the  angry  foe  : 

Contentment,  peace,  and  good  their  steps  attend, 

Their  sacred  hearths  from  ruthless  vice  defend  ; 

To  them  each  genial  year  its  charms  renews, 

The  fruitful  earth  their  thousand  wants  pursues  ; 

For  them  wing'd  commerce  wafts  from  distant  climes 

The  treasures  of  their  land  and  richest  mines  ; 

Harmonious  laws  their  kindred  hearts  unite, 

And  wisdom's  ways  their  nobler  thoughts  delight. 

Behold  her  red-cross  flag  unfurling  far, 

Victorious  Wellington  directs  her  car  ; 

Triumphant  too  at  Waterloo  he  rode, 

Beneath  its  wheels  the  vain  tricolor  trode, — 

Inglorious  bade  the  proud  usurper  bow, 

And  own  his  conqu'ring  arm  in  suppliance  low. 

Behold,  'midst  yonder  deep  and  princely  hall, 

Where  godlike  Justice  sits  in  awful  pall, 

Where  Freedom's  matchless  champions  mutual  join 

To  shield  the  laws,  and  for  their  rights  combine, 

Immortal  Pitt  with  conscious  boldness  rise  ; 

Destructive  lightning  flashes  from  his  eyes  ; 

Now  threat'ning  vengeance  sits  upon  his  brow, 

His  glowing  cheeks  bespeak  his  fervour  now  ; 

Through  all  his  frame  th'  inspiring  god  is  seen, 

And  all  his  pow'rs  with  mingled  terror  gleam. 

Hark  !  through  the  long-drawn  aisle  his  voice  resounds,. 

And  dreadly  now  re-echo  back  the  sounds  ; 

Like  when  th'  Olympian  sire  in  thunder  pours 

His  vengeful  wrath,  and  arrowy  tempests  showers  : 

On  schemes  corrupt  he  wreaks  his  fell  desire, 

And  fiercely  vents  his  all-devouring  ire, 

While  round  the  pompous  heads  of  tyrant  kings 

Aloud  his  dread  denunciation  rings, — 

In  thunder  loud  his  vengeance  flings  retort, 

While  heaven  and  earth  revere  the  dread  report. 

Before  his  voice  now  brazen  discord  shrinks, 

Now  lordly  guilt  in  meek  submission  sinks  ; 

Insatiate  ease  now  startles  from  his  couch, 

In  frantic  terror  factious  minions  crouch  : 


POEM  BY   AN   INDIAN.  195 

The  sable  sons  of  Afric  gladly  hear 

His  welcome  voice,  and  lend  a  list'ning  ear ; 

He  bids  the  captive  slave  from  bondage  flee — 

He  fondly  sets  the  iron-bound  pris'ner  free. 

Amid  the  crowd  of  patiiots,  heroes,  view, 

That  grace  proud  Albion's  clime  with  bright  halo, 

The  train  of  star- eyed  Science'  devotees, 

Who  to  her  altar  bow  with  suppliant  knees. 

On  learning's  pinions  proud  they  take  their  way, 

And  through  the  maze  of  latent  myst'ries  stray  ; 

Far  as  imagination's  piercing  ken 

With  philosophic  eye  their  flight  they  wend  ; 

Stay  with  firm  hand  the  planets  in  their  course, 

Direct  the  pathless  comet,  trace  its  source. 

Chief  to  her  bards  is  due  the  meed  of  praise, 

Though  feebly  giv'n  in  low  discordant  lays  : 

High  on  Parnassus'  cliffs  they  glorious  stand, 

They  strike  the  lyre  with  more  than  mortal  hand  ; 

Melodious  sounds  retreat  on  heav'nly  wings, 

As  sweet  the  muse  in  pensive  sorrow  sings, 

And  o'er  romantic  vales  and  distant  plains 

In  fitful  echoes  die  the  mystic  strains. 

But  first  enroll'd  on  list  .of  genius'  throng, 

Who  scal'd  the  proudest  heights  of  lofty  song, 

With  dazzling  rays,  as  shines  the  morning  star, 

Her  Milton  stands  on  fame's  dread  mount  afar, 

And  gently  beckons  the  aspiring  muse, 

As  o'er  his  soul  his  sacred  beams  diffuse. 

The  clime  of  Canada  in  fondness  gleams, 
And  western  wilds  awake  more  pleasing  themes  : 
From  where  the  eagle  gluts  his  hungry  beak 
On  Labrador's  far  coast  of  barren  peak, 
To  where  the  Kocky  Mountains  sternly  rise, 
O'erlook  the  land,  and  half  invade  the  skies, 
Its  fair  and  undulating  soil  extends, 
And  to  the  eye  its  bright  enchantment  lends. 
Here  Nature's  God  in  matchless  splendour  rears 
His  living  fane,  and  in  wild  pomp  appears. 
Here  placid  lakes  like  molten  silver  beam, 
The  full-orb'd  sun  reflects  the  glassy  stream,— 

02 


196  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

Alluvial  mountains  lift  their  verdant  heads, 
And  on  the  prairies  prone  their  influence  spreads. 
Here  fertile  vales  their  rich  luxuriance  show, 
Where  nature's  works  in  loveliest  beauty  glow  ; 
From  whose  retreats,  or  sounds  the  woodman's  hymn, 
Far  from  the  bustling  throng  of  madd'ning  din, 
Or  'mid  their  haunts  aerial  spirits  stray, 
While  to  the  breeze  they  chaunt  their  roundelay. 
Here  cataracts  vast  the  echoing  forests  wake, 
And  all  the  ground  with  quick  vibrations  shake  ; 
Where  dread  Niagara  in  thunder  roars, 
As  o'er  the  rocky  steep  his  deluge  pours, — 
Along  whose  banks  the  lonely  Indian  wound, 
And  in  the  scene  his  kindred  spirit  found. 
Here  boundless  plains  in  fragrant  verdure  stretch, 
Bright  landscapes  there  invite  the  artist's  sketch  ; 
Here  forests  dark  their  stately  branches  wave, 
And  rivers  there  in  solemn  silence  lave. 
But  though  this  land  with  ev'ry  good  is  crownM, 
And  choicest  gifts  on  ev'ry  hand  surround, — 
Though  Nature  here  has  wrought  her  grandest  plan. 
Yet  does  the  mind  deplore  the  fate  of  man. 
:        Those  lordly  tribes  that  lin'd.  these  mighty  lakes 
Have  fled,  and  disappear'd  like  wintry  flakes. 
Lo  !  on  the  mountain-tops  their  fires  are  out, 
In  blithesome  vales  all  silent  is  their  shout ; 
A  solemn  voice  is  heard  from  ev'ry  shore, 
That  now  the  Indian  nations  are  no  more, — 
A  remnant  scarce  remain  to  tell  their  wrongs, 
But  soon  will  fade  to  live  in  poets'  songs. 

Hail  to  thee,  Canada  !  the  brightest  gem 
That  decks  Victoria's  brilliant  diadem  ; 
Thine  is  the  happy  seat,  the  blissful  clime 
Where  art  and  nature  form  one  vast  sublime  ; 
Where  temp'rate  skies  effuse  their  golden  rays, 
The  fertile  land  the  labourer's  toil  repays ; 
Plenty  and  peace  at  ev'ry  footstep  smile, 
And  sunny  scenes  to  gentler  thoughts  beguile. 
•    A  voice  is  heard  upon  thy  mighty  floods, 

A  voice  resounds  throughout  thy  trackless  woods, — 
Heard  in  the  plaintive  rill  and  cataract's  roar, 
Heard  in  the  whisp'ring  breeze  on  ev'ry  shore  : 


POEM   BY  AN   INDIAN.  197 

Tis  Freedom's  voice  ;  'tis  on  thy  rivers  roll'd, 
That  in  their  course  the  sacred  theme  have  told, 
And  bid  the  dwellers  on  the  mountains  swell 
The  choral  strain,  and  wake  the  joyful  knell,  — 
Till  all  mankind  shall  hear  the  gladd'ning  sound, 
House  from  the  trammel  yoke  of  sleep  profound, 
And  o'er  the  earth  Britannia's  banner  wave, 
Each  foeman  crush'd — unshackled  ev'ry  slave. 

THE   BIKCH   BARK  ALPHABET. 

About  the  year  1827  I  made  a  missionary  tour  to  Lake 
imcoe,   Mahjedushk,  Sahgeeng,  St.   Clair,  and  Muncey 
Town.     At  Sahgeeng  the  Indians  received  the  Gospel  very 
gladly.     On  departing,  we  left  one  of  our  party,  (Keche- 
jeemon,)  to  labour  among  them.    He  continued  to  tell  them 
i  all  he  knew  about  the  Christian  religion.     One  day  some 
of  the  young  people  inquired  if  he  could  not  teach  them 
;  to   read  in  the   white   man's  book.      Keche-jeemon  told 
j  them  he  could  not  read  himself;   all  he  knew  was  a,  b,  c. 
;  They  then  said,   "Teach  us  a,  b,  c."     The  next  difficulty 
j  was,  he  had  no  book  containing  the  alphabet.     At  length, 
he  thought  of  making  the  letters  on  birch  bark ;  so  he  went 
into  the   woods,   got  the  bark,  and  then    with  charcoal 
formed  the  letters  a,  b,  c.     When  the  missionary  went  to 
establish  the  mission  in  that  region,  he  found  all  the  young 
people  knew  the  a,  b,  c. 

An  Indian  lad,  named  Joseph  Quenchenau,  belonging 
to  the  Credit  tribe,  showed  great  love  for  his  books,  and  was 
very  punctual  and  attentive  at  school.  But  best  of  all, 
he  loved  his  Saviour,  and  regularly,  night  and  morning, 
offered  up  his  private  prayer  to  God.  In  the  twelfth  year 
of  his  age  he  was  taken  ill,  when  he  committed  himself 
into  the  hands  of  his  Maker,  saying  he  was  not  afraid  to 
die,  for  he  knew  God  would  take  him  to  heaven.  After  he 


198  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

was  dead,  his  friends  placed  all  his  books,  consisting  of  his 
Bible,  Indian  hymn-book,  and  spelling-book,  on  the  top  of 
his  coffin,  because  he  had  loved  them  so  much.  I  was  very 
sorry  to  lose  such  a  promising  boy  from  our  little  society  ; 
but  God  saw  best  to  take  him,  and  therefore  we  must  bow 
to  His  sovereign  will. 

THE   MORMON   BOOK  AND   AN   INDIAN. 

Soon  after  the  conversion  of  the  Indians  on  the  Bay  of 
Quinty,  as  a  converted  Indian  was  passing  through  the 
white  settlement,  he  heard  preaching  in  a  school-house, 
and,  being  anxious  to  learn  more  about  the  words  of  the 
Great  Spirit,  he  turned  in,  and  took  his  seat  near  the  door. 
He  listened ;  but,  instead  of  hearing  about  the  good  old 
Bible,  the  preacher  was  extolling  another  book  he  called 
the  Mormon  Bible,  which  he  said  was  much  better  and 
plainer  than  the  old  one.  He  then  entered  into  an  explana 
tion  as  to  its  origin,  telling  how  Joe  Smith  had  dug  it  up  out 
of  the  ground,  and  was  inspired  to  translate  it.  When  the 
preacher  had  finished  his  discourse,  he  gave  permission  for 
any  of  the  congregation  to  say  what  they  thought  of  the 
things  they  had  heard.  All  sat  still,  and,  as  no  white  man 
was  found  to  speak  for  the  good  old  Bible,  the  Indian  at 
length  rose  up  and  said,  "  May  Indian  speak  ?"  The  Mor 
mon  preacher  replied,  "Yes,  Indian  may  speak."  The  Indian 
then  said,  "A  great  many  winters  ago,  the  Great  Spirit 
gave  his  good  book  Bible  to  the  white  man,  over  the  great 
waters.  He  took  it,  and  read  it,  and  it  make  his  heart 
all  over  very  glad.  By-and-bye,  white  man  come  over  to 
this  country,  and  brought  the  good  book  with  him.  He 
gave  it  to  poor  Indian.  He  hear  it,  and  understand  it,  and 
it  make  his  heart  very  glad  too.  But  when  the  Great 
Spirit  gave  his  good  book  to  white  man,  the  evil  spirit 


THE   BIBLE  AND   THE    INDIANS. 

Muhje-munedoo  try  to  make  one  too,  and  he  try  to  make  it 

j  like  the  one  the  Good  Spirit  made,  but  he  could  not;  and 

1  then  he  got  so  ashamed  of  it,  he  go  into  the  woods,  dig  a 

I  hole   in   the  ground,  and  then  he  hide  his  book.     After 

!  lying  there  many  winters,  Joe  Smith  go  and  dig  it  up. 

This  is  the  book  this  preacher  has  been  talking  about.     I 

hold  fast  on  the  good  old  Bible,  which  has  made  my  heart 

so  happy.     I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  devil's  book." 

CAPTAIN   JOHN   AND   HIS   BIBLE. 

Captain  John,  or  Wageezhegome,  was  one  of  the  most 

:  intelligent  chiefs  of  the  Credit  tribe.     In  his  early  days  he 

went  for  a  short  time  to  school,  and  learnt  to  read  a  little 

i  in  English ;    but  afterwards,  mingling  in  Indian  life,  he 

1  soon  forgot  all  he  had  learnt  at  school.     Some  time  before 

I  his  conversion  Mrs.  Small,  of  Toronto,  made  him  a  present 

of  a  Bible,  which  he  kept  for  her  sake.     Soon  after  the 

work  of  God  commenced  on  the  Grand   River,  Captain 

John  went  up  there,  where  he  was  made  a  partaker  of  the 

grace  of   God.     He  no  sooner  found  the  Lord  than  he 

began  to  learn  to  read  the  Bible  the  lady  had  given  him, 

-and  by  perseverance   was   soon   able   to   understand  its 

contents,  so  as  to  become  a  teacher  of  righteousness  to  his 

people.     He  made  one  or  two  visits  to  the  Credit  at  his 

own  expense,  for  the  express  purpose  of  inviting  his  people 

up  to  the  Grand  River,  to  hear  for  themselves  the  wonderful 

things  of  God  ;    and  I  am  happy  to  state  that  his  labours 

were   not  in  vain.       After  adorning  the   Gospel   of  our 

Saviour  a  few  years,  he  died,  praising  God,  and  exhorting 

his  people  to  cleave  to  Him  with  all  their  hearts. 

In  John  Sunday  we  have  a  remarkable  instance  of  the 
•capability  of  an  Indian  to  receive  instruction.      John  was 


200  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

about  thirty  years  old  when  he  was  converted  from  the 
depths  of  Paganism  to  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  In 
a  letter  lately  received  from  him  he  writes  : — "  It  took  me 
only  half  an  hour  to  learn  the  alphabet,  and  it  was  not 
many  months  after  I  began  to  read  a  little.  The  first  word 
that  I  spelled  was  b,  a,  g,  bag,  and  by-and-bye  I  knew  the 
word  G,  o,  d,  and  I  thought  I  learned  a  great  thing  then, 
and  at  last  I  began  to  read,  but  when  I  began  to  write  it 
was  very  difficult  to  me.  When  I  try  to  make  a  straight 
mark  I  make  a  mink,*  and  after  a  while  I  began  to  write. 'r 
The  late  Bishop  Hedding  mentions  the  following  fact  as 
coming  under  his  own  observation  when  on  a  visit  to  the 
River  Credit  Mission,  C.W.,  in  1827  : — "  I  saw  among 
these  nations  an  Indian,  named  John  Crane,  who  could 
read  quite  well,  especially  in  the  New  Testament.  He 
said,  and  others  confirmed  it,  that  he  did  not  know  his 
letters.  I  found,  on  inquiry,  that  he  had  been  so  anxious 
to  learn  to  read  that  he  carried  a  New  Testament  with  him 
constantly,  and  asked  every  boy  or  girl  he  met  with  what 
was  the  name  of  any  particular  word  he  would  point  out. 
Thus  he  learned  the  word  by  its  shape,  just  as  a  child 
learns  the  name  of  a  chair,  a  spoon,  or  a  hat,  before  it 
learns  its  letters." 


Extract  of  a  Letter  to  PETER  JONES,  from  an  Indian  Youth 

desiring  more  instruction. 

"  I  am  wishing  to  come  to  your  school,  Muncey  Town, 
if  possible.  I  have  been  to  school  here,  Wesleyan  Semi 
nary,  Albion,  but  my  time  will  be  out  next  spring.  My 
people  are  very  poor,  and  have  not  the  means  to  assist 
me.  I  belong  to  the  Chippewa  tribe.  Half  of  us  are  in 

*  Mink  was  the  toodaim,  or  tribe,  to  which  he  belonged,  the  representation 
of  which  he  made  as  a  signature. 


EAGERNESS   FOR   INSTRUCTION.  201 

Canada,  and  the  remainder,  to  whom  I  belong,  are  in 
Michigan.  I  wish  to  know  if  you  could  assist  me  to  come 
to  school,  as  it  would  enable  me  to  instruct  our  ignorant 
brethren.  I  wish  to  have  a  little  more  instruction  in  the 
English  language.  I  know  you  can  assist  me  anywhere  to 
go  in  your  schools.  I  would  endeavour  to  make  it  a  lasting 
benefit  to  our  poor  people,  by  teaching  them  the  way  of 
life.  Please  send  an  answer. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  JOSEPH  RTJCKY, 

"  Alias  O-SHE-NAH-WA-GE-SHIEK.'r 

"  January  8th,  1852. 
"  To  Rev.  PETER  JONES." 

Extract  of  a  Letter  from  the  Rev.  MATTHEW  RICHEY,  M.A., 

dated  March  20th,  1845. 
"Our  missionary  meeting  at  Hamilton  took  place  on 
Wednesday  evening,  the  29th.  John  Sunday  was  particu 
larly  happy  in  his  address  at  this  meeting,  and,  towards  the 
close,  thrilled  and  astonished  all  present  by  the  ingenuity 
and  power  of  his  appeals.  I  wish  I  were  able  to  present 
you  with  a  correct  report  of  his  entire  speech.  Connecting 
with  the  perusal  of  it  your  vivid  recollection  of  his  mental 
idiosyncrasy, — never  so  fully  developed  as  when  he  becomes 
animated  on  a  missionary  platform, — I  am  sure  you  would 
be  delighted  above  measure.  His  closing  words  I  can  give 
you  with  substantial — I  think  I  may  say,  with  verbal — • 
accuracy ;  and  they  are  too  good  to  be  suppressed.  '  There 
is  a  gentleman/  said  Shawandais, — '  There  is  a  gentleman, 
I  suppose,  now  in  this  house  ;  he  is  a  very  fine  gentleman, 
but  he  is  very  modest.  He  does  not  like  to  show  himself. 
I  do  not  know  how  long  it  is  now  since  I  saw  him,  he 
comes  out  so  little.  I  very  much  afraid  he  sleeps  a  great 


202  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

deal  of  his  time,  when  he  ought  to  be  going  about  doing 
good.  His  name  is  Mr.  Gold.  Mr.  Gold,  are  you  here 
to-night  ?  or  are  you  sleeping  in  your  iron  chest  ?  Come 
out,  Mr.  Gold !  Come  out,  and  help  us  to  do  this  great 
work,  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature !  Ah,  Mr. 
'Gold,  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  yourself,  to  sleep  so 
much  in  your  iron  chest !  Look  at  your  white  brother, 
Mr.  Silver.  He  does  a  great  deal  of  good  in  the  world 
while  you  are  sleeping.  Come  out,  Mr.  Gold  !  Look,  too, 
at  your  little  brown  brother,  Master  Copper.  He  everywhere! 
Your  little  brother  running  about  all  the  time,  doing  all  he 
can.  Why  don't  you  come  ?  Come  out,  Mr.  Gold  !  Well, 
if  you  worit  come  out,  and  give  us  yourself,  send  us  your 
shirt,  that  is,  a  Bank  Note.'  " 


At  a  meeting  of  the  Canada  Conference  Missionary 
Society,  at  which  Bishop  Hedding  was  present,  one  of  the 
speakers  narratedthe  following  incidents,  with  a  viewto  show 
the  eagerness  with  which  the  natives  receive  instruction:— 

"  An  Indian  chief,  residing  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Lake  Simcoe,  came  to  solicit  missionary  aid.  After  unfold 
ing  their  needy  state,  he  observed  that  they  did  not  wish  the 
labours  of  the  missionary  for  nothing.  They  would  hunt 
deer,  beaver,  &c.,  and  each  one  would  lay  aside  some  skins, 
and  appropriate  the  avails  of  them  to  the  support  of  the 
mission.  As  a  demonstration  of  this  generous  disposition, 
and  of  their  ardent  desire  to  have  their  children  instructed, 
the  women  stripped  themselves  of  their  nose  and  ear 
jewels,  brooches,  and  breastplates,  which  had  been  given 
them  by  Government,  and  sent  them  to  the  missionary  to 
purchase  books  for  the  school ;  and  these  were  exhibited 
on  the  occasion,  as  an  evidence  of  their  devotion  to  this 
sacred  cause." 


TALENT  FOR  MUSIC.  203 

We  give   only  another  proof  of  their  general  mental 

j  capacity,  in  their  talent  for  music  in  particular.    A  book  of 

1   Indian  melodies,   by  Thomas   Commuck,   a  Narragansett 

Indian,  was  published  in  New  York,  in  1845.      The  tunes 

in  this  little   book  are   named   after  noted  Indian  chiefs, 

Indian  names  of  places,  &c.,  &c.      The  author  remarks: 

"  This  has  been  done  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory 

of  some  tribes  who  are  now  nearly,  if  not  quite,  extinct ; 

also   as   a  mark   of   courtesy  to  some  with  whom  he  is 

acquainted."     The  book  contains  120  new  tunes. 

The  Rev.  G.  Cole,  who  is  regarded  as  naturally  and 

I    scientifically  a  good  judge,  thus  speaks  of  it : — "  In  the 

first  strain  of  the  first  tune  there  is  something  worthy  of 

i   Handel,  and  in  the  whole  there  is  something  equal  to  any- 

|  thing  we  ever  saw  in  the  productions  of  Haydn.     In  the 

i   next,  there  is  something  strikingly  original.     The  third,  as 

sweet  as  the  gentle  flowings  of  Kedron.    The  fourth,  rather 

tame,  but  suited  to  a  solemn  train  of  thought.    The  fifth  is 

bold,  rich,  and  joyous.    The  sixth  is  in  the  style  of  Leach's 

'Watchman,  S.M./    but  greatly  superior.      The  hearer, 

when  he  hears  a  good  tune,  thinks  that  he  could  make  as 

good  an  one  himself.     We  have  tried  this  principle  with 

regard  to  the  tunes  before  us  several  times,  and  in  every 

case  our  auditor  has  shown,  by  unequivocal  signs,  that  he 

felt  as  if  he  could  do  the  like  himself,  if  he  only  had  the 

ability." 

SPECIMENS   OF   INDIAN   ELOQUENCE,  WIT,    AND   SHREWDNESS. 

At  the  negotiation  for  peace,  in  1774,  after  the  Battle  of 
the  Kanhawa,  the  great  "  Mingo  chief,"  Logan,  refused  to 
appear  at  the  council.  He  was  in  favour  of  peace,  but  his 
proud  spirit  scorned  to  ask  for  it ;  and  he  remained  in  his 
cabin,  brooding  in  melancholy  silence  over  his  own  wrongs. 


204  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

Of  so  much  importance  was  his  name  considered  by  Lord 
Dunmore,  that  a  special  messenger  was  despatched  to  ascer 
tain  whether  he  would  accede  to  the  articles  of  peace.  This 
conference  took  place  in  a  solitary  wood,  and,  at  its  close, 
he  charged  him  with  the  celebrated  speech  to  Lord  Dun- 
more,  which  has  become  familiar  wherever  the  English 
language  is  spoken.* 

"  I  appeal  to  any  white  man  to  say  if  he  ever  entered 
Logan's  cabin  hungry,  and  he  gave  him  not  meat ;  if  ever 
he  came  cold  and  naked,  and  he  clothed  him  not.  During 
the  course  of  the  last  long  and  bloody  war  Logan  remained 
idle  in  his  cabin,  an  advocate  for  peace.  Such  was  my  love 
for  the  whites,that  my  countrymen  pointed,  as  they  passed, 
and  said,  '  Logan  is  the  friend  of  the  white  man/  I  had 
even  thought  to  have  lived  with  you,  but  for  the  injuries  of 
one  man.  Colonel  Cresass,  the  last  spring,  in  cold  blood 
and  unprovoked,  murdered  all  the  relations  of  Logan,  not 
even  sparing  my  women  and  children.  There  runs  not  a 
drop  of  my  blood  in  the  veins  of  any  living  creature.  This 
called  on  me  for  vengeance.  I  have  sought  it ;  I  have 
killed  many ;  I  have  fully  glutted  my  vengeance.  For  my 
country,  I  rejoice  at  the  beams  of  peace  ;  but  do  not 
harbour  the  thought  that  mine  is  the  joy  of  fear.  Logan 
never  felt  fear.  He  will  not  turn  on  his  heel  to  save  his 
life.  Who  is  there  to  mourn  for  Logan  ?  Not  one  !" 

WIT   AND   SHEEWDNESS. 

It  is  related  that  two  chiefs  came  from  the  far  West  to 
the  city  of  Washington,  on  business  with  the  government. 
While  they  were  there,  a  gentleman  invited  them  to  dinner. 
They  went, — and  being  seated  for  the  first  time  at  a  white 
man's  table,  they  began  to  eat  such  things  as  were  set  before 

*  Life  of  Brant. 


WIT   AND   SHREWDNESS.  205 

them,  and  to  help  themselves  to  such  as  were  within  their 
reach.  One  of  them  seeing  some  yellow-looking  stuff 
(mustard,)  took  a  spoonful,  swallowing  the  whole.  Tears 
soon  ran  down  his  cheeks.  His  brother  chief,  seeing  him 
weep,  said,  "  Oh  !  my  brother,  why  do  you  weep  ?"  The 
other  replied,  "  I  am  thinking  about  my  son  who  was 
killed  in  such  a  battle !"  Presently  the  other  chief  took 
a  spoonful  of  the  same  stuff,  which  caused  his  eyes  to  weep 
as  did  his  brother's  ;  who  in  return  asked  him,  "  Why  do 
you  cry  ?"  Upon  which  he  replied,  "  Oh !  I  weep  to  think 
you  were  not  killed  when  your  son  was." 

Once  the  Rev.  W.  Case  took  John  Sunday  with  him  to 
visit  the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  of  raising  funds  for 
the  Canadian  Missions.  John  one  day  received  an  invitation 
to  dine  with  a  minister.  At  table  this  good  man  was  talking 
to  John  about  religion,  feeling  truly  thankful  to  see  a  con 
verted  Indian.  Among  other  eatables  before  him  was  a 
dish  of  finely-scraped  horseradish :  John,  not  knowing 
what  it  was,  and  supposing  it  might  be  something  very 
sweet,  took  a  spoonful  of  it  into  his  mouth ;  presently  tears 
came  into  his  eyes;  the  minister  observing  them,  and 
supposing  John  was  weeping  for  joy  at  what  was  the  topic 
of  discourse,  began  to  shout,  "  Glory  !  glory !  glory !"  John, 
as  soon  as  he  could,  raised  his  hand,  and  pointing  to  the 
dish  of  horse-radish,  said,  "  O,  it  is  that, — it  is  that !" 

From  this  anecdote  we  may  see  that  tears  are  not  always 
to  be  depended  upon ;  and  also  the  difference  between  a 
pagan  and  a  Christian  Indian's  veracity. 

A  hunting  Indian  one  day  called  at  a  farm-house  for 
some  food.  The  good  woman  of  the  house  began  asking 
him  all  sorts  of  questions.  At  length  she  pointed  to  a 


206  INDIAN   CAPACITY. 

shaking  aspen  tree,  and  asked  the  Indian,  "  What  do  you 
call  that?"  He  replied,  "Me  call  it  woman's  tongue." 
"Why  do  you  call  it  woman's  tongue?"  was  the  next 
question.  The  Indian  then  said,  "  You  see  those  leaves 
always  shaking,  never  stand  still;  so  me  call  it  woman's 
tongue." 

An  Indian  and  a  white  man  agreed  to  hunt  in  partner 
ship.  At  the  end  of  three  days  they  were  to  divide  equally 
what  they  had  killed.  The  white  man  killed  a  buzzard, 
and  the  Indian  a  turkey.  The  white  man  then  said,  "  It 
would  be  a  pity  to  cut  the  birds  in  two,  therefore  you  may 
take  the  buzzard  and  I  will  take  the  turkey ;  or  else  I  will 
take  the  turkey  and  you  may  take  the  buzzard."  The 
Indian  replied,  "You  say  white  man  take  turkey  twice,  you 
no  say  Indian  take  turkey  once." 

In  J.  Long's  travels  the  following  story  is  related  : — "  An 
old  American  savage,  being  at  an  inn  at  New  York,  met 
with  a  gentleman  who  gave  him  some  liquor,  and,  being 
rather  lively,  boasted  he  could  read  and  write  English. 
The  gentleman  willing  to  indulge  him  in  displaying  his 
knowledge,  begged  leave  to  propose  a  question,  to  which 
the  old  man  consented.  He  was  then  asked  who  was  the 
first  circumcised  ? — the  Indian  immediately  replied, i  Father 
Abraham' — and  directly  asked  the  gentleman  who  was  the 
first  Quaker  ?  He  said  it  was  very  uncertain, — that  people 
differed  in  their  sentiments  exceedingly.  The  Indian 
perceiving  the  gentleman  unable  to  solve  the  question, 
put  his  fingers  into  his  mouth,  to  express  his  surprise,  and 
looking  steadfastly,  told  him  that  Mordecai  was  the  first 
Quaker,  for  he  would  not  pull  oif  his  hat  to  Haman." 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

OPINION   OF  THE   INDIANS   RESPECTING  THE   SOVEREIGN   AND 
PEOPLE   OF   GREAT   BRITAIN. 

Patriotism — Ee-interment  of  Captain  Brant — Enjoy  no  Political  Rights — 
Considered  by  the  Colonial  Government  as  Children — Opinion  as  to  their 
capability  to  use  their  rights  as  British  Subjects — Opinions  of  the 
Americans  ;  of  the  Negroes — Letter  from  an  Indian  in  Paris — P.  Jones's 
impression  of  England  and  English  customs  on  his  first  visit. 

THE  ideas  entertained  by  the  Indians  generally  of  the 
King  of  England,  with  regard  to  his  power,  riches,  and 
knowledge,  are  most  extravagant.  They  imagine  his  power 
to  be  absolute,  and  his  authority  unlimited  ;  that  his  word 
is  law,  to  which  all  his  subjects  bow  with  implicit  obedi 
ence  ;  that  his  wigwam  is  the  largest  in  the  world,  and 
decorated  with  the  most  gorgeous  trappings ;  that  he  sits 
upon  his  throne,  clothed  in  robes  of  many  colours,  sur 
rounded  by  his  officers  of  state ;  and  that  heralds  are 
always  in  attendance,  to  proclaim  his  mandates  to  the 
people  from  day  to  day. 

They  also  consider  that  his  riches  and  benevolence  are 
unbounded,  the  whole  resources  of  the  kingdom  being  at  his 
command,  a  portion  of  which  he  grants  to  those  of  his  sub 
jects  who  are  needy.  With  regard  to  his  wisdom,  they 
conceive  that  he  knows  everything  that  is  going  on  in  the 
world ;  that  even  the  speech  or  talk  of  an  Indian  chief 
delivered  to  a  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs  in  the  wilds 
of  Canada  is  made  known  to  him. 

On  the  eve  of  my  visiting  England  in  the  year  1831, 


208  OPINION   OF   THE   ENGLISH. 

Ohief  Yellowhead  of  Lake  Simcoe  came  to  me,  and  said,  "  I 
shake  hands  with  our  Great  Father  over  the  great  waters  ; 
when  you  see  him  tell  him  my  name  ;  he  will  know  who  I  am, 
as  he  has  often  heard  of  me  through  our  fathers  the 
governors  and  Indian  agents,  who  have  sent  my  messages  to 
him.  Tell  him  I  am  still  alive."  This  chief  delivered  his 
talk  with  the  utmost  gravity  and  sincerity,  and  with  the 
fullest  assurance  that  the  king  knew  all  about  the  great 
chief  Yellowhead.  In  short,  the  simple-minded  Indians 
believe  that  the  whole  management  of  public  affairs  devolves 
upon  the  Sovereign,  and  that  everything  is  done  under  his 
supervision  and  with  his  cognizance. 

They  designate  a  king  Ningeche  Noosenon,  that  is,  "  Our 
Great  Father;"  and  a  Queen  Ningahnon,  "Our  Great 
Mother."  A  noted  chief  at  Walpool  Island,  on  the  river  St. 
Clair,  by  the  name  of  Pashegeezhegwashkum, — the  meaning  of 
which  is  "he  who  makes  footsteps  in  the  sky," — once 
delivered  a  speech  to  me  in  which  he  had  occasion  to  men 
tion  the  king  of  England  and  the  President  of  the  United 
States.  The  former  he  styled  "  Our  Great  Father,"  and 
the  latter  "  Our  Step-father."  This  was  the  first  time  I  had 
ever  heard  the  Great  Chief  of  the  Keche  MooJcomon,  or  Big 
Knives,  called  Step-father.  This  chief  had  formerly  resided 
in  the  United  States  ;  but,  having  stepped  over  the  boundary 
line,  he  transferred  the  "  great"  to  the  King  of  England,  and 
left  only  his  "  step"  on  his  former  father. 

It  has  been  well  said  by  a  certain  writer,*  that  the 
attachment  of  the  red  men  of  the  forest  to  the  British 
Government  and  people  borders  on  veneration:  there 
are  none  in  their  estimation  equal  to  them  for  wisdom, 
power,  and  benevolence.  They  have  the  highest  opinion  of 
the  prowess  of  the  British  soldiery,  whom  they  designate 
Maskokonahyad,  or  red  coats. 

*  Sir  F.  B.  Head. 


« 


THEIR  LOYALTY.  209 

In  the  American  Revolution,  the  greater  portion  of  the 
famous  Six  Nations  of  Indians,  with  other  tribes,  took  up  the 
tomahawk  in  behalf  of  Great  Britain  ;  and  by  so  doing  lost 
j  their  beautiful  and  rich  country  on  the  Mohawk  River. 
(During  the  war  of  1812  between  England  and  America,  all 
I  the  Indians  in  Canada,  and  many  of  the  western  tribes, 
[rallied  round  the  British  standard;  and  it  is  generally 
[believed,  that  had  it  not  been  for  their  efficient  and  timely 
j  aid,  Canada  would  have  been  wrested  from  the  crown  of 
[Great  Britain.  It  is  also  well  known  that  during  the  late 
j  rebellion  in  Canada,  the  Indians  were  not  slow  in  assisting 
I  to  suppress  the  insurrection.  In  these  wars  many  of  our 
!  fathers  fell  and  mingled  their  blood  with  the  brave  sons  of 
Britain,  whose  bones  now  lie  side  by  side. 

I  mention  these  facts  to  shew  the  devotion  of  the  Indian 
tribes  to  the  Sovereign  of  Great  Britain.     As  a  further 
[manifestation  of  their  patriotic  feelings  it  may  be  interesting 
\  to  mention  the  noble  manner  in  which  they  came  forward 
and  subscribed  to  the  rebuilding  of  General  Brock's  Monu 
ment,  after  it  had  been  destroyed  by  some  unprincipled 
wretch.     The  following  speeches,  selected  from  many  that 
accompanied  the  donations  of  the  chiefs,  will  show  their 
loyalty  as  British  subjects.* 

Another  illustration  of  the  devotion  of  the  Indians  to  the 
British  Government,  is  furnished  by  the  account  of  the 
re-interment  of  Brant,  taken  from  the  Brantford  Herald  of 
November  27th,  1850  :- 

"On  Monday  last  the  remains  of  Thayendenegea,  which 
had  been  previously  exhumed,  were  placed  in  the  tomb  at 
the  Mohawk  that  had  recently  been  prepared  for  their 
reception.  This  was  done  with  no  small  degree  of 
pageantry.  The  vast  multitude  of  people  who  had  as- 

*  See  Appendix  N. 

P 


210  OPINION   OF   THE  ENGLISH. 

sembled  from  different  quarters,  went  in  procession  from 
the  town  of  Brantford  to  the  Mohawk  village 

"  Addresses  were  delivered  by  the  Rev.  A.  Nelles,  Rev. 
P.  Jones,  Sir  A.  McNab,  D.  Thorbnrn,  Esq.,  and  others ; 
among  whom  was  an  American  gentleman  whose  father 
had,  many  years  ago,  been  most  generously  treated  by 
Brant.  After  the  speaking  was  concluded,  the  interment 
took  place,  when  three  volleys  were  fired  over  the  grave  of 
the  brave  and  faithful  Indian  soldier,  Captain  Joseph 
Brant."  ...  *  f. 

The  following  speech,  delivered  on  the  occasion  by 
Kahkewaquonaby  (the  Rev.  Peter  Jones),  and  published 
at  the  time  by  request,  is  here  subjoined  : — 

An  Address  delivered  on  the  occasion  of  the  re-interment  of 
the  celebrated  CAPTAIN  JOSEPH  BRANT,  by  KAHKEWA 
QUONABY  (Rev'.  PETER  JONES),  Chief  and  Missionary. 

"My  CHRISTIAN  FRIENDS. — In  offering  a  few  remarks  on 
the  occasion  for  which  we  are  this  day  assembled,  I  may 
be  allowed,  in  the  first  place,  to  express  my  own  personal 
interest  in  the  history  of  him  whose  bones  we  are  now 
about  to  re-commit  to  their  resting-place.  This  deep 
interest  arises  from  the  fact  that  my  late  father,  Augustus 
Jones,  and  Joseph  Brant,  maintained  the  closest  friendship 
to  the  day  of  Brant's  death.  By  mutual  consent,  Brant 
settled  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Burlington  Bay 
beach,  now  called  Wellington  Square,  and  my  father  at  the 
southern  extremity,  now  called  Stony  Creek — the  beautiful 
smooth  beach  forming  a  delightful  natural  sand-road,  over 
which  they  travelled  backwards  and  forwards  in  visiting 
and  sharing  each  other's  hospitality.  At  the  birth  of  my 
late  brother,  John  Jones,  Brant,  from  his  deep  attachment 
to  my  father,  gave  his  own  Indian  name,  '  Thayendenagea/ 


CAPTAIN   BRANT.  211 

by  which  name  he  was  always  known  among  the  Indians. 
This  second  Thayendenagea  afterwards  became  the  husband 
of  one  of  Brant's  grandaughters,  whose  name  was  Chris 
tiana  Brant,  daughter  of  the  late  Jacob  Brant.  I  would 
also  state,  that  on  the  arrival  of  Captain  Brant  and  his 
people  in  Canada,  after  the  loss  of  their  territory  in  the 
United  States,  they  applied  to  my  own  people,  the  Messis- 
saugas  or  Chippeways  of  the  river  Credit  (of  whom  I  am 
one  of  their  chiefs)  to  purchase  a  portion  of  their  lands. 
Our  people  replied  in  council : — 

"  ( Brethren — The  whole  country  is  before  you,  choose 
you  a  tract  for  yourselves,  and  there  build  your  wigwams 
and  plant  your  corn.' 

"  The  Six  Nations  then  selected  this  splendid  Grand  River 
tract,  which  they  said  was  very  much  like  the  country  on 
the  Mohawk  river  in  the  State  of  New  York,  which  they 
had  lost.  They  offered  pay  to  our  nation,  but  the  Chip 
peways  would  not  take  any.  From  this  time  Captain  Brant 
and  his  people  became  much  attached  to  the  Credit  Indians, 
to  whom  they  have  lately  manifested  their  good  will  in  a 
noble  manner.  The  Credit  Indians,  at  their  old  reserve, 
being  crowded  on  every  side  by  the  whites,  resolved  to 
emigrate ;  and  whilst  they  were  in  search  of  a  suitable 
location,  the  Six  Nations,  in  remembrance  of  the  former 
kind  and  generous  reception  they  had  received  from  the 
original  owners  of  this  fine  tract  of  country,  sent  a  message 
to  the  Credit  Indians,  inviting  them  to  come  and  share 
their  reserve,  and  nobly  made  a  free  grant  of  a  large  tract 
of  land  in  Tuscarora,  where  the  Credit  Indians  are  now 
settled.  I  may  also  be  allowed  to  say  that  I  feel  myself 
connected  with  Brant's  people,  as  I  was  adopted  into  their 
nation,  and  received  the  name  of  Sagondensta ;  so  that  I 
may  be  proud  of  the  honour  you  are  paying  to  the  departed 


212  OPINION   OF  THE   ENGLISH. 

warrior  and  his  mourning  and  lonely  people.  In  regard 
to  the  attachment  of  Joseph  Brant  to  the  British  nation, 
and  his  numerous  exploits  during  the  Revolutionary  war,  I 
feel  incompetent  to  do  justice,  and  must  leave  this  to 
others.  I  would  only  say,  that  from  all  I  can  learn,  his 
adherence  to  Great  Britain  was  strong  and  sincere  ;  and  in 
consequence  of  that  attachment  the  Six  Nations  lost  their 
extensive  fertile  country,  now  the  garden  of  the  State  of 
New  York.  No  one  can  dispute  his  bravery.  In  Indian 
language  it  may  be  said  of  him  as  was  said  of  the  lamented 
General  Brock :  '  His  eye  was  like  the  eagle's  —  his 
motions  like  arrows  from  the  bow — his  enemies  fell  before 
him  as  the  trees  before  the  blast  of  the  Great  Spirit.'  The 
shout  of  victory  echoed  from  tribe  to  tribe. — The  tomahawk 
was  then  buried  and  peace  proclaimed.  The  loyalty  of 
Brant's  people,  the  same  spirit  of  devotion  to  the  Crown 
of  England,  has  been  •  deeply  infused  into  the  veins  of  the 
Six  Nations,  who,  during  the  last  war,  flew,  with  other 
Indian  nations,  to  the  help  of  the  British ;  and  I  have 
heard  it  stated  by  good  judges,  that  had  it  not  been  for  the 
help  of  the  Indians,  Canada  would  have  been  wrested  from 
Great  Britain.  At  a  general  council  held  at  the  river 
Credit  a  few  years  since,  the  chiefs  of  the  Six  Nations 
informed  their  Chippeway  brethren  that  they  had  always 
been  strongly  attached  to  the  British  Government,  and 
that  if  that  attachment  was  ever  lessened  it  would  not  be 
their  fault,  but  that  of  the  Government  in  not  keeping  faith 
with  them.  I  will  now  make  a  few  remarks  in  regard  to 
the  religious  sentiments  of  Joseph  Brant ;  he  was,  I  am 
informed,  a  thorough-going  Churchman,  and  entertained 
high  respect  for  the  missionaries  and  the  word  of  God. — 
He  assisted  in  the  translation  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Mark  into 
Mohawk,  and  other  portions  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  as 


CAPTAIN   BKANT. 

well  as  the  book  of  Common  Prayer,  which  were  printed 
and  distributed  amongst  the  Christian  portion  of  the  Six 
Nations,  and  I  have  every  reason  to  believe  were  pro 
ductive  of  much  good.  If  I  am  rightly  informed,  Brant 
was  the  principal  means  of  the  erection  of  this  church,  now 
the  oldest  in  Canada,  and  procured  the  bell  which  has  so 
often  summoned  the  people  of  God  together  to  worship  in 
his  holy  courts ;  and  has  tolled  for  hundreds  of  those  whose 
bones  now  lie  in  that  sacred  yard.  I  am  informed  that  it 
tolled,  when  Brant  died,  twenty-four  hours.  I  have  been 
informed,  by  one  of  his  people,  that  after  the  Six  Nations 
had  settled  on  this  river,  the  Indians  had  a  great  feast,  and 
through  the  influence  of  the  pagans,  the  Mohawks  were 
induced  to  assist  in  making  and  setting  up  a  large  idol  at 
the  eastern  entrance  of  the  Mohawk  Castle.  Captain 
Brant  was  absent  when  this  took  place,  and  on  again 
visiting  the  Grand  River,  and  seeing  this  image  (like 
Moses,  when  he  came  down  from  the  Mount  and  saw  the 
golden  calf),  his  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  immediately 
ordered  the  idol  to  be  cut  down  and  destroyed.  This 
speaks  loudly  for  the  Christianity  of  Captain  Brant,  as  it  is 
quite  evident  that  he  was  jealous  for  the  honour  of  Almighty 
God,  who,  blessed  be  his  name,  is  no  respecter  of  persons, 
but  in  every  nation  he  that  worketh  righteousness  is  ac 
cepted  of  him.  I  am  happy  to  learn  that  our  white  friends 
have  it  in  their  hearts  to  erect  a  monument  to  the  memory 
of  the  Indian  brave,  that  succeeding  generations  may  see 
and  know  the  hero  after  whom  the  town  of  Brantford  is 
named.  This  is  all  I  have  to  say/' 


214  OPINION   OF    THE   ENGLISH. 

The  following  correspondence  is  a  demonstration  of 
patriotic  and  sympathetic  feeling  which  does  credit  to 
their  enlightened  Christianity : — 

Indian  Subscription  to  the  Patriotic  Fund,  and  the  reply  of 
Her  Majesty's  Government. 

The  Messissauga  Indians  of  the  New'  Credit  Settlement 
in  Tuscarora,  in  full  council,  made  a  grant  of  £25  currency,  to 
the  Patriotic  Fund,  and  forwarded  the  following  requisition 
and  letter,  through  D.  Thorburn,  Esq.,  S.I. A.,  to  his 
Excellency  Sir  Edmund  Head  :— 

"  NEW  CREDIT,  July  1th,  1855. 
"£25. 

"  Required  by  our  tribe,  the  sum  of  twenty-five  pounds, 
currency,  to  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  our  Great  Father, 
Sir  Edmund  Head,  as  a  subscription  from  our  tribe  to  the 
Patriotic  Fund  in  England,  and  the  amount  to  be  charged 
to  our  annuity  of  lands  ceded  to  the  Crown. 

(Signed)  "  JOSEPH  SAWYER,  1       .     „ 

"  PETER  JONES,     / 
"  Witness : — JAMES  TOHECOE." 

"  BRANTFORD,  July  16th,  1856. 
"  DEAR  SIR, 

"  I  have  much  pleasure  in  transmitting  to  you  the 
enclosed  requisition  for  £25  currency,  from  the  Messissauga 
Indians  of  the  New  Credit  Settlement,  being  the  amount 
of  their  subscription  towards  the  Patriotic  Fund  in  Eng 
land,  and  which  is  designed  as  an  expression  of  their  deep 
sympathy  for  the  poor  widows  and  orphans  of  the  brave 
warriors  of  the  allied  armies  who  have  fallen  in  the  field  of 
battle. 


CONTRIBUTIONS   TO   THE   PATRIOTIC   FUND.  215 

"  I  am  sure  it  will  rejoice  your  heart  to  know  that  your 
Red  Indian  children  not  only  feel  a  great  pleasure  in 
offering  their  mite  to  the  cause  of  humanity,  but  that,  to 
my  certain  knowledge,  they  accompany  their  gift  with 
their  sincere  and  earnest  prayers  to  Almighty  God,  that 
success  may  attend  the  armies  of  the  allies,  and  speedily 
procure  that  honourable  peace  which  may  conduce  to  the 
prosperity  and  happiness  of  all  nations,  and  thus  cause  the 
cries  of  the  widow  and  orphan  to  be  heard  no  more  in  the 
land.  May  God  grant  it. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

"  Dear  Sir, 
"  Your  obedient  servant, 

"  PETER  JONES,  Chief." 
"  To  D.  THORBURN,  Esq., 

"  Supt.  Indian  Affairs,  $c.,  Cayuga" 


Sept.  22nd,  1855. 


216  OPINION  OF  THE  ENGLISH. 

(COPY  :) 

"  DOWNING  STREET,  Aug.  19£A,  1855. 
"  SIR, 

"  I  have  to  acknowledge  your  despatch  (93)  of  the 
26th  ult.,  enclosing  a  bill  of  exchange  for  twenty  pounds 
three  shillings  and  sevenpence  sterling,  being  the  amount 
of  subscription  by  the  Messissauga  Indians  to  the  Patriotic 
Fund. 

I  request  you  will  convey  to  the  chief  and  Indians  the 
thanks  of  Her  Majesty's  Government  for  this  contribution, 
and  the  sense  entertained  by  Her  Majesty  for  the  sympathy 
expressed  on  behalf  of  the  widows  and  orphans  of  the 
allied  armies  engaged  in  the  present  contest. 

"  I  have,  &c., 

(Signed)  "  W.  MOLESWORTH." 

"  To  Gov.  Sir  EDMUND  HEAD,  Bart.11 


When  the  French  first  came  to  Canada,  the  Indians 
entered  into  an  alliance  with  them ;  but  no  sooner  was 
Canada  conquered  by  the  English,  than  all  the  Indians 
threw  off  their  allegiance  to  the  French,  and  gladly  entered 
into  a  treaty  with  the  British  Government.  This  treaty, 
down  to  the  present  day,  has  not  been  violated.  The  old 
chiefs  often  mention  these  treaties  in  their  councils,  using 
at  the  same  time  a  striking  metaphor,  in  which  is  apparent 
their  superior  attachment  to  the  English.  They  say  that 
when  the  French  came,  they  bound  their  hands  together 
with  an  iron  chain ;  but  that  when  the  English  came,  they 
broke  asunder  that  chain,  which  had  already  become  rusty, 
and  then  their  great  Father,  the  King  of  England,  bound 
their  hands  together  with  a  silver  chain,  which  he  promised 
should  never  rust  and  never  be  broken. 


THEIR  TREATMENT  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT.       217 

The  treaty  then  made  with  the  Indians  placed  them  as 
allies  with  the  British  nation,  and  not  subjects ;  and  they 
were  so  considered  until  the  influx  of  emigration  completely 
outnumbered  the  aborigines.  From  that  time  the  Colo 
nial  Government  assumed  a  parental  authority  over  them, 
treating  them  in  every  respect  as  children.  No  one  will 
deny  that  the  Indians  have  been  more  kindly  treated  by 
the  British  Government  than  by  the  American.  The 
former  have  always  protected  them  from  the  impositions 
of  wicked  white  men ;  but  the  latter,  in  too  many  instances, 
have  driven  and  chased  the  poor  red  man  further  and  fur 
ther  to  the  west ;  and  if  they  had  not  of  late  years  shown 
more  compassion  towards  him,  he  must  soon  have  been 
driven  into  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

It  was  kind  in  the  Government  to  act  as  guardians  of 
the  poor  defenceless  Indians,  and  to  protect  them  from  the 
frauds  of  unprincipled  white  men ;  but,  at  the  same  time, 
I  think  that  some  acts  of  the  Colonial  Government  cannot 
be  considered  as  doing  full  justice  to  the  natives.  I  now 
refer  to  the  manner  in  which  some  of  the  tribes  have  been 
compelled  to  surrender  their  territories. 

Indians  at  the  present  time  enjoy  no  political  rights  or 
advantages.  They  cannot  vote  at  elections  for  members 
of  Parliament,  nor  sit  as  jurors,  however  qualified  they 
may  be,  simply  because  they  have  no  title-deeds  for  their 
lands.  I  feel  confident  that  these  things  act  as  a  powerful 
check  to  their  advancement  in  the  arts  of  civilized  life.  I 
have  often  heard  them  say  that  it  is  not  much  use  for  the 
Indians  to  aim  at  the  exalted  privileges  of  their  white 
neighbours,  as  they  will  never  be  permitted  to  enjoy  them. 
I  know  of  no  legal  impediment  to  their  possessing  such 
rights  ;  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  tenure  by  which  they  hold 
their  lands.  It  is  my  firm  conviction  that  many  of  the 


OPINION    OF  THE  ENGLISH. 


. 


Indians   are    sufficiently  instructed  in  the  knowledge 
civil  affairs  to  be  able  to  use  the  rights  of  British  subjects 
as  judiciously  as  many  of  their  white  neighbours.     The 
names  of  numbers  might  be  inserted  were  it  of  any  avail. 
May  the  time  soon  come  when  my  countrymen  will  be 
able  to  walk  side  by  side  with  their  white  neighbours,  and!; 
partake  in  all  the  blessings  and  privileges  enjoyed  by  the  •! 
white  subjects  of  her  most  gracious  Majesty  the  Queen ! 

THE  INDIANS'  OPINION  OF  THE  AMERICANS. 

The  Canadian  Indians,  and  those  in  the  Western  States, , 
have  a  very  poor  opinion  of  the  Americans.     They  call!' 
them  Keche  Mookomon  (the  Big  Knives),  from  their  having 
massacred,  during  the  American  war,  many  of  the  Indians 
with   cutlasses   and   dirks.      They  imagine  that  all  the 
Yankees  hate  the  Indians,  and  would  gladly  exterminate 
them  from  the  earth ;  they  also  consider  them  as  rogues 
and  traitors.     Entertaining  such  views,  it  is  no  wonder 
that  they  look  upon  them  with  distrust.     The  following 
anecdote  will  illustrate  the  fact : — 

An  Indian  Chief  on  the  Grand  River  was  applied  to,  i 
separately,  by  two  white  men,  for  a  certain  piece  of  land.  .1, 
One   was   an   old   honest   Canadian   Dutch    farmer,  well  f 
known  to  the  chief.     The  other  was  a  Yankee  stranger,  ,l- 
who  came  with  many  extravagant  promises  of  what  he 
would  do  for  the  Indian  if  he  would  only  let  him  have  the 
land,  far  outbidding  his  competitor.      The  chief  gravely 
listened  to  these  offers,  and  then  coolly  replied  to  the 
Dutch  farmer: — "  My  friend,  I  have  known  you  these  many 
years,  and  have  never  heard  of  your  cheating  an  Indian, 
or  sending  him  away  from  your  house  hungry."    Then, 
pointing  to  the  stranger,  he  said : — "  This  man  wants  my 
land  ;  his  mouth  is  all  sugar,  and  his  words  very  sweet,  but 


DISTRUST   OF   THE   AMERICANS.  219 

I  do  not  know  what  is  in  his  heart.     I  therefore  turn  away 
I  from  his  sweet  words,  and  let  you  have  my  land." 

THEIR    OPINION   OP   THE   NEGRO    RACE. 

They  consider  the  Negroes  were  made  inferior  to  other 
races  of  the  human  family,  and  deeply  commiserate  their 
unhappy  state  in  being  bound  with  the  iron  band  of  slavery. 
!  They  imagine  that  the  Indian  comes  next  to  the  Negro  in 
\  the  endurance  of  wrongs  inflicted  by  the  white  man  ;  and 
with  this  idea  they  call  them  "  our  fellow-suffering  bre 
thren."     With  many  of  the  tribes  there  is  a  great  aversion 
to  intermarriages  with  the  Africans.     The  Indians  boast  of 
their  freedom,  and  say  they  would   sooner  die  than  be 
treated  as  beasts  of  burden ! " 

The  following  extract  from  a  letter  to  the  Author,  from 
an  Indian  visiting  Paris,  will  show  their  opinion  of  the 
French  people: — 

"  PARIS,  Oct.  19tJi,  1854. 
"Mr  DEAR  BROTHER, 

".  .  .  .  Last  Saturday  we  saw  the  great  chief 
of  France,  and  his  great  chief  woman ;  the  great  chief  of 
Belgium,  and  his  great  chief  woman ;  and  some  hundreds 
of  their  people  .  .  .  These  things  we  did  for  them : — 
We  played  the  Indian  ball-play,  shot  at  marks  with  our 
own  bows  and  arrows,  false  scalping,  war  dance,  paddled 
one  of  our  birch-bark  canoes  in  a  beautifully  made  river, 
among  swans,  wrild  geese,  and  ducks.  After  the  two  great 
chiefs  and  their  great  chief  women  had  much  talk  with  us, 
they  thanked  us,  got  into  their  carriages  covered  with  gold, 
drawn  by  six  beautiful  horses,  and  drove  to  the  wigwam  of 
the  great  chief  of  France.  We  followed  them,  and  the  great 


220  OPINION   OP   THE   ENGLISH. 

chief's  servant,  who  wears  a  red  coat,  and  much  gold  and 
silver,  and  a  hat  in  the  shape  of  half-night-sun,  took  us 
into  one  of  the  great  rooms  to  dine.  Everything  on  the 
table  was  gold  and  silver;  we  had  twelve  clean  plates. 
Many  came  in  while  we  were  eating,  and  it  was  great 
amusement  to  thenTall 

"  Paris  is  much  handsomer  than  the  city  of  London ; 
very  clean. 

"The  French  people  wear  much  hair  about  the  mouth, 
which  makes  them  look  bold  and  noble ;  but  our  friend 
Sasagon,  who  has  no  taste  for  beauty,  says  that  it  would 
puzzle  any  one  of  our  people  to  find  where  the  French 
man's  mouth  is ;  and  that  a  person  having  much  hair 
round  his  mouth  makes  him  look  like  one  of  our  Indian 
dogs  in  North  America  'when  running  away  with  a  black 
squirrel  in  his  mouth. 

"  The  French  women  carry  big  and  heavy  loads  on  their 
backs,  on  what  we  call  tetoomaugun,  same  as  our  women 
do ;  they  do  it  because  they  are  industrious.  Here,  again, 
Sasagon  says,  i  that  the  French  women  would  make  good 
wives  for  the  Ojebway  hunters.' 

"The  French  people  are  very  gay  in  their  dress,  and 
yet  I  think  they  are  not  so  selfish  and  proud  as  most  of  the 
English. 

"  There  are  no  ragged  people  or  beggars  in  Paris.  We 
have  not  seen  a  single  person  intoxicated  since  we  have 
been  here. 

"  KEEKAUNIS, 

"  To  KAHKEWAQUONABY,  MAUNGWADAUS, 

or  RET.  PETER  JONES."  or  GEORGE  HENRY. 

The  following  is  the  opinion  the  Author  formed  of 
England  and  its  inhabitants  on  his  first  visit,  in  the  year 


VISIT  OF  THE  AUTHOR  TO  ENGLAND,         221 

1831   (extracted  from  a  letter  to  his  brother,  Mr.  John 
Jones,  dated  London,  December  30th,  1831): — 

.  .  .  .  "  I  have  thought  you  would  be  pleased  to 
hear  my  remarks,  as  an  Indian  traveller,  on  the  customs 
and  manners  of  the  English  people,  and  therefore  send  you 
the  following,  made  from  actual  observation : — 

"  The  English,  in  general,  are  a  noble,  generous-minded 
|  people — free  to  act  and  free  to  think;  they  very  much 
i  pride  themselves  on  their  civil  and  religious  privileges;  in 
i  their  learning,  generosity,  manufactures,  and  commerce ; 
I  and  they  think  that  no  other  nation  is  equal  to  them. 

"  I  have  found  them  very  open  and  friendly,  always  ready 
to  relieve  the  wants  of  the  poor  and  needy  when  properly 
i  brought  before  them.  No  nation,  I  think,  can  be  more 
fond  of  novelties  than  the  English ;  they  will  gaze  upon  a 
foreigner  as  if  he  had  just  dropped  down  from  the  moon  ; 
and  I  have  often  been  amused  in  seeing  what  a  large  num 
ber  of  people  a  monkey  riding  upon  a  dog  will  collect,  where 
such  things  may  be  seen  almost  every  day.  When  my 
Indian  name,  Kalikewaquonaby,  is  announced  to  attend  any 
public  meeting,  so  great  is  the  curiosity,  the  place  is  sure 
to  be  filled.  They  are  truly  industrious,  and  in  general 
very  honest  and  upright.  Their  close  attention  to  business 
produces,  I  think,  too  much  worldly-mindedness,  and  hence 
they  forget  to  think  enough  about  their  souls  and  their 
God ;  their  motto  seems  to  be  'Money,  money ;  get  money, 
get  rich,  and  be  a  gentleman.'  With  this  sentiment  they 
fly  about  in  every  direction,  like  a  swarm  of  bees,  in  search 
of  the  treasure  which  lies  so  near  their  hearts.  These 
remarks  refer  to  the  men  of  the  world,  and  of  such  there 
are  not  a  few. 

"  The  English  are  very  fond  of  good  living,^  and  many 
who  live  on  roast  beef,  plum  pudding,  and  turtle  soup,  get 


222  OPINION    OF   THE   ENGLISH. 

very  fat,  and  round  as  a  toad.  They  eat  four  times  in  a 
day.  Breakfast  at  eight  or  nine,  which  consists  of  coffee  or 
tea,  bread  and  butter,  and  sometimes  a  little  fried  bacon, 
fish,  or  eggs.  Dinner  at  about  two,  P.M.,  when  everything 
that  is  good  is  spread  before  the  eater ;  which  winds  up 
with  fruit,  nuts,  and  a  few  glasses  of  wine.  Tea  at  six, 
with  bread  and  butter,  toast,  and  sometimes  sweet  cake. 
Supper  about  nine  or  ten,  when  the  leavings  of  the  dinner 
again  make  their  appearance,  upon  which  John  Bull  makes 
a  hearty  meal  to  go  to  bed  upon  at  midnight. 

"  The  fashion  in  dress  varies  so  much,  I  am  unable  to 
describe  it.  I  will  only  say,  that  the  ladies  of  fashion  wear 
very  curious  bonnets,  which  look  something  like  a  farmer's 
scoop-shovel ;  and  when  they  walk  in  the  tiptoe  style  they 
put  me  in  mind  of  the  little  snipes,  that  run  along  the 
shores  of  the  lakes  in  Canada.  They  also  wear  sleeves  as 
big  as  bushel  bags,  which  make  them  appear  as  if  they 
had  three  bodies  with  one  head.  Yet,  with  all  their  big 
bonnets  and  sleeves,  the  English  ladies,  I  think,  are  the 
best  of  women.  A *<•;•>.*:  ,*•  , 

"P.  JONES." 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

INDIAN      ANECDOTES. 

Illustrations  of  Faith. 

THE  late  James  Young,  Indian,  informed  me  that  one* 
Sunday  morning,  as  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  house  of 
God,  he  overtook  Widow  Waubanosay.  Before  he  came 
up  to  her  he  heard  her  talking,  as  if  some  one  was  with 
her.  When  she  heard  his  footsteps  behind  her,  seeing  it 
was  her  class-leader,  she  said,  "  O  my  brother,  I  am  only 
talking  with  Jesus  as  I  walk  along,  and  he  makes  me  very 
happy  in  my  heart."  This,  of  a  truth,  is  walking  with 
God.  W.  W.  is  one  of  our  most  holy  women.  God  is 
with  her. 

ANSWER  TO   THE   PRAYER   OF   FAITH. 

A  teacher  at  Grape  Island  once  requested  the  Indians  to 
pray  for  his  unconverted  brothers  and  sisters  living  in  the 
States.  Upon  his  arrival  home  he  found  them  all  converted 
to  God.  His  mother  met  him  and  told  him  the  good  news, 
saying  that  she  could  not  account  for  their  remarkable 
conversions,  as  no  special  means  had  been  employed.  The 
teacher  then  unfolded  the  mystery. 

STRONG   FAITH   IN   CHRISTIAN   INDIANS. 

The  Rev.  J.  Messmore  stated  that  when  he  was  a  mis 
sionary  on  the  Grand  River,  a  chief,  with  a  party  of  his 
warriors,  came  to  drive  the  Methodist  Indians  and  their 
preachers  away  from  the  settlement.  The  Christians  were 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

assembled  at  their  place  of  worship  when  the  party  arrived. 
They  told  their  enemies  that  "  Jesus  Christ  was  stronger 
than  the  children  of  the  devil,  and  that  God  would  take 
care  of  them."  They  then  joined  in  prayer ;  after  which, 
one  of  the  Indian  speakers  went  out,  and,  mounting  a  log, 
preached  to  them  with  such  power  that  the  chief  and  his 
warriors  were  soon  melted  into  tears.  They  then  went 
into  the  church  and  united  with  the  Christians  in  worship 
ping  the  true  God.  The  next  sabbath  the  chief  was  among 
the  penitents  at  the  altar,  crying  to  God  for  mercy :  he 
soon  found  peace,  to  the  joy  of  his  soul,  and  united  himself 
with  the  people  of  God,  whom  he  had  so  recently  sought 
to  persecute. 

RESIGNATION   UNDER  AFFLICTION. 

Thomas  Magee,  a  pious  Indian  exhorter,  was  bereaved 
of  his  children  one  after  another.  When  his  seventh  child 
was  taken  from  him,  after  I  had  preached  a  funeral  sermon, 
he  rose  up  in  the  congregation  and  said : — "  Brothers  and 
Sisters, — I  am  now  about  to  bury  my  seventh  child ;  I  do 
not  murmur  at  what  the  great  Spirit  has  done  in  taking 
away  my  children ;  I  now  feel  that  there  are  seven  cords 
reaching  down  from  heaven  to  my  heart,  and  that  these 
cords  are  pulling  me  up  towards  heaven,  and  not  one  shall 
be  broken  until  I  reach  to  the  end  of  them,  and  then  I 
shall  meet  my  dear  children  again." 

Polly  Sunegoo  is  a  pious,  intelligent  Indian  woman.  In 
the  early  part  of  her  religious  life  she  passed  through  deep 
afflictions,  which  she  bore  with  Christian  fortitude.  Her 
children  died  one  after  the  other ;  her  husband  was  at  this 
time  given  to  intemperance,  which  was  a  great  trial  to  her; 
her  last  promising  son  was  drowned  in  the  mill-race  at  the 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES.  225 

River  Credit,  and  her  only  daughter  lying  apparently  at 
the  point  of  death.  In  all  these  afflictions  religion  was 
her  only  consolation,  and  she  was  often  heard  to  sing, — 

"  My  company  before  is  gone, 
And  I  am  left  alone  with  Thee,"  &c. 

PERSECUTION   FOR  CHRIST'S   SAKE. 

The  Rev.  J.  Messmore  informed  me  that  when  he  was 
labouring  on  the  Grand  River  Mission,  an  Indian  woman 
being  converted  to  God,  her  ungodly  chief  withheld  from 
her  her  blanket,  and  two  dollars  in  cash,  telling  her  that 
she  must  either  give  up  the  Christian  religion  or  lose  her 
presents,  &c.  She  replied — "  By  and  bye  the  blanket  will 
be  burnt  up  and  the  silver  melt  away;  but  the  good  religion 
I  have  found  will  never  leave  me, — it  will  comfort  my  heart 
here,  and  carry  me  to  heaven  when  I  die." 

John  Caleb,  an  Indian  youth  at  Muncey  Town,  when 
about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  converted  to  the  Christian 
religion,  and  became  very  anxious  to  learn  to  read  and 
write.  He  was  much  opposed  by  his  parents,  who  were 
heathens,  and  threatened  to  take  his  gun  and  horse  and 
sell  them  for  the  fire-waters,  if  he  did  not  give  up  going  to 
the  meetings  and  school.  John  told  his  parents  that  he 
thought  more  about  serving  the  Great  Spirit  than  he  did 
about  his  gun  or  his  horse,  and  would  therefore  rather 
lose  all  he  possessed  than  give  up  his  school  and  religious 
meetings ;  and  more  than  this,  he  modestly  told  them  he 
would  rather  suffer  death  than  disobey  what  the  Great 
Spirit  had  commanded  him  to  do.  John  then  prayed 
earnestly  for  the  conversion  of  his  parents,  and  that  good 
Being  who  hears  and  answers  the  prayers  of  faith  gave 

Q 


2.26  INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

Mm  the  desires  of  his  heart  in  their  sound  conversion. 
Let  young  persons  never  be  discouraged ;  God  will  surely 
answer  their  prayers,  if  offered  up  in  sincerity  and  faith. 

FAITHFUL   CONVERTS,    AND   THEIR  DESIRE   FOR   INSTRUCTION. 

Faithfulness  of  an  Indian  Woman  at  Hudson's  Bay. — The 
late  Re v.James  Evans  stated,  at  a  missionary  meeting,  that  he 
met  with  an  old  Indian  woman  in  the  Hudson's  Bay  territory 
who  was  converted  at  St.  Marie  seven  years  previous  to  his 
meeting  her.  She  informed  him  that  for  five  years  she  had 
been  living  among  the  pagans.  The  first  three  years  of  her 
sojourn  in  that  country  she  had  year  after  year  looked  for 
the  arrival  of  a  missionary,  but  no  missionary  came.  She 
then  gave  up  all  hopes  of  ever  again  hearing  the  words  of 
the  Great  Spirit,  and  resolved  to  serve  him  alone  as  well  as 
she  could,  and  she  kept  her  resolution  in  the  midst  of  pagan 
darkness  and  numerous  temptations,  until  she  had  the  joy 
of  seeing  the  face  of  a  missionary.  She  expressed  many 
thanks  for  this  great  privilege,  and  stated  she  had  been 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Christian  religion  through 
the  labours  of  John  Sunday,  at  the  Sault  St.  Marie. 

Saugeeng  Indians  ask  for  Spiritual  Guns. — Some  of  the1 
Saugeeng  Indians  came  to  me  at  the  Credit,  and  said — 
"  We  have  come  to  ask  for  guns  to  shoot  our  enemies,  as 
we  are  engaged  in  war."  I  asked  them  what  they  meant. 
They  replied,  that  they  had  come  to  ask  for  our  translation 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  they  called  their  spiritual 
guns. 

THE   FLATHEAD   INDIANS    SEEKING    FOR    THE  WHITE   MAN?S 
RELIGION. 

It  was  stated  in  the  American  paper  that  a  deputation 
of  Elathead  Indians  had  arrived  at  some  western  towns, 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES.  227 

enquiring  after  the  white  man's  religion,  saying  that  "  some 
of  their  Indian  traders  had  informed  them  that  the  white  man 
had  his  religion  written  in  a  book,  which  told  him  all  he 
was  commanded  to  do,  and  that  they  had  come  to  ask  for 
a  missionary  to  tell  their  people  the  words  of  that  good 
book."  These  poor  Indians  travelled  between  two  and 
three  thousand  miles  on  foot,  seeking  for  a  messenger  of 
peace  to  publish  unto  them  the  good  tidings  of  salvation  ! 

When  the  work  of  conversion  first  commenced  at  the 
Sault  St.  Marie  by  the  preaching  of  John  Sunday  and 
others,  so  great  was  the  desire  to  hear  the  word  of  God, 
that  an  Indian  woman  who  was  encamped  on  an  island, 
finding  the  canoe  gone,  took  her  two  children,  and,  slinging 
one  on  each  shoulder,  forded  the  river,  which  was  about 
three  feet  deep,  and  thus  reached  the  meeting,  which  was 
held  on  the  mainland. 

CHRISTIAN   LIBERALITY. 

George  Killsnake's  Missionary  Ox. — When  I  was  stationed 
at  Muncey,  George  Killsnake  drove  a  young  ox  to  the 
Mission  House,  and  said  that  he  had  subscribed  four  dollars 
to  the  Missionary  Society  and  two  dollars  to  the  Bible 
Society,  and  that  he  had  brought  the  ox  from  Moravian 
Town  in  order  to  sell  it  to  get  money  to  pay  these  debts, 
but  that  he  had  found  no  market  on  the  road.  I  gave  him 
his  price  for  the  beast;  he  was  much  delighted,  and  at 
once  paid  his  subscriptions.  This  Indian  had  driven  his  ox 
upwards  of  thirty  miles, 

TRINKETS  CONTRIBUTED  BY  NEW  CONVERTS. 

When  the  work  of  God  commenced  among  our  Indian 
tribes,  many  of  them  had  silver  brooches,  ear-bobs,  arm- 

Q  2 


228  INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

bands,  and  nose-jewels,  which  they  threw  into  the  missionary 
collections  with  great  apparent  pleasure.  These  contri 
butions  were  sold  to  jewellers,  and  the  proceeds  applied  in 
helping  on  the  blessed  work.  I  have  often  known  the  poor 
Indian  women  make  baskets  and  brooms  previous  to  a 
missionary  meeting,  that  by  the  sale  of  these  things  they 
might  have  a  little  money  in  time  for  the  collection. 

INDIANS  PREPARED   TO   RECEIVE   THE    GOSPEL    BEFORE   IT  WAS 
PREACHED   TO   THEM. 

The  Rev.  A.  Prindle  informed  me  that  the  first  Metho 
dist  missionaries  sent  to  Canada  were  instructed  to  visit 
and  preach  to  the  Indians ;  but  such  was  their  want  of  faith, 
that  he  and  his  companions  laughed  at  the  idea  as  a  fruit 
less  effort.  Their  unbelief  arose  from  the  abject  state  in 
which  the  Indians  were  at  that  time. 

Soon  after  this  the  same  minister  states  that  when  Dr. 
Bangs  was  travelling  in  Canada,  he  conversed  with  some 
Indians  at  Duffin's  Creek  on  the  subject  of  religion.  The 
chief  burst  into  tears,  and  catching  the  preacher  round  the 
neck,  said,  "  I  will  be  a  Christian  and  you  shall  be  my 
minister." 

P.   WOMPEGOOSH  AND   HIS  DEER-HUNTING. 

P.  Wompegoosh,  an  Indian  residing  in  the  township  of 
Waterloo,  on  the  Grand  River,  came  on  a  visit  to  the  Credit 
for  the  purpose  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Great  Spirit. 
Being  much  interested,  he  tarried  longer  than  he  expected. 
On  his  return  home,  he  found  his  family  out  of  provisions 
and  very  hungry.  P.  Wompegoosh  rose  up  very  early  in 
the  morning  in  search  of  deer  ;  he  travelled  till  the  middle 
of  the  afternoon  without  seeing  a  sign  of  one.  He  now 
began  to  despair ;  in  this  emergency  he  made  known  his 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES.  229 

wants  to  the  Christian's  God,  and  began  to  call  aloud  on 
him.  To  his  first  prayer  he  received  no  answer.  He  then 
travelled  on  some  distance,  again  praying  aloud  as  before 
that  God  would  give  him  deer  for  his  family.  On  rising 
from  his  knees,  he  looked  and  saw  three  deer  standing  not 
far  from  him;  taking  his  rifle  he  shot  one  on  the  spot; 
when  he  discovered  he  had  killed  it,  he  again  fell  upon  his 
knees  and  returned  thanks  to  God.  As  he  rose  from  his 
thanksgiving  behold  he  saw  another  standing  within  gun 
shot;  as  soon  as  he  could  load,  he  shot  the  second,  and  again 
gave  thanks.  After  this  he  went  in  search  of  the  third, 
and  soon  killed  him.  He  was  thus  provided  with  an 
abundant  supply  for  his  family.  Surely  "  God  is  a  prayer- 
hearing,  and  a  prayer-answering  God,  a  very  present  help 
in  time  of  trouble  !" 

OLD   JEEKIB  AND   HIS   OLD   WIFE. 

Among  the  Credit  Indians  there  was  a  very  tall,  good- 
natured  old  man,  named  Jeekib.  He  and  his  wife  used  to 
get  drunk  together.  On  one  occasion  I  saw  the  old  woman 
beating  her  husband  on  his  head  and  back.  The  old  man, 
instead  of  resisting  the  blows,  kept  himself  perfectly  com 
posed,  saying,  "Wawanee,  wawanee ;"  that  is,  "Thank 
you,  thank  you."  This  enraged  his  wife  the  more,  and 
when  she  saw  she  could  not  hurt  him,  she  sat  down  and 
wept  bitterly. 

OBJECTIONS  TO   BECOMING  CHRISTIANS. 

Pashegezhegwashkum,  a  chief  of  the  Beldom  Indians 
and  a  noted  pow-wow,  after  listening  to  the  preaching  of 
the  white  man,  brought  forward  his  objections  to  the 
Christian  religion  by  saying,  "  The  white  man  makes  the 
fire-water,  he  drinks,  and  sells  it  to  the  Indians,  he  lies  and 
cheats  the  poor  Indian.  I  have  seen  him  go  to  his  praying- 


230  INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

house  in  Maiden,  and  as  soon  as  he  comes  out  I  have  seen 
him  go  straight  to  the  tavern,  get  drunk,  quarrel,  and 
fight.  Now  the  white  man's  religion  is  no  better  than 
mine.  I  will  hold  fast  to  the  religion  of  my  forefathers, 
and  follow  them  to  the  far  west." 

Old  widow  Wahbuhnoosay  accompanied  a  party  of 
Indians  to  Toronto,  to  sell  baskets  and  brooms.  They  re 
turned  by  the  cars  as  far  as  Hamilton.  The  old  woman 
had  never  been  in  them  before.  She  was  observed  to  sit  per 
fectly  quiet.  When  she  got  out,  she  threw  herself  down  flat 
on  her  face.  The  conductor  told  the  Indians  to  find  out 
what  was  the  matter  with  her ;  when  she  replied,  "  I  am 
waiting  for  my  soul  to  come." 

AN  INDIAN'S  REPLY  TO  A  CHALLENGE. 

The  Indian  has  more  sense  than  the  white  man.  The 
duellist  may  possess  some  physical  bravery,  but  he  lacks  the 
moral  courage  of  the  Indian,  who,  when  he  was  challenged, 
replied,  "  I  have  two  objections  to  this  duel  affair ;  the  one 
is,  lest  I  should  hurt  you,  and  the  other  is,  lest  you  should 
hurt  me.  I  do  not  see  any  good  that  it  would  do  me  to 
put  a  bullet  through  your  body — I  could  not  make  any  use 
of  you  when  dead  ;  but  I  could  of  a  rabbit  or  turkey.  As 
to  myself,  I  think  it  more  wise  to  avoid  than  to  put  myself 
in  the  way  of  harm ;  I  am  under  apprehension  that  you 
might  hit  me.  That  being  the  case,  I  think  it  advisable  to 
keep  my  distance.  If  you  want  to  try  your  pistols,  take 
some  object — a  tree,  or  anything  about  my  size ;  and  if 
you  hit  that,  send  me  word,  and  I  shall  acknowledge,  that 
had  I  been  there  you  might  have  hit  me." 

FIRST   INTERVIEW  BETWEEN   A  WHITE   MAN  AND   INDIANS. 

When  the  Dacatos  first  saw  a  white  man  they  imme 
diately  took  him  prisoner.  The  white  man  shewed  them  a 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES.  231 

gun  he  had  in  his  hand,  and  by  signs  told  them  that  if  he 
should  point  it  to  them  it  would  kill  them.  The  Indians 
appeared  incredulous,  and  having  placed  one  of  their  men 
a  short  distance  from  him,  requested  him  to  try  the  power 
of  his  gun.  The  white  man  declined.  They  then  found  a 
dog,  which  the  white  man  shot  dead  on  the  spot.  As  soon 
as  they  heard  the  report  of  the  gun,  and  saw  its  effects, 
they  ran  off  in  great  alarm.  They  then  called  the  white 
man  Uhnemekee,  that  is,  the  Thunder  God. 

HONESTY  OF  AN   INDIAN. 

One  day,  an  Indian  solicited  a  little  tobacco  of  a  white 
man,  to  fill  his  pipe.  Having  some  loose  in  his  pocket,  the 
white  man  gave  him  a  handful.  The  next  day  the  Indian 
returned  in  search  of  the  man  who  gave  him  the  tobacco. 
"  I  wish  to  see  him/7  said  the  Indian.  "  Why  so  ?"  in 
quired  some  one.  "  Why,  I  find  money  with  the  tobacco.77 
"  Well !  what  of  that  ?  Keep  it ;  it  was  given  to  you." 
"Ah!"  said  the  Indian,  shaking  his  head,  "I  got  good 
man  and  bad  man  here/7  pointing  to  his  breast.  "  Good 
man  say,  Money  not  yours ;  you  must  return  it ;  bad 
man  say,  7Tis  yours ;  it  was  given  to  you.  Good  man 
say,  That  not  right ;  tobacco  yours,  money  not  yours. 
Bad  man  say,  Never  mind,  nobody  know  it ;  go  buy 
rum.  Good  man  say,  O,  no;  no  such  thing.  So  poor 
Indian  know  not  what  to  do.  Me  lie  down  to  sleep,  but 
no  sleep ;  good  man  and  bad  man  talk  all  night,  and 
trouble  me.  So,  now  me  bring  money  back;  now  me 
feel  glad.77 

ANECDOTE   OF   AN   INDIAN   PREACHER. 

While  Mr.  Kirkland  was  a  missionary  to  the  Oneidas, 
being  unwell,  he  was  unable  to  preach  on  the  afternoon  of 
a  certain  sabbath,  and  told  good  Peter,  one  of  the  head 


232  INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

men  of  the  Oneidas,  that  he  must  address  the  congrega 
tion.  Peter  modestly  and  reluctantly  consented.  After  a 
few  words  of  introduction,  he  began  a  discourse  on  the 
character  of  the  Saviour.  "  What,  my  brethren,"  said  he, 
"  are  the  views  which  you  form  of  the  character  of  Jesus  ? 
You  will  answer,  perhaps,  that  he  was  a  man  of  singular 
benevolence.  You  will  tell  me  that  he  proved  this  to  be 
his  character  by  the  nature  of  the  miracles  which  he 
wrought.  All  these,  you  will  say,  were  kind  in  the  ex 
treme.  He  created  bread  to  feed  thousands  who  were 
ready  to  perish :  He  raised  to  life  the  son  of  a  poor 
woman  who  was  a  widow,  and  to  whom  his  labours  were 
necessary  for  her  support  in  old  age.  Are  these,  then, 
your  only  views  of  the  Saviour  ?  I  tell  you  they  are  lame. 
— -When  Jesus  came  into  our  world,  he  threw  his  blanket 
around  him,  but  the  GOD  was  within." — Dwiglit's  Travels. 

INDIAN  LOYALTY,   AND   LATE  AMERICAN   BEIGANDS. 

The  following  letter  is  from  a  native  Indian,  who  has 
been  educated  in  the  Methodist  Mission  schools,  and  is  now 
an  interpreter  and  teacher  at  the  River  St.  Clair  Mission. 
He  is  one  of  those  whom  Sir  F.  Head  has  said  Christi 
anity  had  "  decimated," — one  of  those  whom  it  was  recom 
mended  to  send  to  the  Manitoulin  Island  to  "  feed  "  upon 
"  fish  "  and  "  berries  that  grow  in  the  interstices  of  the 
rocks."  The  vein  of  pleasant  wit  which  pervades  this  letter 
renders  it  very  amusing.  It  also  shows  that  the  operations 
of  the  Methodist  Missionary  Society  are  not  less  favourable 
to  loyalty  than  they  are  to  piety,  sobriety,  and  industry. 
We  are  glad  to  perceive  from  this  letter  that  even  in 
Michigan,  the  Americans  are  now  assisting  to  prevent 
lawless  incursions  of  mobs,  which  have  collected  on  their 
frontier,  upon  the  Canadian  territories. 


INDIAN   ANECDOTES.  23$ 

"  ST.  CLAIR  MISSION,  July  20th,  1838. 

"  DEAR  SIR, — I  send  these  few  lines  for  to  say  to  you  that 
we  have  been  troubled  very  much  by  the  rebels  ;  so  much 
so  that  we  are  in  fear  we  get  as  savage  as  our  fathers  were 
in  all  the  wars  under  the  British  flag.  We  have  to  be  up 
every  night  in  watching  them,  and  go  to  sleep  in  day-time 
like  bats  and  owls  :  we  have  to  carry  our  guns  and  toma 
hawks,  war-clubs  and  scalping-knives,  while  our  heads  are 
decorated  with  feathers,  and  faces  painted.  I  am  thinking 
that  if  they  will  yet  continue  a  little  longer,  we  shall  have 
to  dress  ourselves  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  make  them  fall 
like  dead  men  on  the  ground  just  by  seeing  us,  without  the 
war-whoops  and  yells.  Though  the  Yankees  are  now  assist 
ing  us  in  trying  to  keep  them  away  from  robbing  some  of 
the  stores  on  these  frontiers,  yet  we  are  in  fear  that  they 
will  yet  continue  to  trouble  us  ;  for  they  are  just  like  the 
artichokes  on  the  American  side,  that  the  hogs  cannot  root 
them  all  up,  they  will  come  up  and  grow  in  spite  of  all  the 
laws  can  do  to  prevent  them. 

"  I  am,  Sir, 
"  Your  very  dear  Indian  friend, 

"  GEORGE^  HENRY. 

To  Rev.  E.  HYERSON,  Toronto. 

"  P.S. — The  rebels  did  come  over  on  our  side  a  few  weeks 
ago,  and  robbed  one  store  ;  but  a  few  of  the  savages  drove 
the  unfortunate  fellows  over  again,  and  chased  them  on  the 
other  side  too.  "  G.  H." 

Bishop  Hedding  relates  the  following  incidents  : — 

"  When  at  Grape  Island  Mission  I  had  a  meeting  to 

allow  them  to  ask  any  question  they  might  desire.     It  was 

astonishing  and  sometimes  amusing  to  hear  the  questions 

they  proposed.     A  squaw  said  '  She  heard  her  boy  read  in 


234  INDIAN   ANECDOTES. 

the  Testament  that  a  man  and  his  wife  were  one ;  now, 
supposing  that  the  squaw  is  converted  and  her  husband  is 
a  drunkard — when  they  die  will  the  Indian  go  to  Heaven 
with  the  squaw,  or  must  she  go  to  hell  with  her  husband, 
seeing  they  are  one  ?'  Her  husband  was  a  drunkard. 

"  When  addressing  them  I  had  for  my  interpreter  a 
large,  stout,  fine-looking  Indian,  who  had  been  an  old  war 
rior.  They  called  him  Captain  Beaver.  He  appeared  to 
be  solemnly  engaged  in  religion,  and  deeply  affected  with 
its  great  truths.  Before  his  conversion  he  had  been  a  great 
sinner,  he  had  killed  one  wife,  and  in  a  drunken  frolic 
threw  a  child  out  of  doors  into  the  mud,  and  stamped  it 
to  death.  When  preaching  to  them  on  the  intercession  of 
Christ,  the  wrhole  congregation  were  greatly  affected  and 
cried  aloud,  so  that  I  was  obliged  to  stop  for  some  time 
before  they  could  hear  me.  Captain  Beaver  bowed  himself 
nearly  double,  and  cried  aloud,  l  Oh,  oh !'  I  was  told  by 
the  missionary  that  this  doctrine  of  the  intercession  of 
Christ  had  probably  not  been  taught  them  before,  and  it 
was  the  discovery  of  it  for  the  first  time  that  so  greatly 
affected  them. 

"When  visiting  the  Indians  residing  at  the  River  Credit 
one  Monday  morning,  a  converted  Indian  came  to  me  and 
said,  '  Yesterday  I  crossed  the  River  Credit  in  a  canoe,  and 
the  salmon  were  thick  all  around  me  ;  and  he  no  run  away, 
for  he  know  Christian  Indian  would  not  catch  salmon  on 
Sunday/  " 


CHAPTER  XX. 

PRESENT     STATE      AND    FUTURE     PROSPECTS     OF     THE     NORTH 
AMERICAN    INDIANS. 

THE  concluding  chapter  of  this  volume  was  to  have  em 
braced  the  following  subjects  : — "  The  present  state  and 
future  prospects  of  the  North  American  Indians." 

As  the  author  ceased  from  his  labours  before  the  com 
mencement  of  this  chapter,  it  is  deemed  sufficient  to  insert 
his  suggestions  on  the  subject,  expressing  as  they  do  his 
unaltered  opinions  up  to  the  day  of  his  death.  The  queries, 
as  will  be  seen,  are  numerous,  and  embrace  a  wide  field. 
The  answers  of  the  author,  having  all  the  authority  of  a 
life  of  labour  and  observation,  cannot  fail  to  interest. 

Answers  to  the   Queries  proposed  by  the   Commissioners  ap 
pointed  to  enquire  into  Indian  Affairs  in  this  province. 

Query  No.  1. — How  long  have  you  had  an  acquaintance 
with  any  body  of  Indians  ? 

Answer  No.  1. — Being  an  Indian  on  my  mother's  side,  I 
am  well  acquainted  with  the  habits,  customs,  and  manners 
of  the  Chippeway  nation  of  Indians  to  whom  I  belong. 
The  tribe  or  clan  with  whom  I  have  been  brought  up  is 
called  Messissauga,  which  signifies  the  eagle  tribe,  their 
ensign  or  toodaim  being  that  of  the  eagle.  I  also  lived  for 
several  years  among  the  Mohawk  Indians  on  the  Grand 
River,  by  whom  I  was  adopted.  Since  my  entering 
upon  the  work  of  a  missionary,  I  have  traveUed  very 
extensively  among  all  the  Indian  tribes  in  this  country, 
and  am  therefore  well  acquainted  with  their  former 


236  FUTURE   PROSPECTS. 

and  present  state ;  but,  as  I  belong  to  the  River  Credil 
Indians,  I  intend  to  confine  my  remarks  principally 
to  them. 

Query  No.  2. — What  has  been  their  improvement  during 
that  time  in  their  moral  and  religious  character,  and  in 
habits  of  industry  ? 

Answer  No.  2. — Previous  to  the  year  1823,  at  which 
time  I  was  converted  to  Christianity,  the  Chippeway  and 
indeed  all  the  tribes  were  in  a  most  degraded  state  ;  they 
were  pagans,  idolaters,  superstitious,  drunken,  filthy,  and 
indolent ;  they  wandered  about  from  place,  living  in  wig 
wams,  and  subsisted  by  hunting  and  fishing.  Since  their 
conversion,  paganism,  idolatry,  and  superstition,  have  been 
removed,  and  the  true  God  acknowledged  and  worshipped. 
The  Christians  are  sober,  and  comparatively  clean  and 
industrious  ;  they  have  formed  themselves  into  settlements, 
where  they  have  places  of  worship  and  schools,  and  culti 
vate  the  earth. 

Query  No.  3. — Do  you  find  them  improved  in  their 
mode  of  agriculture  to  any  extent,  since  you  first  became 
acquainted  with  them  ? 

Answer  No.  3. — Many  of  them  have  made  considerable 
progress  in  farming,  but  not  to  the  extent  they  would 
have  done  if  they  had  been  settled  on  their  own  farm  lots. 
The  Credit  Indians  live  in  a  village,  and  some  of  them  have 
necessarily  to  go  a  mile  or  two  to  their  farms,  which  has 
been  a  great  hindrance  to  their  improvement.  Before 
their  conversion  very  few  of  them  raised  even  Indian  corn, 
but  now  many  of  them  grow  wheat,  oats,  peas,  Indian 
corn,  potatoes,  and  other  vegetables,  several  cut  hay  and 
have  small  orchards.  I  find  the  Indians  at  Muncey  Town 
far  behind  their  brethren  at  the  Credit  in  agricultural 
industry. 


FUTUKE   PROSPECTS.  237 

Query  No.  4. — What  progress  have  they  made  in 
Christianity  ? 

Answer  No.  4. — Considerable ;  many  of  them  can  repeat 
the  Lord's  prayer,  the  ten  commandments,  and  the  Apostle's 
creed.  They  also  understand  the  leading  articles  of  our 
holy  religion.  I  have  translated  the  Book  of  Genesis,  the 
gospels  of  Matthew  and  John,  with  other  portions  of  Scrip 
ture,  which  they  have  now  in  their  possession.  They  have 
made  some  proficiency  in  singing,  are  tolerably  well 
acquainted  with  the  rules  of  sacred  harmony,  and  have  a 
hymn-book  translated  into  their  own  language,  which  is  in 
constant  use. 

Query  No.  5. — Since  their  conversion  to  Christianity  are 
their  moral  habits  improved  ?  What  effect  has  it  had  upon 
their  social  habits  ? 

Answer  No.  5. — Christianity  has  done  much  to  improve 
their  moral,  social,  and  domestic  habits.  Previous  to  their 
conversion  the  women  were  considered  as  mere  slaves ;  the 
drudgery  and  hard  work  was  done  by  them ;  now  the  men 
treat  their  wives  as  equals,  bearing  the  heavy  burdens 
themselves,  while  the  women  attend  to  the  children  and 
household  concerns. 

Query  No.  6. — Do  they  appear  sensible  of  any  improve 
ment  in  their  condition,  and  desirous  of  advancing  ? 

Answer  No.  6. — Very  much  so,  and  feel  grateful  to  those 
who  instruct  them.  They  are  still  desirous  of  advancing 
in  knowledge,  seeing  their  white  neighbours  enjoy  many 
comforts  and  privileges  which  they  do  not  possess. 

Query  No.  7. — Are  any  of  the  Indians  still  heathens  ? 
What  efforts  have  been  made  to  convert  them  ?  And  what 
obstacles  have  prevented  their  conversion  ? 

Answer  No.  7. — There  are  no  heathens  at  the  Credit, 
AInwick,  Rice  Lake,  Mud  Lake,  Snake  Island,  Balsom 


238  FUTURE    PEOSPECTS. 

Lake,  narrows  of  Lake  Simcoe,  Cold  Water,  St.  Clair,  and 
Moravian  Town ;  but  there  are  a  number  at  Muncey  Town, 
some  at  Sahgeeng,  Big  Bay,  and  the  Grand  River.  I 
believe  all  the  Indians  at  Walpool  Island  are  pagans.* 
There  are  a  few  among  the  Oneidas  settled  on  the  Thames 
at  Muncey,  and  a  number  of  Pattawatimees  wandering 
about  in  these  western  parts  who  are  in  a  most  deplorable 
state  of  poverty  and  degradation.  Eiforts  have  been  made 
to  introduce  Christianity  to  most  of  the  pagans  by  mission 
aries  of  various  denominations,  but  principally  by  native 
teachers.  The  obstacles  to  their  conversion  arise  from 
their  strong  partiality  to  the  ways  of  their  forefathers,  and 
their  prejudices  to  the  white  man's  religion.  I  am  happy 
to  state  that  the  Wesleyan  Missionaries,  aided  by  native 
teachers,  have  never  yet  failed  to  introduce  Christianity 
among  a  body  of  Indians. 

Query  No.  8. — What,  in  your  opinion,  is  the  best  mode 
of  promoting  their  religious  improvement  ? 

Answer  No.  8. — To  combine  manual  labour  with  religious 
instruction ;  to  educate  some  of  the  Indian  youths  with  a 
view  to  their  becoming  missionaries  and  school  teachers,  as 
it  is  a  well  known  fact  that  the  good  already  effected  has 
been  principally  through  the  labours  of  native  missionaries.  | 

Query  No.  9. — Do  the  children  in  the  Indian  schools   \ 
shew  any  aptitude  in  acquiring  knowledge  ? 

Answer  No.  9. — Considering  they  are  taught  in  a  strange- 
language,  they  show  as  much  aptitude  as  white  children. 

Query  No.  10. — What,  in  your  opinion,  is  the  best  mode 
of  promoting  the  moral,  intellectual,  and  social  improve 
ment  of  the  Indians  ? 

Answer  No.  10. — The  establishment  of  well-regulated 
schools  of  industry,  and  the  congregating  of  the  several 

*  This  island  is  now  tinder  Christian  instruction. 


FUTURE   PROSPECTS.  239 

scattered  tribes  into  three  or  four  settlements,  which  would 
be  a  great  saving  of  expense  to  the  Government  and  to 
missionary  societies,  at  the  same  time  it  would  afford 
greater  facilities  for  their  instruction  in  everything  calcu 
lated  to  advance  their  general  improvement. 

Query  No.  11. — Can  you  offer  any  suggestions  on  the 
expediency  and  best  means  of  establishing  schools  of  in 
dustry  for  the  Indian  youth,  and  the  best  system  of  instruc 
tion  to  be  adopted  in  them  ? 

Answer  No.  11. — I  would  respectfully  refer  the  com 
missioners  to  my  letter  on  this  subject,  addressed  to  them, 
dated  November  21st,  1842.*  In  addition  to  what  is  there 
stated,  I  am  happy  to  add  that  most  of  the  Indian  youths 
who  have  been  educated  at  the  academies  have  become 
respectable,  and  are  now  usefully  employed  in  instructing 
their  countrymen. 

Query  No.  12. — Do  the  Indians  show  any  aptness  for 
mechanical  arts  ?  And  if  so,  to  what  arts  ? 

Answer  No.  12. — I  know  several  Indians  who  have  be 
come  pretty  good  mechanics  with  little  or  no  instruction. 
At  the  Credit  Mission  there  are  two  or  three  carpenters 
and  a  shoemaker.  At  Muncey  we  have  one  blacksmith, 
and  some  carpenters  and  tailors.  By  a  little  more  in 
struction  they  would  soon  become  good  workmen  in  any 
mechanical  art.  The  only  drawback  which  I  have  observed 
is  a  want  of  steady  application  to  their  respective  trades. 

Query  No.  13. — Is  the  health  of  the  Indians  generally 
good,  or  otherwise,  as  contrasted  with  the  white  population 
in  their  neighbourhood  ? 

Answer  No.  13. — From  observation  I  am  led  to  conclude 
that  in  general  they  are  not  as  healthy  as  the  white  popula 
tion.  I  apprehend  this  arises  from  their  former  mode  of 

*   See  Appendix  0. 


240  FUTURE   PROSPECTS. 

living,  when  they  were  frequently  exposed  to  excessive  fa 
tigue  and  fasting,  to  carrying  heavy  burdens,  drunkenness, 
and  injuries  inflicted  on  each  other  when  in  this  state.  These 
things  have  laid  the  foundation  of  many  pulmonary  com 
plaints  from  which  the  present  generation  are  suffering. 

Query  No.  14. — Do  you  find  the  Indians  on  the  increase 
or  decrease  in  numbers,  irrespectively  of  migration?  If 
the  latter,  what,  in  your  opinion,  is  the  cause  ? 

Answer  No.  14. — Previously  to  their  conversion  to  Chris 
tianity  they  were  rapidly  decreasing.  Before  the  white  man 
came  to  this  country  the  old  Indians  say  that  their  forefathers 
lived  long  and  reared  large  families,  and  that  their  diseases 
were  few  in  number.  In  my  opinion  the  principal  causes 
of  their  decrease  have  been  the  introduction  of  contagious 
diseases,  which  hurried  thousands  off  the  stage  of  action  ; 
their  excessive  fondness  for  the  fire-waters,  and  want  of 
proper  care  and  food  for  the  children  and  mothers.  I  am 
happy  however  to  state  that  this  mortality  has  been  greatly 
checked  since  they  have  abandoned  their  former  mode 
of  life. 

I  have  kept  a  register  of  the  number  of  births  and 
deaths  of  the  Credit  Indians  for  several  years  past.  After 
their  conversion  they  remained  stationary  for  some  years  ; 
but,  latterly,  there  has  been  a  small  increase  from  actual 
births.  I  have  also  observed,  in  other  tribes,  that  the  longer 
they  hav  eenjoyed  the  blessings  of  civilisation,  the  more 
healthy  they  have  become,  and  the  larger  families  they 
have  reared. 

Query  No.  15. — Is  there  in  your  opinion  any  means  of 
checking  the  excessive  mortality  among  the  Indians,  if 
such  prevails  ? 

Answer  No.  15. — In  my  opinion  the  best  means  is  to  pro 
mote  industry  and  regular  habits  amongst  them,  and  to  have 


FUTURE   PROSPECTS.  241 

a  good  medical  man  stationed  at  or  near  each  Indian  set 
tlement.  I  have  known  many  of  them  suffer  much,  and  die 
for  the  want  of  medical  aid.  It  is  also  my  opinion  that 
intermarriages  with  other  tribes  of  people  would  tend 
greatly  to  improve  their  health.  Many  of  the  small  tribes 
are  degenerating  on  account  of  their  having  continued  for 
ages  to  marry  into  the  same  body  of  Indians.  Hence  the 
necessity  of  concentrating  the  scattered  tribes. 

Query  No.  16. — Do  the  Indian  men  or  women  frequently 
intermarry  with  the  whites  ? 

Answer  No.  16. — -When  this  country  was  first  visited  by 
the  whites  it  was  a  common  practice  for  white  men  to  take 
Indian  wives,  but  at  present  it  seldom  occurs.  As  far  as 
my  knowledge  extends,  there  are  only  three  or  four  white 
men  married  to  Indian  women,  and  about  the  same  number 
of  Indian  men  married  to  white  women. 

Query  No.  17. — Is  there  any  marked  difference  in  the 
habits  and  general  conduct  between  the  half-breeds  and 
the  native  Indians  ?  If  so,  state  it. 

Answer  No.  17. — I  think  there  is.  The  half-breeds  are  in 
general  more  inclined  to  social  and  domestic  habits.  I 
have  always  found  them  more  ready  to  embrace  Christianity 
and  civilization  than  the  pure  Indian,  who,  in  his  untutored 
state,  looks  upon  manual  labour  as  far  too  degrading  to 
engage  his  attention. 

Quei"y  No.  18. — In  cases  where  intermarriages  with  the 
whites  have  taken  place,  do  you  find  the  condition  of  the 
children  of  the  marriage  improved  ? 

Answer  No.  18. — I  think  they  are,  especially  as  regards 
their  health  and  constitution. 

Query  No.  19. — Do  the  Indian  women  frequently  live 
with  white  men,  without  being  married  ? 

R 


242  FUTURE   PROSPECTS. 

Answer  No.  19. — I  know  of  no  instances  in  all  the  tribes 
with  which  I  am  acquainted. 

Query  No.  20. — Does  the  birth  of  illegitimate  children 
among  the  unmarried  women  occur  frequently?  And  in 
what  light  is  the  circumstance  viewed  by  the  Indians  ? 

Answer  No.  20. — Such  occurrences  are  not  so  frequent  as 
when  the  Indians  were  in  their  drunken  state ;  and  when 
they  do  occur  it  is  regarded  as  a  great  sin,  and  the 
mother  loses  her  reputation  as  a  virtuous  woman. 

Query  No.  21. — Do  any  of  the  Indians  enjoy  all,  or  any, 
of  the  civil  and  political  rights  possessed  by  other  subjects 
of  Her  Majesty  ? 

Answer  No.  21. — Not  any  to  my  knowledge ;  except  the 
protection  of  law  which  I  believe  every  alien  enjoys  who 
may  visit  or  reside  in  any  part  of  her  Majesty's  dominions. 
I  am  fully  persuaded  that,  in  order  to  improve  the  condition 
of  the  Indians,  all  the  civil  and  political  rights  of  British 
subjects  ought  to  be  extended  to  them  so  soon  as  they  are 
capable  of  understanding  and  exercising  such  rights. 

Query  No.  22. — Are  there  any  instances  of  Indians  pos 
sessing  such  rights,  besides  those  of  the  children  of  edu 
cated  white  men  married  to  Indian  women  ? 

Answer  No.  22. — I  know  of  none. 

Query  No.  23. — In  your  opinion  have  the  Indians  the 
knowledge  and  ability  to  exercise  any  of  those  rights  ? 

Answer  No.  23. — In  my  opinion,  some  of  the  Credit 
Indians,  and  a  few  at  other  settlements,  are  so  far  advanced 
in  knowledge  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  some  of  those  rights, 
such  as  voting  for  Members  of  Parliament,  township 
officers,  &c.,  and  to  sit  as  jurors. 

Query  No.  24. —  Can  you  offer  any  suggestions  for  the 
improvement  of  the  condition  of  the  Indians? — For  the 


FUTURE   PROSPECTS.  243 


.application  of  their  presents,  the  expenditure  of  their  an- 
imities,  and  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  of  their  lands? 

Answer  No.  24*. — I  would  most  respectfully  suggest — 

1st. — The  importance  of  establishing  schools  of  industry 
as  soon  as  possible,  that  there  may  be  no  further  delay  in 
bringing  forward  the  present  rising  generation. 

2nd. — In  order  to  promote  industry  among  the  Indians, 
agricultural  societies  ought  to  be  formed  at  each  settlement, 
and  rewards  offered  to  such  as  might  excel  in  any  branch 
of  farming.  This  would  excite  a  spirit  of  emulation,  and 
be  productive  of  good  results. 

3rd. — In  forming  an  Indian  settlement,  I  consider  that 
each  family  ought  to  be  located  on  his  own  farm  lot,  con 
taining  50  or  100  acres  of  land,  with  the  boundaries  of 
each  lot  marked  out  and  established. 

4th. — I  am  of  opinion  that  it  would  have  a  beneficial 
tendency  were  titles  given  to  the  Indians  by  the  Govern 
ment,  securing  their  reserved  lands  to  them  and  their 
posterity  for  ever.  In  offering  these  suggestions  I  do  not 
mean  to  say  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  confer  titles  indi 
vidually  on  the  Indians,  but  on  the  whole  tribe.  At  present 
they  hold  no  written  documents  from  Government,  and 
they  frequently  express  fears  that  they  will,  at  some  future 
period,  lose  their  lands.  This  fear  acts  as  a  check  upon 
their  industry  and  enterprise.  In  suggesting  the  impro 
priety  of  giving  individual  titles,  I  consider  at  the  same 
time  it  would  be  well  to  hold  out  the  promise  to  the  sober 
and  industrious,  that  when  they  shall  have  attained  to  a 
good  knowledge  of  the  value  of  property,  and  have  esta 
blished  a  good  character,  they  shall  have  titles  given  them. 

5th. — The  power  of  the  chiefs  is  very  different  from  what 
it  was  in  former  times,  when  their  advice  was  listened  to, 
and  their  commands  implicitly  obeyed.  Immoral  acts  were 

R  2 


244  FUTURE   PROSPECTS. 

then  punished,  and  the  offenders  submitted  without  a 
murmur.  But  I  am  sorry  to  say,  at  present,  many  of  the 
young  people  ridicule  the  attempts  of  the  chiefs  to  suppress 
vice.  I  would  humbly  suggest  that  the  Legislature,  in  its- 
wisdom,  take  this  subject  into  consideration,  and  pass  an 
Act  incorporating  the  chiefs  to  act  as  councillors,  and  the 
Superintendents  of  the  Indian  department  as  wardens. 
Bye-laws  could  be  passed  for  the  regulation  and  improve 
ment  of  the  several  communities  of  Indians,  such  as  the 
enactment  of  a  moral  code  of  laws,  performance  of  statute 
labour,  the  regulation  offences,  &c.,  &c. 

6th. — I  think  it  very  desirable  that  something  should  be 
done  for  the  Pottawatimees  who  wander  about  in  these 
parts.  They  are  in  a  state  of  great  poverty  and  degra 
dation,  and  an  annoyance  to  the  white  inhabitants  wher 
ever  they  go.  They  have  no  lands  in  this  province,  having 
recently  come  over  from  the  United  States.  I  would, 
therefore,  suggest  the  propriety  of  locating  them,  and  thus 
bring  them  under  the  influence  of  civilization  and  Chris 
tianity. 

7th. — Feeling  a  deep  interest  for  the  welfare  of  the- 
Muncey  Indians  residing  at  Muncey  Town,  I  beg  to  call ! 
the  attention  of  the  Commissioners  to  their  state.     They 
are  an  interesting  people,  strongly  attached  to  the  British  i 
Government ;  and  during  the  last  American  war  rendered ! 
essential  service  in  the  defence  of  this  province.     If  the 
Government  could  do  something  in  the  way  of  assisting 
them  in  their  farming,  it  would  afford  great  satisfaction, 
and  be  the  means  of  facilitating  their  civilization.     They 
receive  no  annuity  from  Government,  and  consequently 
have  no  means  at  their  command  to  help  forward  their 
improvements. 

8th. — With  regard  to  their  presents,  I  would  respectfully 


FUTURE   PROSPECTS.  245 

suggest  the  propriety  of  issuing  them  at  their  respective 
settlements.  This  would  prevent  some  of  the  tribes  being 
obliged  to  leave  home,  very  often  to  the  great  damage  of 
their  crops,  in  order  to  travel  to  a  distant  post  to  receive 
the  Queen's  bounty. 

9th. — It  is  my  opinion  that  the  annuities  payable  to  the 
Indians  for  lands  ceded  to  the  Crown  ought  to  be  applied 
in  promoting  agriculture  and  education  among  them. 

10th. — The  proceeds  of  the  sales  of  their  lands  ought  to 
be  invested  in  good  securities,  and  the  interest  paid  an 
nually,  and  applied  to  such  purposes  as  may  improve  their 
condition. 

llth. — I  would  suggest  the  propriety  of  rendering  an 
nually  detailed  accounts  of  the  receipts  and  expenditures  of 
the  annuities,  and  the  proceeds  of  the  sales  of  their  lands, 
and  that  the  same  be  laid  before  the  Indians  in  council  for 
their  satisfaction  and  information. 

All  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

(Signed)  PETER  JONES, 

Missionary  and  Indian  Chief. 
Muncey  Mission  House, 
Feb.  GtJi,  1843. 


APPENDIX, 


(A.) 

ARRIVAL   OF  THE  BLOOD-HOUNDS   IN  FLORIDA. 

(From  the  New  York  New  World,  1840.) 

WE  learn  from  the  Madisonian,  that  an  officer  of  the  army,  just 
arrived  in  Washington  from  St.  Augustine,  reports  that  a  vessel 
with  thirty-three  blood-hounds,  from  Cuba,  had  entered  one  of  the 
ports  of  the  peninsula  before  he  left.  The  purposes  for  which  they 
are  imported  have  not  been  disguised.  They  are  to  be  employed  in 
hunting  down  the  miserable  remnant  of  the  Seminoles  in  Florida. 

We  have  never  read  anything  more  strikingly  illustrative  of  the 
inhumanity  and  injustice  of  this  war  than  these  remarks  of  Mr. 
Poinsett.  It  is  then,  for  a  country  benign  to  the  Indians,  but  deadly 
to  the  whites,  that  we  are  contending  !  Of  what  advantage  can  it 
be  when  we  obtain  it  ? 

"  In  what  an  inhuman  attitude,"  says  the  Madisonian,  "  does  this 
development  show  this  government  before  the  civilized  world !  A 
great,  powerful,  and  magnanimous  nation  of  fifteen  millions  of 
freemen,  hunting  down  with  blood-hounds  a  wretched  squad  of 
Indians,  dwelling  in  a  country  which  no  white  man  can  inhabit 
after  it  is  conquered  !  A  war  which  will  complete  the  solitude  of 
a  desert,  by  destroying  the  remnant  of  life  that  remains  in  it !" 

When  Spain  armed  herself  with  blood-hounds  to  extirpate  the 
wretched  aborigines  of  Cuba,  a  general  cry  of  execration  and  horror 
rose  from  civilized  Europe  at  the  unparalleled  spectacle !  When 
Great  Britain  turned  the  hostility  of  the  savages  within  our  borders 
against  our  forefathers,  the  measure  was  denounced  by  Lord 
Chatham  as  a  stain  upon  her  national  honour.  With  what  degree 
of  condemnation  will  the  good  and  wise  of  every  country  and  age 
regard  the  attempt  of  our  Government  to  extirpate,  by  means  so 
terrible,  from  a  region  to  which  their  habits  and  constitutions  are 


248  APPENDIX. 

peculiarly  and  exclusively  adapted,  the  poor  remains  of  a  once  great 
and  powerful  tribe,  who,  in  the  unintentionally  pathetic  language  of 
the  Secretary  of  War,  are  "  hemmed  in  by  the  sea,  and  must  defend 
themselves  to  the  uttermost." 

(From  the  Albany  Argus.} 

We  have  been  unable  to  persuade  ourselves  that  the  Government 
had  become  so  utterly  insane  and  degraded  as  to  think  of  prose 
cuting  its  wanton  and  inglorious  war  in  Florida  with  BLOOD 
HOUNDS  !  But  we  are  startled  by  a  report  that  a  "  detachment " 
of  these  brute  "  allies  "  have  actually  arrived  !  Still  we  doubt.  For 
the  honour  of  the  Eepublic — for  the  honour  of  civilization — for  the 
honour  of  human  nature,  we  hope  that  our  cup  of  national  infamy 
may  not  be  filled  to  overflowing.  Enough  of  dishonour  already 
attaches  to  this  sanguinary  war.  The  integrity  of  a  flag  of  truce 
has  been  for  the  first  time  violated.  We  commenced  the  war  without 
cause,  other  than  the  desire  to  rob  the  Indians  of  their  lands.  Defeat 
and  disgrace,  under  the  just  auspices  of  the  God  of  battles,  has  so 
far  attended  our  efforts.  One  commanding  General  informed  the 
Government  that  the  swamps  for  which  we  were  fighting  are  not 
worth  the  medicine  used  to  save  a  remnant  of  the  army  from 
untimely -graves.  And  yet  the  same  besotted  councils  which  set 
the  war  on  foot,  persist  in  proceeding,  with  no  purpose,  it  would 
seem,  but  to  allow  an  army  of  speculators  to  "  pick  and  steal,"  and 
to  sink  the  nation  deeper  in  its  ignominy. 

Is  Mr.  Van  Buren,  after  bringing  ruin,  bankruptcy,  and  distress 
upon  the  people,  about  to  sign  and  seal  a  covenant  of  eternal  infamy 
by  a  mode  of  warfare  which  is  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  civilization, 
and  which  is  abhorrent  to  every  sentiment  and  feeling  of  justice  and 
humanity  1 

(From  the  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser} 
We  are  not  quite  old  enough  to  remember  the  time  when  the 
biped  blood-hounds  of  France  sent  their  blood-hounds  into  the 
human  hunting-grounds  of  St.  Domingo.  But  we  do  remember 
the  shuddering  which  conversation  upon  the  subject  created  when 
we  were  young.  Little  did  we  then  expect  to  see  the  day  that  we 
should  be  called  upon  to  chronicle  like  transactions  of  barbarity 
against  an  administration  of  the  government  founded  by  the  spotless 
Washington. 


APPENDIX.  249 

(B.  AND   C.) 

PARALLEL   BETWEEN   THE   TEN     LOST     TRIBES     OF     ISRAEL     AND     THE 
AMERICAN   INDIANS. 

AN  interesting  inquiry  has  for  a  considerable  time  past  engaged 
the  attention  of  the  curious,  both  in  Europe  and  of  America,  con 
cerning  the  present  existence  and  local  situation  of  the  remains  of 
the  lost  ten  tribes  of  Israel.  A  German  publication  assigns  to  a 
large  portion  of  them  the  great  plains  of  Bucharia,  in  Central 
Asia  ;  others  have  contended  that  the  American  Indians  are  the 
true  descendants  of  that  stock.  In  favour  of  the  latterargument  a 
work*  has  recently  been  published,  from  which  we  extract  the  fol 
lowing  analogy  between  those  tribes  and  the  ancient  Israelites.  The 
parallel  is  striking,  and  well  worthy  attention.  "  They  [the 
Indians]  are  living  in  tribes,  with  heads  of  tribes  ;  they  have  all  a 
family  likeness,  though  covering  thousands  of  leagues  of  land, 
and  have  a  tradition  prevailing  universally  that  they  connect  that 
country  at  the  North-west  corner.  They  are  a  very  religious 
people,  and  yet  have  entirely  escaped  the  idolatry  of  the  old  world. 
They  acknowledge  one  God,  the  Great  Spirit,  who  created  all  things, 
seen  and  unseen.  The  name  by  which  this  being  is  known  to  them 
is  Ale,  the  old  Hebrew  name  of  God ;  he  is  also  called  Yehowah, 
sometimes  Yah,  and  also  Abba ;  for  this  great  being  they  possess 
a  high  reverence,  calling  him  the  head  of  their  community,  and 
themselves  his  favourite  people.  They  believe  that  he  was  more 
favourable  to  them  in  old  times  than  he  is  now  ;  that  their  fathers 
were  in  covenant  with  him,  that  he  talked  with  them,  and  favoured 
them.  They  are  distinctly  heard  to  sing,  with  their  religious  dances, 
Hallelujah,  and  praise  to  Yah  ;  other  remarkable  sounds  go  out  of 
their  mouths,  as  shilu  yo,  shilu  lie,  ale-yo,  he-v;ah,  yohewah,  but  they 
profess  not  to  know  the  meaning  of  these  words,  only  that  they 
learned  to  use  them  upon  sacred  occasions.  They  acknowledge  the 
government  of  a  Providence  overruling  all  things,  and  express  a 
willing  submission  to  whatever  takes  place.  They  keep  annual 
feasts,  which  resemble  those  of  the  Mosaic  ritual ;  a  feast  of  first- 
fruits,  which  they  do  not  permit  themselves  to  taste  until  they  have 
made  an  offering  of  them  to  God  ;  also  an  evening  festival,  in  which 

*  "A  View  of  the  American  Indians,"  by  Samuel  Worsley. 


250  APPENDIX. 

no  bone  of  the  animal  that  is  eaten  may  be  broken  ;  and  if  one 
family  be  not  large  enough  to  consume  the  whole  of  it,  a  neighbouring 
family  is  called  in  to  assist  :  the  whole  of  it  is  consumed,  and  th< 
relics  of  it  are  burned  before  the  rising  of  the  next  day's  sun.  There 
is  one  part  of  the  animal  which  they  never  eat,  the  hollow  of  the 
thigh.  They  eat  bitter  vegetables,  and  observe  severe  fasts,  for 
the  purpose  of  cleansing  themselves  from  sin';  they  also  have  a  fe 
of  harvest,  when  their  fruits  are  gathering  in  ;  a  dai]y  sacrifice, 
and  a  feast  of  love.  Their  forefathers  practised  the  rites  of  circum 
cision  ;*  but  not  knowing  why  so  strange  a  practice  was  continued, 
and  not  approving  it,  they  gave  it  up.  There  is  a  sort  of  jubilc 
kept  by  some  of  them.  They  have  cities  of  refuge,  to  which  a  guilty 
man,  and  even  a  murderer,  may  fly  and  be  safe." 


(D.) 

IN  reading  over  a  paper  read  before  the  Ethnological  Society, 
London,  by  James  Kennedy,  Esq.,  LL.B.,  I  find  his  opinions  on 
this  subject  accord  with  my  own.  He  says — "With  regard  to 
North  America,  there  seem  to  have  been  two  great  divisions  of 
people  among  the  Indians  inhabiting  the  eastern  and  western  coun 
tries  of  that  continent.  They  both  bore  the  general  colour  and 
appearance  of  the  Mongol  or  Asiatic  race  ;  but  those  on  the  west 
alone  had  the  obliquity  of  eye  peculiar  to  the  Mongolians ;  that 
peculiarity  extending  down  to  Mexico,  Central  America,  and  still 
further  south,  evidencing  their  origin  from  the  Mongols  of  the 
north-west  of  Asia.  In  the  eastern  countries  of  North  America, 
this  strongly-marked  peculiarity  was  not  found,  as  Dr.  Morton  has 
also  stated  in  his  great  work,  *  Crania  Americana ;'  while  the 
Indians  there  were  distinguishable  by  manners  equally  indica 
tive  of  their  distinct  origin;"  .  .  .  "while  we  find  the  nations 
of  the  east  and  west  sides  of  North  America  equally  savage  and 
bloodthirsty,  yet  those  on  the  east  had  some  particular  customs  or 
practices  unknown  to  those  of  the  west ;  or,  if  not  unknown,  yet 

*  Years  after  the  foregoing  was  written,  the  author  was  informed  that  it 
is  a  well-attested  fact  that  in.  their  drunken  brawls  the  Munceys  frequently 
reproach  the  Iroquois  in  an  epithet  of  derision  identical  with  that  of  circum 
cision,  for  having  practised  it  in  olden  times. 


APPENDIX.  251 

not  in  general  use  among  them  ;  such  as  the  wampum,  the  calumet 
and  pipe  of  peace,  the  shaving  of  the  head,  the  practice  of  scalping, 
the  rite  of  circumcision,  and  the  building  of  mounds.  All  these 
customs  or  practices  are  clearly  traceable  throughout  what  we  may 
call  Scythia  or  Tartary,  especially  that  of  building  mounds,  which? 
common  as  they  are  in  the  eastern  half  of  North  America,  are  still 
more  common  throughout  Siberia  and  all  Tartary ;  from  which 
quarter,  therefore,  we  may  conclude  that  the  progenitors  of  that 
family  of  American  Indians  originally  came."  ...  "  Such  analo 
gies  and  considerations,  primd  facie,  give  us  considerable  reason  to 
expect  that  we  ought  to  look  for  the  origin  of  the  various  American 
nations  in  the  countries  to  which  they  refer  ;  and  thus,  according 
to  the  theory  I  maintain,  the  ethnologist  ought  to  look  to  Tartary  ; 
to  compare  the  languages  of  the  people  on  the  eastern  shores  of 
North  America  ;  while  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  various  tribes  on 
the  western  coasts,  down  to  Central  America,  he  ought  to  compare 
their  languages  with  those  of  the  nations  who  inhabit  the  eastern 
parts  of  Asia.  Were  this  course  to  be  sedulously  followed,  I  feel 
persuaded  that  very  extraordinary  analogies  might  be  discovered, 
and  the  question  of  origin  and  unity  of  race  even  might  be  settled.'' 


(E.) 

HOW  AN   INDIAN   CAN   DIE. 

(From  the  St.  Paul  Democrat.} 

A  TOUCHING  instance  of  this  characteristic  trait,  occurred  at  the 
late  engagement  between  a  small  war  party  of  the  Chippewas  and 
a  greatly  superior  party  of  Sioux,  near  Cedar  Island  Lake.  The 
Chippewas,  who  were  en  route  for  a  scalping  foray  upon  the  Sioux 
villages  on  the  Minnesota,  here  fell  into  an  ambuscade,  and  the 
first  notice  of  danger  which  saluted  their  ears  was  a  discharge  of 
fire-arms  from  a  thicket.  Four  of  their  number  fell  dead  in  their 
tracks.  Another  named  the  War  Cloud,  a  leading  brave,  had  a 
leg  broken  by  a  bullet.  His  comrades  were  loth  to  leave  him,  and, 
whilst  their  assailants  were  re-loading  their  guns,  attempted  to  carry 
him  along  with  them  to  where  they  could  gain  the  shelter  of  a 
thicket  a  short  distance  to  the  rear.  But  he  commanded  them  to 


252  APPENDIX. 

leave  him,  telling  them  that  he  would  show  his  enemies  how  a 
Chippewa  could  die. 

At  his  request  they  seated  him  on  a  log,  with  his  back  leaning 
against  a  tree.  He  then  commenced  painting  his  face  and  singing, 
his  death-song.  As  his  enemies  approached  he  only  sang  a  louder 
and  a  livelier  strain  ;  and  when  several  had  gathered  around  him, 
flourishing  their  scalping-knives,  and  screeching  forth  their  demoniac 
yells  of  exultation,  not  a  look  or  gesture  manifested  that  he  was 
even  aware  of  their  presence.  At  length  they  seized  him  and  tore 
his  scalp  from  his  head.  Still  seated  with  his  back  against  a  large 
tree,  they  commenced  shooting  their  arrows  into  the  trunk  around 
his  head,  grazing  his  ears,  neck,  &c.,  until  they  Utterly  pinned  him 
fast,  without  having  once  touched  a  vital  part.  Yet  our  hero 
remained  the  same  imperturbable  Stoic,  continuing  to  chant  his 
defiant  strain,  and  although  one  of  the  number  flourished  his 
reeking  scalp  before  his  eyes,  still  not  a  single  expression  of  his 
countenance  could  be  observed  to  change.  At  last  one  of  the 
number  approached  him  with  a  tomahawk,  which,  after  a  few 
unheeded  flourishes,  he  buried  in  the  captive's  skull,  who  sank  in 
death,  with  the  song  still  upon  his  lips.  He  had,  indeed,  succeeded 
well  in  teaching  his  enemies  "  how  a  Chippewa  could  die."  A  few 
days  afterwards  they  were  taught  how  a  Chippewa  could  be  avenged. 


(F.) 

ALEXANDER  HENRY  relates  the  death  and  burial  of  a  child  who 
had  been  scalded.  He  says  : — "  I  did  not  fail  to  attend  the  funeral. 
The  grave  was  made  of  a  large  size,  and  the  whole  of  the  inside 
lined  with  birch  bark.  On  the  bank  was  laid  the  body  of  the 
child,  accompanied  with  an  axe,  a  pair  of  snow-shoes,  a  small  kettle, 
several  pairs  of  mocassins,  its  own  strings  of  beads ;  and  because  it 
was  a  girl,  a  carrying  belt  and  a  paddle.  The  kettle  was  filled 
with  meal.  The  last  act  of  the  mother  (crying  over  the  child)  was 
that  of  taking  from  it  a  lock  of  hair  for  a  memorial,  that  by  this 
she  should  discover  her  daughter  in  the  land  of  spirits,  as  she 
should  take  it  with  her.  In  this  she  alluded  to  the  day  when  some 
pious  hand  would  place  in  her  own  grave,  along  with  the  carrying 


APPENDIX. 

belt  and  paddle,  this  little  relic,  hallowed  by  maternal  tears." — 
(Page  150.) 

J.  CARVER'S  TESTIMONY  : — "Whilst  I  remained  among  thelndians, 
a  couple  whose  tent  was  adjacent  to  mine  lost  a  son  of  about  four 
years  of  age.     The  parents  were  so  much  affected  at  the  death  of 
their  favourite  child,  and  they  pursued  the  usual  testimonies  of  grief 
with  such  uncommon  rigour,  as  through  the  weight  of  sorrow  and 
loss  of  blood  to  occasion  the  death  of  the  father.     The  woman,  who 
had  hitherto  been  inconsolable,  no  sooner  saw  her  husband  expire, 
than  she  dried  up  her  tears,  and  appeared  cheerful  and  resigned. 
As  I  knew  not  how  to  account  for  so  extraordinary  a  transition. 
I  took  an  opportunity  to  ask  her  the  reason,  telling  her  that  I 
should  have  imagined  that  the  loss  of  her  husband  would  rather 
have  occasioned  an  increase  of  grief  than  such  a  sudden  diminution. 
She  informed  me  that,  as  the  child  was  so  young  when  it  died,  and 
unable  to  support  itself  in  the  country  of  spirits,  both  she  and  her 
husband  had  been  apprehensive  that  its  situation  would  be  far  from 
happy  ;  but  no  sooner  did  she  behold  its  father  depart  for  the  same 
place,  who  not  only  loved  the  child  with  the  tenderest  affection, 
but  was  a  good  hunter,  and  would  be  able  to  provide  plentifully  for 
its  support,  than  she  ceased  to  mourn.     She  added,  that  she  now 
saw  no  reason  to  continue  her  tears,  as  the  child,  on  whom  she 
doted,  was  happy  under  the  care  of  a  fond  father,  and  she  had  only 
one  wish  which  remained  ungratified,  which  was,  to  be  herself  with 
them.    Expressions  so  replete  with  unaffected  tenderness,  and  senti 
ments  that  would  have  done  honour  to  a  Roman  matron,  made  an 
impression  on  my  mind  greatly  in  favour  of  the  people  to  whom 
she  belonged,  and  tended  not  a  little  to  counteract  the  prejudices 
I  had  entertained,  in  common  with  other  travellers,   of  Indian 
insensibility,   and    want  of  parental  affection.     Her  subsequent 
conduct  confirmed  the  opinion  I  had  just  imbibed,  and  convinced 
me  that,  notwithstanding  this  apparent  suspension  of  her  grief,  some 
particles  of  that  reluctance  to  be  separated  from  a  beloved  relation, 
which  is  implanted  either  by  nature  or  custom  in  every  human 
heart,  still  lurked  in  hers.     I  observed  that  she  went  almost  every 
evening  to  the  foot  of  the  tree,  on  a  branch  of  which  the  bodies  of 
her  husband  and  child  were  laid  ;  and,  after  cutting  off  a  lock  of  her 
hair,  and  throwing  it  on  the  ground,  in  a  plaintive  song  bemoaned 
its  fate." 


254  APPENDIX. 

(G.) 

"  OLD   JACK'S   PINE-TREE  GOD." 

ON  the  west  side  of  the  Grand  Kiver,  in  the  township  of  Waterloo, 
formerly  stood  a  lofty  pine-tree,  with  a  large  spreading  closely  matted 
top,  which  had  a  most  imposing  appearance  from  the  distant  hills, 
as  this  tree  was  taller  than  any  others  within  view.  On  the  top  of 
this  tree  the  eagles  for  many  generations  were  wont  to  build  their 
nests  and  rear  their  young,  so  that  other  lofty  trees,  towering  rocks, 
and  declivities,  might  become  inhabited  by  the  representatives  of 
the  "thunder-god."  Old  Jack,  the  Indian,  whose  hunting-grounds 
lay  within  the  shadow  of  this  remarkable  tree,  thought  that  he  must 
have  a  god  to  worship,  and  therefore  dreamed  or  fancied  that  this 
tree  was  to  be  his  munedoo,  or  god,  who  would  grant  him  and  his 
family  long  life  and  success  in  hunting.  He  and  they  made  periodi 
cal  visits  to  it,  bringing  with  them  the  best  of  the  game  they  had 
taken,  and  offering  the  same  at  the  foot  of  the  tree.  The  offering 
was  made  in  the  usual  manner,  namely,  by  boiling  the  game,  and 
burning  part  of  it  as  a  burnt  offering,  and  the  remainder  being  eaten 
by  the  invited  guests,  or  by  portions  of  the  family.  But  old  Jack 
would  not  taste  a  mouthful  of  it  himself,  as  he  intended  that  it 
should  be  a  whole  sacrifice.  If  the  heathen  are  led  to  see  the  ne 
cessity  of  a  whole  consecration  of  the  animal  or  thing  offered,  in 
order  that  it  may  be  an  acceptable  sacrifice,  how  much  more  impor 
tant  is  it,  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  that  we  present  our 
selves  living  sacrifices  to  God  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
having  given  himself  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  has  opened 
the  way  to  the  mercy-seat,  that  all  mankind  may  come  to  God  and 
obtain  salvation.  When  passing  through  that  part  of  the  country, 
I  have  repeatedly  gazed  upon  and  admired  old  Jack's  tree.  I  have 
recently  heard  that  the  white  man  has  been  so  daring  and  profane, 
as  to  fell  to  the  ground  the  poor  Indian's  god,  which  no  doubt  was 
drawn  to  the  saw-mill,  and  then  made  into  lumber  to  build  the 
white  man's  wigwam.  How  would  the  descendants  of  Jack,  with 
the  eagles  that  nestled  on  the  branches  of  this  tree,  wail  and  lament 
to  see  that  their  father's  god  has  fallen  to  rise  no  more  !  This  is 
but  too  emblematical  of  the  fate  of  the  red  man  of  the  forest.  The 


APPENDIX.  255 

•white  man  comes,  and  as  he  advances  the  trees  vanish  before  him  ; 
thus  the  poor  Indian  disappears,  as  if  crushed  by  the  falling  of  the 
immense  forests. 

During  the  summer  of  1837,  whilst  on  a  missionary  tour  to  the 
Manitoulin  Islands,  we  passed  on  the  north-east  shore  of  Lake 
Huron,  an  island  on  which  was  a  large  and  curious  rock,  presenting 
the  appearance  of  a  turtle  with  its  head  pointing  towards  the  west, 
as  if  overlooking  the  waters  in  that  direction.  We  landed,  in  order 
to  examine  the  stone  turtle,  as  we  had  been  informed  that  the  heathen 
Indians  frequently  offered  their  devotions  and  sacrifices  to  it.  On 
approaching,  we  found  several  pieces  of  tobacco  lying  beneath  the 
head,  which  had  been  left  by  the  poor  superstitious  Indians,  in  order 
that  they  might  meet  with  no  disasters  whilst  journeying  in  the 
direction  they  supposed  this  blind  inanimate  god  to  overlook. 

The  caverns,  or  hollow  rocks,  in  the  mountains  which  surround 
Burlington  Bay,  were  once  noted  as  being  the  abodes  of  gods,  and 
especially  when  explosions  were  said  to  take  place.  Before  the  country 
was  settled  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mountain  which  extends  round 
the  head  waters  of  Lake  Ontario,  explosions  were  frequently  heard, 
which  the  superstitious  Indians  attributed  to  the  breathing  or  blow 
ing  of  the  munedoo,  but  which  no  doubt  were  caused  by  the  bursting 
of  sulphurous  gas  from  the  rocks.  The  poor  Indians  now  say  that 
the  munedoos  have  such  an  abhorrence  to  the  white  people  coming 
near  their  abodes,  that,  like  the  red  men  of  the  forest,  they  leave 
their  once  consecrated  retreats  unprofaned  by  the  presence  of  the 
pale  faces,  and  retire  back  into  the  interior.  Near  the  Credit  village, 
at  the  foot  of  a  pointed  hill,  is  a  deep  hole  in  the  water,  which  is  said 
to  be  the  abode  of  one  of  the  water-gods,  where  he  was  frequently 
heard  to  sing  and  beat  his  drum.  When  the  white  people  began  to 
frequent  this  place  for  the  purpose  of  taking  the  salmon,  this 
munedoo  took  his  departure  during  a  tremendous  flood  caused  by 
his  power,  and  went  down  the  river  into  Lake  Ontario. 


256  APPENDIX. 

(H.) 

INDIAN  TRAGEDY. 

A  MICHIGAN  correspondent  of  the  Rochester  Democrat  details  the 
following  tragedy  in  savage  life.  If  an  Indian  could  write  the  story 
he  would  head  it— "The  Scathe  of  Fire-Water  :"— 

"In  the  spring  of  1837,  Nogisqua,  an  Indian  of  the  Pottawatimees 
tribe,  residing  in  this  vicinity,  having  pawned  his  gun  and  part  of 

his  clothing  from  time  to  time  to  a  man  named  John  N ,  for 

intoxicating  drink,  the  trader  proposed  to  the  Indian  that  if  he 
would  sell  him  a  certain  cream-coloured  pony  belonging  to  his  squaw, 
and  a  present  from  her  father,  Bawbish,  a  chief  of  their  tribe,  he  would 
give  up  his  gun  and  clothing,  and  let  him  have  more  strong  drink 
from  time  to  time  until  the  price  agreed  upon  was  paid.  To  this 
Nogisqua  agreed,  and  privately  gave  up  the  pony,  which  was  sent 
off  farther  west. 

"  It  appeared  that  his  squaw,  having  some  suspicion  of  what  was 
going  on,  employed  her  younger  brother  to  watch  the  result  and 
inform  her;  which  it  appears  he  did.  Upon  the  return  of  the 
Indian  to  his  camp,  partly  intoxicated,  his  squaw,  highly  enraged, 
accused  him  of  selling  her  pony.  She  became  more  and  more 
enraged  at  his  indifference  about  the  affair,  and  at  length  declared 
she  would  kill  him.  He  handed  her  his  scalping-knife,  and  drawing 
aside  his  hunting  shirt  and  making  his  bosom  bare,  coolly  exclaimed, 
1  Kina  pool"1 — (kill  away.)  She  instantly  plunged  it  to  its  handle 
in  the  Indian's  breast,  which  caused  his  death  in  a  few  minutes. 

"  Her  father,  the  Indian  chief,  being  then  absent  some  twenty  or 
thirty  miles  east,  a  runner  was  despatched  to  inform  him.  Soon 
after,  Mr.  Fowle  says  he  saw  him  pass  by  his  house  with  a  sad 
countenance  for  the  place  of  the  murder. 

"  A  heart-rending  duty  now  devolved  upon  the  old  chief.  His 
word  was  to  acquit  or  condemn  his  agonized  daughter,  according  to 
Indian  usage  from  time  immemorial.  Horror  reigned  in  the  breast 
of  her  father.  His  daughter  was  the  handsomest  squaw  of  her  tribe, 
and  a  darling  child ;  and  the  wails  of  his  relatives,  together  with  his 
own  sympathies,  rolled  upon  the  mind  of  the  chief  like  the  rushings 
of  the  mighty  deep  upon  the  lonely  rock  in  the  sweeping  storm. 
The  crisis  in  the  chief's  mind  was  at  hand.  He  must  judge.  No 


APPENDIX.  257 

other  tribunal  was  in  the  Indian  code  of  criminal  justice.  The  per 
formance  of  this  duty  required  more  than  Koinan  firmness.  He 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  goddess  of  Mercy.  The  Great  Spirit, 
and  the  blood  of  his  murdered  son-in-law,  seemed  to  say,  '  Bawbish, 
according  to  the  customs  of  your  forefathers  for  ages  past,  now  decide 
justly!' 

"  The  chief,  like  agonized  Joseph,  when  he  made  himself  known 
to  his  brethren,  could  contain  himself  no  longer.  His  integrity 
as  Indian  chief  prevailed.  He  rolled  his  troubled  eye  for  the  last 
time  upon  his  darling  daughter,  then  upon  his  kindred,  and  upon  a 
portion  of  his  tribe  that  stood  before  him,  and  then  to  the  Great 
Spirit  for  firmness.  The  storm  of  agony  in  the  mind  of  the  chief 
had  passed  away,  and,  in  deep  sorrow,  he  decided  that  his  daughter 
ought  to  die  by  the  hand  of  the  nearest  of  kin  to  the  murdered 
Indian,  according  to  their  custom  for  ages  past.  The  person  of  the 
father,  chief  and  judge,  then  withdrew,  with  nothing  but  his  in 
tegrity  to  console  him,  which  the  whole  world  beside  could  neither 
purchase  nor  bribe. 

"  Upon  enquiry,  it  was  decided  that  Jonese,  a  brother  of  Nogisqua, 
then  south,  near  Fort  Wayne,  should  execute  the  sentence.  Accord 
ingly,  a  runner  was  sent  for  him,  and  he  came  without  delay.  After 
hearing  what  was  deemed  his  duty,  the  cry  of  a  brother's  blood  from 
the  ground  on  which  he  stood  strung  every  nerve,  and  gave  tone  to 
every  muscle  for  revenge. 

"  There  were  white  persons  present  at  the  execution,  who  relate 
it  as  follows  : — The  brother  proceeded  to  the  fatal  Indian  camp,  and 
after  sharpening  his  scalping-knife  to  his  liking,  and  performing 
several  ceremonies  customary  with  their  tribe  since  their  acquaint 
ance  with  the  Catholic  missionaries,  he  took  the  victim  by  her  long 
flowing  hair,  and  led  her  to  the  front  of  the  camp.  Then,  with  his 
scalping-knife,  he  made  an  incision  in  her  forehead  in  the  form  of  a 
cross,  bared  her  bosom,  and  plunged  the  knife  to  the  handle  in  her 
body.  A  shriek,  a  rush  of  blood,  and  a  few  dying  groans  and  con 
vulsions  followed,  and  the  fair  form  of  the  handsome  squaw  lay  stiff 
in  death. 

"  From  the  time  of  the  murder  until  the  execution,  the  female 
relatives  of  the  murderess  never  left  her,  the  time  being  spent  in 
lamentations  over  the  young  squaw.  After  the  execution,  both 
bodies  were  buried  together  in  a  sand-bank,  where  they  now  lie 


258  APPENDIX. 

side  by  side.  The  Indian  squaws  became  reconciled,  and  all  seemed 
satisfied  that  no  other  atonement  could  have  been  satisfactory. 

"  Since  the  events  related,  the  remnant  of  the  tribe  has  been 
removed  to  the  great  west,  together  with  their  chief,  whom  the 
strongest  inducements  the  world  could  present  could  not  jostle  out 
of  the  path  of  justice. 

"  Thus  perished,"  says  my  informant,  "the  best  Indian  and  hand 
somest  squaw  of  their  tribe — the  victims  of  the  whisky-cellar — who 
is  far  more  guilty  than  either  of  the  others  of  a  moral  wrong."  My 
informant  also  says,  "  that  from  first  to  last,  there  was  manifested 
no  desire  to  escape  or  evade  the  [fate  of  the  unfortunate  young 
squaw." 


1.  Brothers, — 

2.  A  great  deal  of  land 

'3.  And  a  great  deal  of  water 

4.  Is  between  us. 

5.  You  have  never  seen  us, 

6.  And  we  do  not  know  your  faces ; 

7.  But  you  and  we  pray  to  the  same  Great  Spirit 

8.  Who  made  the  red  men  and  the  white  men. 

9.  We  are  brothers. 

10.  Brothers,— 

11.  You  have  given  up  a  great  deal  of  land 
.12.  To  the  chiefs  of  the  white  men. 

13.  We  are  sorry  to  hear  it. 

14.  The  chiefs  of  the  white  men  try  to  persuade  you  to  go  further 

back  in  the  woods. 

15.  We  are  sorry  to  hear  it. 

16.  For  times  to  come  we  will  tell  you  what  you  must  do. 

17.  You  must  never  drink  fire-water. 

18.  The  white  men  gives  fire-water, 

19.  To  make  your  brains  like  dung  ; 

20.  He  then  laughs  at  you, 

21.  And  you  go  further  back  in  the  wood. 

22.  Brothers,— 

23.  You  must  learn  to  get  dollars. 


APPENDIX.  259 

24.  To  get  dollars,  rear  sheep 

25.  And  pigs,  cows  and  horses, 

26.  Turkeys  and  geese. 

27.  Brothers, — 

28.  At  the  end  of  every  six  moons 

29.  Take  some  of  the  animals 

30.  To  the  towns  of  the  .white  men, 

31.  To  sell  them  for  dollars. 

32.  Brothers, — 

33.  Lay  up  corn  and  dried  grass  for  yourselves 

34.  And  for  your  animals  during  winter  ; 

35.  If  you  have  more  than  you  want, 

36.  Sell  some  of  your  corn 

37.  To  the  white  men,  your  neighbours. 

38.  Brothers,— 

39.  Cultivate  your  good  land, 

40.  Sow  potatoes  and  corn, 

41.  Beet  and  rye, 

42.  Oats  and  onions. 

43.  Oats  are  very  good  when  ground  into  meal. 

44.  Onions  are  very  good  when  cooked  with  meat  and  with  deer's 

meat. 
Brothers, — 

45.  Cut  down  good  trees, 

46.  And  saw  them  into  planks  ; 

47.  Send  the  planks  to  the  town 

48.  And  sell  them  for  dollars. 

49.  Brothers,— 

50.  Buy  with  the  dollars 

51.  Blankets  and  kettles  of  iron, 

52.  Cotton  shirts  and  cotton  for  the  squaws — 

53.  Buy  spades  and  round  knives  to  cut  the  corn — 

54.  Buy  axes  and  hand-saws — 

55.  Buy  light  ploughs  made  of  iron. 
Brothers, — 

56.  Do  not  sell  any  more  land. 

57.  Tell  your  children  not  to  sell  any  more  land. 

58.  If  the  Governor  says 

59.  "  Give  me  some  of  your  land," 


260  APPENDIX. 

60.  Say  to  him  "  No,  we  have  cleared  off  trees, 

61.  We  work  at  it,  we  sow  seed, 

62.  We  will  not  leave  it, 

63.  We  will  not  go  farther  back  in  the  woods." 
Brothers, — 

64.  Do  not  speak  words  which  cut  to  the  Governor  ; 

65.  Speak  to  him  word  of  "  sugar,"  make  him  your  friend. 
Brothers, — 

66.  Try  to  get  title-deeds  from  the  Governor — 

67.  Title-deeds  for  the  land  where  you  live  now. 

68.  Go  to  the  Governor 

69.  And  say  to  him, 

70.  "  We  have  cleared  the  land  from  trees, 

71.  We  have  sowed,  and  we  have  cut  corn, 

72.  We  have  built  houses  and  barns  : 

73.  Give  us  a  title-deed  for  our  land." 

74.  If  the  Governor  does  not  give  the  title-deed  the  first  time, 

75.  Go  to  him  a  second  time — 

76.  If  he  will  not  give  it  the  second  time, 

77.  Go  to  him  again,  and  again,  and  again, 

78.  Until  you  get  the  title-deed. 

79.  The  writing  must  be  registered  in  the  council-house  for  writing. 

80.  Keep  the  title-deed  in  your  church  : 

81.  Show  it  to  your  sons  and  to  your  daughters. 

82.  May  the  Great  Spirit  keep  fire  away  from  his  house. 
Brothers, — 

,  83.    We  are  glad  to  hear  that  many  red  men  can  read  the  great 
word, 

84.  And  that  they  love  the  Great  Spirit  who  sends  it. 

85.  It  is  sent  to  the  red  man  and  the  white  man. 

86.  We  are  glad  to  know  that  you  have  missionaries  and  schools  in 

some  of  your  towns. 
Brothers. — 

87.  Settle  in  little  towns. 

88.  Attend  to  the  great  word  which  the  missionaries  read  to  you. 
Brothers, — 

-39.    Send  your  little  ones  to  school. 

90.  Come  out  of  the  wigwam  and  out  of  darkness, 

91.  And  dwell  in  the  light. 


APPENDIX.  261 

Brothers', — 

92.  May  the  Great  Spirit  teach  you  to  kno  w  and  to  love  the  great 

word. 

93.  May  you  receive  it  into  your  hearts. 

London,  August  22nd,  1837. 

Sent  by  us  through  Shawundais,  or  John  Sunday,  to  the  Chippe- 
was  and  the  other  Indians,  their  neighbours,  we  wishing  that 
they  may  all  improve  in  religious  knowledge,  and  in  all  those 
useful  arts  and  acquirements  which  have,  till  now,  made  the 
white  men  superior  to  their  red  brothers. 

(Signed)  AUGUSTUS  D'ESTE, 

THOMAS  HODGKIN,  M.D., 
EGBERT  ALDER. 


(J.) 

Copy  of  a  Despatch  to  his  Excellency  SIR  GEORGE  ARTHUR,  Lieut. - 
Governor  of  the  Province  of  Upper  Canada,  &c.,  dec.,  &c. 

DOWNING  STREET,  28th  March,  1838. 

Sir, — The  Indian  missionary,  Mr.  Peter  Jones,  and  the  secretary 
to  the  Wesleyan  Missionary  Society,  Mr.  Alder,  have  lately  been  in 
communication  with  me  relative  to  the  application  preferred  by  the 
former  on  behalf  of  certain  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  Upper  Canada, 
for  title-deeds  of  the  lands  which  they  now  hold  under  the  Crown. 
I  enclose  herewith  for  your  information  copies  of  the  letters  which 
they  have  addressed  to  me. 

I  need  scarcely  state  that,  in  considering  these  letters,  I  have  not 
failed  to  advert  to  the  opinions  expressed  in  Sir  Francis  Head's 
despatches  of  the  18th  October  and  8th  November  last.  I  am,  of 
course,  sensible  how  much  weight  is  due  to  Sir  F.  Head's  opinion 
on  such  a  subject,  and  with  my  present  information  I  should  much 
doubt  the  expediency  of  adopting  to  the  letter  the  propositions  con 
tained  in  the  accompanying  letters. 

Yet,  I  must  think  that  some  measure  may  be  taken  for  removing 
the  uneasiness  which  is  said  to  exist  among  the  Indians  in  regard 
to  their  land.  With  this  view,  I  should  propose  that  at  the  first 
general  meeting  of  the  Indians  an  assurance  should  be  conveyed  to 


262  APPENDIX. 

them,  in  the  most  formal  and  solemn  manner,  that  her  Majesty's 
Government  will  protect  their  interests,  and  respect  their  rights,  in 
regard  to  the  land  on  which  they  are  settled. 

It  might  be  explained  to  them,  that  for  the  sake  of  themselves 
and  their  posterity,  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  deliver  into  their 
hands  the  title-deeds  of  their  property  ;  but  that  those  title-deeds 
should  be  drawn  up  in  writing,  and  recorded  in  the  office  of  the 
Commissioner  of  Crown  Lands,  of  the  fact  of  which  record,  any 
person  or  persons  deputed  on  their  behalf  may  convince  them 
selves  by  inspection  ;  that  these  title-deeds  so  recorded  should 
be  considered  by  the  Government  as  equally  binding  with  any 
other  similar  documents  ;  and  that  if  the  Indians,  or  any  other 
individual  among  them,  should  at  any  time  desire  to  sell  or  exchange 
their  land,  the  Government  would  be  ready  to  listen  to  their  appli 
cations,  and  to  take  such  measures  as  should  be  most  consistent  with 
their  welfare  and  feelings. 

It  appears  to  me,  that  if  a  measure  of  this  nature  were  adopted, 
any  reasonable  apprehensions  in  the  minds  of  the  Indians  would  be 
allayed,  while  the  danger  of  their  becoming  the  victims  of  deception 
would  be  avoided. 

It  would  also  tend  to  draw  closer  the  connection  which  unites 
them  with  the  Executive  Government,  and  to  cherish  those  feelings 
of  affection  with  which  they  regard  the  Sovereign  of  the  British 
dominions. 

I.  am  aware,  however,  that  there  may  be  impediments  to  such  a 
course  which  have  not  occurred  to  me  ;  and  I  do  not,  therefore, 
desire  you  to  consider  the  foregoing  instructions  as  imperative.  But 
I  should  be  anxious,  that,  if  not  the  precise  measure  which  I  have 
suggested,  some  other  of  a  similar  description  should  be  forthwith 
adopted. 

In  furnishing  me  with  a  report  of  the  steps  which  you  may  take 
in  this  matter,  I  request  that  you  will  advert  to  the  statement  in 
Mr.  Jones's  letter,  respecting  the  annuity  granted  to  the  River 
Credit  Indians,  in  return  for  their  lands  ;  and  that  you  will  supply 
me  with  an  explanation  of  the  alleged  reduction  of  the  sum  which 
had  been  agreed  upon  as  a  -permanent  payment. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

(Signed)  GLENELG, 


APPENDIX.  263 


To  Mr.  JOSEPH  SAWYER,  and  the  River  Credit  Indians. 

LEEDS,  22nd  3f ay,  1838. 

MY  DEAR  BROTHERS,— For  your  information  I  here  send  you  a  copy 
of  Lord  Glenelg's  despatch  to  his  Excellency  Sir  George  Arthur,  our 
new  Governor.  You  will  perceive  from  the  despatch  that  her  most 
gracious  Majesty's  Government  have  been  pleased  to  listen  to  our 
words,  which  you  sent  over  to  England  by  me,  and  that  there  is  a 
fair  prospect  of  having  all  our  wishes  and  desires  attended  to  by 
the  government  of  our  Great  Mother  the  Queen. 

My  Brothers, — I  rejoice  to  tell  you  that  I  never  saw  the  sun  rise 
so  bright  and  clear  upon  my  fellow-Indians  as  at  the  present  time. 
O,  may  no  evil-minded  person  rise  to  obscure  the  clear  sky  by 
throwing  dust  in  the  air ! 

My  Brothers, — Be  united  in  all  your  important  matters.  Union 
is  strength.  Let  the  glory  and  honour  of  the  Great  Spirit,  and  the 
welfare  and  happiness  of  your  children  for  ever,  be  your  rule  and 
chief  object,  and  then  I  am  sure  there  will  be  but  one  opinion 
amongst  us  all. 

My  Brothers, — God  has  heard  our  cries  when  we  called  upon  him, 
about  our  sorrows  and  fears.  Let  us,  then,  ever  trust  in  Him  who 
has  the  control  and  the  disposal  of  the  hearts  of  kings,  queens,  and 
rulers.  When  I  first  heard  that  Lord  Glenelg  had  sent  such  a 
favourable  despatch  to  our  governor,  I  shed  tears  of  joy ;  I  could 
not  help  weeping.  Let  us  then  thank  God  and  take  courage. 

My  Brothers, — I  would  now  advise  you,  before  you  speak  to  Sir 
George  Arthur,  to  consult  with  the  Kev.  J.  Stinson  and  the  Rev. 
Egerton  Ryerson,  as  to  the  best  mode  of  obtaining  the  title-deeds, 
which  Lord  Glenelg  has  been  pleased  to  recommend  to  be  given  to 
us.  Brother  Evans,  I  think,  would  also  be  glad  to  assist  in  this 
matter,  as  I  know  him  to  be  a  warm  friend  to  the  poor  Indians. 

My  Brothers, — It  appears  to  me  that  his  lordship's  plan  of  having 
the  title-deeds  recorded  in  the  office  of  the  Commissioners  of  Crown 
Lands  is  an  excellent  one,  as  it  will  prevent  any  of  our  people  from 
selling  or  making  away  with  their  lands.  When  I  return  to  Canada 
I  shall  talk  to  you  more  on  this  subject. 

My  Brothers,— I  am  glad  that  his  lordship  has  been  pleased  to 


264  APPENDIX. 

request  an  explanation  to  be  given  about  the  reduction  of  our  land 
payments.  I  advise  you  to  get  a  copy  of  the  agreement  or  bond 
from  the  office  of  the  Indian  department  in  Toronto.  The  agree 
ment  will  show  for  itself  what  was  understood  by  both  parties 
when  our  fathers  surrendered  their  territories  to  the  crown  of  Great 
Britain. 

My  Brothers, — I  rejoice  to  tell  you  that  our  Great  Mother  the 
Queen,  and  all  the  officers  of  the  Government,  love  the  poor  Indians, 
and  desire  to  do  them  good.  I  am  glad  also  to  say  that  all  the 
Christians  in  England  love  and  pity  our  people ;  and  I  am  per 
suaded  when  you  hear  this,  and  read  the  accompanying  despatch, 
you  will  love  the  queen  and  the  British  nation  more  than  ever. 
God  save  our  great  and  noble  queen  ! 

My  Brothers, — I  am  glad  to  learn  that  in  the  midst  of  the  late 
disturbances  in  Canada  you  have  been  kept  and  preserved  in  peace, 
and  that  you  have  not  suffered  in  your  religious  enjoyments  and 
zeal  for  God  on  account  of  them.  O  be  thankful,  my  brothers,  that 
the  Great  Spirit  has  been  pleased  to  preserve  and  deliver  our  country 
from  the  wicked  designs  of  those  who  would  gladly  imbue  the  pro 
vince  in  carnage  and  bloodshed,  with  a  view  to  separate  us  from  the 
fostering  care  of  the  mother  country. 

Dear  Brothers, — I  am  happy  to  inform  you  that  myself  and  my  dear 
Newish  enjoy  good  health  and  peace.  The  English  Christians  take 
much  pains  to  raise  money  in  order  to  send  missionaries  among  the- 
poor  heathen  in  different  parts  of  the  world  ;  we  ought,  therefore, 
to  be  very  thankful  for  what  they  have  done  for  us.  I  am  now  trying 
to  get  the  Wesleyan  Missionary  Committee  in  London  to  establish 
a  central  manual  labour  school.  They  have  given  me  encourage 
ment  to  hope  that  they  will  take  up  the  subject  and  put  one  in 
operation.  I  feel  very  anxious  to  see  an  institution  of  this  kind 
established  amongst  us,  for  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  our  children 
will  never  be  what  they  ought  to  be  until  they  are  taught  to  work 
and  learn  useful  trades,  as  well  as  to  learn  to  read  and  write. 

We  hope  to  be  able  to  leave  England  for  home  about  the  1st  Sep 
tember  next,  but  this  will  depend  on  the  success  I  may  have  on  those 
matters  I  have  still  to  attend  to.  I  am  glad  I  came  to  England,  for 
if  I  had  not  come  just  at  the  time  I  did,  I  doubt  whether  we  should 
ever  have  obtained  the  deeds  or  the  arrears  of  our  payments.  Now 


APPENDIX.  265 

my  beloved  brothers,  neighbours,  and  relatives,  I  must  close  my 
paper  talk,  and  I  shake  hands  with  all  the  brothers,  sisters,  and 
children  in  my  heart. 

Write  to  me  as  soon  as  you  receive  this,  and  tell  me  all  that  is  in 
your  hearts.    You  will  be  pleased  to  read  all  these  words  in  a  full 
,  council.     Pray  for  me. 

I  remain,  my  dear  brethren, 
Your  brother  and  servant  in  the  work  of  the  Lord, 

PETER  JONES, 
or  KAHKEWAQUONABT. 

After  the  reading  of  the  above  despatch  and  letter  in  Council  at 
Credit,  the  Chief  Sawyer  delivered  a  lengthened  speech  on  the 
beneficial  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  religious  and  social  state 
of  the  Indians.  The  following  is  the  part  of  the  chief's  speech 
which  relates  to  Lord  Glenelg's  despatch  : — 

"  My  Brothers  and  Young  Men, — We  have  often  petitioned  our 
Great  Father,  and  made  our  wants  known  to  him  ;  but  he  did  not 
hear  us,  he  did  not  attend  to  our  wants.  But  at  last  we  have  sent 
our  words  to  our  Great  Mother  the  Queen  ;  and  now  you  see  how 
soon  she  has  sent  out  this  despatch  to  her  lieutenant-governor  to 
attend  to  our  wants.  What  is  he  reason  of  this  1  I  don't  know 
any  other  reason,  but  because  the  Mother  loves  the  children  better 
than  the  Father.  Now  we  have  a  queen  instead  of  a  king  ;  and  a 
mother  is  more  ready  to  hear  the  cries  and  to  relieve  the  wants  of 
the  children." 

The  above  was  heartily  responded  to  by  all  the  Indians  in  council. 
Their  acclamations  were  almost  deafening. 


COPT   OF   A   PETITION   TO   THE   QUEEN,   FROM   THE   CREDIT   INDIANS, 
PRATING  TO   HAVE  THEIR  LANDS   SECURED   TO   THEM. 

4TH  OCTOBER,  1837. 

To  Her  most  gracious  Majesty   Victoria  of  the  United  Kingdom  of 
Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  Queen.  Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c.,  fyc. 

The  humble  petition  of  the  undersigned  sachems,  principal  chiefs, 
and  warriors  of  the  Messissauga  tribe  of  the  Chippewa  Nation  of 


266  APPENDIX. 

Indians  of  the  River  Credit,  in  the  Home  District,  in  the  province 
of  Upper  Canada,  on  behalf  of  themselves  and  the  people  of  the 
said  tribe. 

May  it  please  your  Majesty, — We  are  the  descendants  of  the 
-original  inhabitants  of  the  soil,  who  formerly  possessed  this,  their 
native  country,  in  peace  and  harmony  long  before  the  French,  the 
ancient  enemies  of  your  people,  came  over  the  great  waters  and 
settled  upon  our  territories  :  then  your  people  came  too,  and  with 
great  valour  drove  away  the  French  and  took  Quebec,  and  the 
British  colours  have  ever  since  waved  over  the  land  of  our  fore 
fathers. 

We  have  been  happy  and  contented  to  live  under  the  protection 
•of  such  a  great  and  powerful  empire  ;  and  we  acknowledge,  with 
gratitude  to  the  great  Father  of  all,  the  good  we  have  enjoyed  under 
British  Government.  Our  people  have  been  civilized  and  educated, 
and  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  been  preached  to  us.  We  have 
also  learned  the  ways  of  the  white  people ;  they  have  taught  the 
children  of  the  forest  to  plough  and  to  sow. 

Our  people  are  now  very  few  in  number  ;  the  white  people  have 
settled  all  around  us,  but  our  Great  Father,  King  George  the  Third, 
allowed  us  to  reserve  a  tract  of  land  at  the  Eiver  Credit ;  and  the 
parliament  of  this  nation  has  acknowledged  this  tract  of  land  to  be 
ours,  and  has  forbid  the  white  people  from  disturbing  our  fisheries. 
Our  good  queen  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that  many  of  our  children 
have  been  taught  to  read  and  to  write.  Some  time  ago,  our  people 
in  council  said  it  was  proper  now  to  divide  the  land,  so  we  gave 
some  of  them  small  farms  of  about  fifty  acres,  to  be  held  by  them 
and  their  posterity  for  ever.  Our  people  have  begun  to  improve 
their  farms  ;  they  wish  to  sell  the  produce  at  market  and  buy  goods 
from  the  white  people,  but  they  are  afraid  to  clear  much  ground, 
because  they  are  told  by  evil-minded  persons  that  their  farms  can 
be  taken  away  from  them  at  any  time.  These  people  say  the  land 
is  not  our  own,  but  belongs  to  your  Majesty.  Did  your  Majesty 
buy  it  from  us,  or  from  our  forefathers  ?  We  know  that  our  people 
in  times  past  have  sold  lauds  to  our  late  father  the  king,  but  we  never 
sold  our  lands  at  the  Credit. 

Will  your  Majesty  be  pleased  to  assure  us  that  our  lands  shall 
not  be  taken  away  from  us,  or  our  people,  who  have  begun  to  culti 
vate  their  farms  ;  and  will  your  Majesty  be  pleased  to  permit  us  to 


APPENDIX. 


267 


go  on  dividing  our  lands  among  our  people  as  our  people  in  council 
think  best.  Our  people  and  our  children  then  will  continue  to  cul 
tivate  the  wild  lands  of  our  forefathers,  and  will  be  contented  and 

appy,  and  will  pray  that  your  Majesty  may  long  live,  and  reign 
over  our  people  as  their  most  gracious  queen  and  sovereign. 

And  your  petitioners,  as  in  duty  bound,  will  ever  pray. 


NAWAHJEGEZHEGWABY, 
JOSEPH  SAWYER,  Chief 

MANOONOODING, 

JAMES  CHEEHOK, 

PlPOONNAHBA, 

JAMES  YOUNG. 

KEZHEGOWININE, 
DAVID  SAWYER. 

TYENTENNEGEN, 
JOHN  JONES. 

NAW  AH  JEGEZHIGWABY, 

JOHN  CAMPBELL. 

PAMEGAHWAYAHSING, 
ISAAC  HENRY. 

MASQUAHZEGWUNA, 

MOSES  PAHDEQUONG, 

NEGAHNUB, 

LAWRENCE  HERCHMER. 

SASWAYAHSEGA, 

THOMAS  MAYER. 

MAHYAHWEGEZHIGWABY, 
JOHN  KEGHEGOO. 

In  Council  at  the  River  Credit, 
the  4th  day  of  October,  1837. 


OOMINEWAHJEWEEN, 

WILLIAM  HERCHMER. 

KANAHWAHBAHNIND, 
WILLIAM  JOHN. 

PAMEGEWAHNWABY, 
JOHN  PETER. 

CHEWIMOOKA, 

JOHN  M'CoLLUM. 

PAHOOMBWAWINNDUNG, 
THOMAS  SMITH. 

AHGHAWAHNAHQUAHDWABY, 
PETER  OLDS. 

NAHWAHQUAYAHSEGA, 
SAMUEL  FINGER. 

TAWAHSING, 

JAMES  TAHWAH. 

ANEWAHKOOGE, 
JOHN  WESLEY. 

MOOKEJEWUNOOKA, 
GEORGE  KING, 

NANINGAHSEYA, 

WILLIAM  JACKSON. 


(K.) 

The  following  account  of  a  noted  conjuror  was  furnished  by  the 
late  Eev.  James  Evans,  August,  1835  : 

Oozhuskah,  a  native  Indian  of  the  Ojebway  tribe,  now  resides  at 
Mackinaw.  He  was  or:ce  one  of  the  lowest  and  most  abandoned 


268  APPENDIX. 

of  that  profligate  class  of  Indians  who  have  measurably  forsaken 
their  native  wilds,  and  linger  about  the  settlements  of  the  whites. 
His  stature  is  small ;  his  frame,  worn  down  with  age,  and  debilitated 
by  former  dissipation,  presents  a  strange  ghastliness  of  appearance, 
which  would  almost  excite  the  belief  that  Oozhuskah  is  a  deserter 
from  the  land  of  departed  spirits.  But,  however  fearful  and  sus 
picious  his  character  may  have  once  been,  those  acquainted  with 
him  now  do  not  fear  him ;  his  spirit,  formerly  wild,  untameable, 
and  intriguing,  is  at  present  gentle,  honest,  guileless.  His  name 
once  stood  unrivalled  as  a  prophet,  and  he  was  considered  in 
vincible  as  a  warrior. 

"The  missionaries  stationed  at  Mackinaw  had  often  faithfully  tried 
to  instruct  him  in  the  knowledge  of  God  ;  but  he  always  responded 
to  their  instructions  with  the  most  supercilious  contempt,  and  their 
lessons  were  apparently  "  pearls  cast  before  swine."  But  they  were 
not  lost.  They  were  lodged  in  the  memory  of  Oozhuskah.  He 
narrated  them  to  his  wife,  who  was  as  drunken  as  himself,  but 
when  sober  these  lessons  formed  a  fruitful  theme  of  conversation. 

"  In  the  winter,  as  usual,  Oozhuskah  chose  his  hunting-ground, 
some  fifty  miles  from  Mackinaw :  here,  with  no  companion  but  his 
aged  squaw,  he  pitched  his  lonely  tent,  in  the  recesses  of  the  forest. 
Here,  the  inebriating  draught  was  beyond  his  reach  ;  they  had  time 
for  reflection  and  for  converse.  They  had  not  long  occupied  their 
quarters,  when  Mekagase  was  taken  ill ;  Oozhuskah's  conjuring 
songs  and  Indian  medicines  could  not  cure  her.  During  this  severe 
illness  she  retained  her  senses.  The  truth  of  heaven  dwelt  upon 
her  mind  ;  her  understanding  told  her  she  was  a  wretch,  a  sinner, 
that  she  had  all  her  life  persisted  in  doing  knowingly  and  wilfully 
wrong.  Death  stared  her  in  the  face,  and  she  was  afraid  to  die  ; 
her  conscience  convinced  her  she  was  unprepared,  and  that  as 
a  consequence  of  her  wickedness  she  must  expect  misery  hereafter. 
Trembling  on  the  threshold  of  eternity,  she  humbled  herself,  prayed 
to  the  Great  Spirit  in  compassion  to  forgive  her,  to  blot  out  her 
sins,  and  receive  her  departing  spirit. 

"  Suddenly,  the  fears  of  Mekagase  were  taken  away  ;  joy  filled' 
her  heart,  and  she  felt  indescribably  more  happy  than  when  in 
youth  she  had  joined  the  Indian  dance  around  the  evening  fires  of 
her  tribe.  In  short,  she  experienced  what  the  Apostle  designates 
1  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory  ! '  From  that  hour  her  disease 


APPENDIX.  269 

abated.  She  felt  she  was  a  new  creature,  and,  unlike  too  many 
enlightened  Christians,  she  did  not  reason  herself  out  of  the  faith ; 
but,  taking  the  simple  testimony  of  the  Spirit  bearing  witness  with 
her  own,  spoke  of  her  hopes  and  her  joys  to  Oozhuskah,  with 
ecstacy  and  confidence  ;  she  warned  him  of  his  folly  and  wickedness 
with  such  convincing  testimony  that  his  heart  was  touched.  He 
prayed  to  the  Great  Spirit ;  the  radiance  of  Divine  truth  beamed  on 
his  benighted  understanding,  melting  his  hardened  heart ;  and 
in  ten  days  from  his  wife's  remarkable  conversion,  Oozhuskah  could 
heartily  join  with  her  in  offering  their  morning  and  evening  orisons 
to  the  Great  Spirit  in  praise  of  redeeming  grace. 

When  the  hunting-season  was  over  they  returned  to  Mackinaw, 
where  they  lost  no  time  in  making  known  the  change  wrought  in 
their  feelings  ;  and  from  that  day  to  this  they  have  tested  the 
verity  of  their  conversion  by  well-ordered  lives  and  godly  con 
versation. 

"  Oozhuskah  narrated  to  me  the  following  account  of  his  former 
life  :— '  From  the  earliest  period  of  my  recollection,  inspired  by  the 
traditions  of  my  tribe,  I  had  an  insatiable  thirst  to  become  a  pro 
phet To  accomplish  this  object,  I  commenced  a  fast.  I 

partook  of  no  kind  of  nourishment  for  twenty  days,  excepting  the 
broth  of  a  little  boiled  corn,  after  the  going  down  of  the  sun.  On 
the  twentieth  day  I  caused  my  tent  to  be  erected  alone  in  the  forest : 
I  entered  it,  and  on  that  evening  ate  nothing.  I  was  almost 
famished  with  hunger  ;  my  skin  clave  to  my  bones ;  and  I  had 
barely  strength  to  stand  on  my  feet.  Nearly  fainting,  I  laid  down 
in  my  tent,  determined  to  die  or  obtain  the  object  of  my  desire.  I 
lay  until  nearly  midnight,  when  suddenly  a  man  entered  my  tent. 
•*  What  are  you  doing  ?  Why  are  you  here  ?  and  what  do  you 
want  ? '  said  he.  I  replied,  '  I  am  fasting,  almost  dead,  and  must 
soon  perish  with  hunger.'  Before  I  had  time  to  say  more,  he 
rejoined,  '  Follow  me  ; '  and  it  seemed  as  if  my  spirit  left  my  body. 
I  rose  and  went  out  of  my  tent ;  he  then  took  me  by  the  arm,  and 
we  both  ascended  into  the  air,  and  moved  on  with  the  utmost  ease 
and  rapidity.'  Oozhuskah  then  related  the  adventures  of  his 
journey ;  how  his  long  fasting  had  gained  the  approbation  of  the 

gods,  and  how  they  made  him  a  mighty  prophet After  this 

he  found  himself  in  his  tent  extremely  hungry  ;  he  partook  of  some 
food,  and  slept  sweetly.  When  he  awoke  the  next  morning  he  felt 


270  APPENDIX. 

proud,  considering  himself  superior  to  all  the  Indians  around  him. 
From  this  time  all  the  promises  of  the  gods  were  fulfilled,  till  the 
illness  of  Mekagase,  '  when,'  he  adds,  '  I  was  led  by  her  conversion 
to  examine  myself,  and  saw  that  I  was  a  wretch,  and  a  child  of  the 
devil.  Then  I  prayed  to  the  Great  Spirit,  and  he  heard  and  for 
gave  me.' 

"  At  that  time  I  had  a  large  collection  of  medicines,  some 
to  kill  and  some  to  cure  :  I  threw  them  all  away,  and  my  hawk* 
has  not  since  visited  me,  and  God  grant  he  never  may.  I  was  the 
most  wicked  of  men  ;  my  converse  with  the  strange  man  of  the 
cave  made  me  proud,  but  it  did  not  make  me  happy.  But  I  bless 
God  that  now  a  Spirit  unseen  communes  with  my  heart;  and 
though  it  does  not  teach  me  how  to  destroy  my  enemies,  it  teaches 
ine  to  forgive  and  love  them." 


(L.) 

CONVERSION  OF  A  MEDICINE  MAN. 

(From  J.  Sunday's  Journal,  October  17th,  1833.) 

To-day  a  medicine  man,  who  used  to  oppose  us,  came  and  said  he- 
would  give  up  his  enchantments  and  listen  to  our  teaching.  The 
cause  of  the  change  is  this  : — He  had  a  daughter  whom  he  tenderly 
loved,  and  being  taken  sick,  he  tried  his  utmost  skill  to  cure  her, 
but  could  not.  m  His  munedoo  would  not  be  entreated  for  her,  and 
his  medical  enchantments  would  have  no  effect ;  but  his  beloved 
daughter  died.  "When  the  child  was  past  recovery,  and  was  given 
up  to  die,  a  pious  son  affectionately  sat  by  her  for  three  days  and 
nights,  and  scarcely  slept  the  whole  time,  but  continued  to  watch 
and  pray  for  her,  that  she  might  be  prepared  for  death.  After  the 
sister  died,  the  young  man  dreamed  he  saw  a  ladder  that  reached  to 
heaven,  and  that  his  sister  ascended  on  it.  He  told  the  dream  to 
his  father.  This  greatly  comforted  him,  and  when  he  reflected  that 

*  The  bird  he  chose  for  his  messenger  to  communicate  with  his  familiar 
spirits. 


APPENDIX.  271 

his  pagan  skill  had  failed  him  when  he  most  needed  help,  and  that 
the  new  religion  taught  such  affection  and  faithfulness  as  that  of 
his  son  to  his  sister,  and  that  the  Great  Spirit  had  heard  his  prayer, 
and  shown  that  his  daughter  was  safe  and  happy,  he  resolved  to 
change  his  worthless  religion  for  that  which  gave  him  comfort  in-, 
affliction. 


(M.) 

JOHN   CHIEF,  AND   MERCHANT'S  SOUL   IN   CLAY  BANK. 

Extract  of  a  Letter  to  P.  JONES,  from  JOHN  SUNDAY,  Muncey  Townr 
November  I2th,  1850. 

'  "  THERE  are  many  magicians  here.  I  will  name  one  John  Chief. 
This  man  pretends  he  can  do  a  great  thing.  One  Indian  has  been 
sick  for  some  time.  He  has  been  Christian  some  years,  and  now 
he  has  turned  into  pagan ;  he  believed  that  the  magicians  could  cure 
him,  so  he  got  John  Chief  to  come  to  him  and  at  the  same  time 
sent  an  Indian  to  get  whisky  for  the  magician.  When  John  Chief 
came  he  told  some  men  to  make  JeesuhJcon  (conjuring  wigwam)r 
and  when  finished  he  went  into  it.  The  conjuror  then  said  to 
the  sick  man  : — '  Your  soul  is  gone  away  from  you,  and  is  now  in 
the  bank  of  the  river,  it  is  with  the  munedoos,  who  reside  on  the 
high  clay  bank,  where  it  has  been  all  the  time.  If  you  wish  your 
soul  to  come  back  to  you  again  I  can  send  one  of  the  sky-men,  or 
Medawwhmagwug ,  and  bring  it  back  again.' 

'  The  sick  man  said  : — '  I  shall  be  very  glad  if  my  soul  comes  back 
to  me  again.' 

"  So  John  Chief  send  one  of  his  sky-men  to  go  and  bring  the  sick 
man's  soul,  and  in  a  short  time  he  returned,  and  then  the  magician 
said  to  the  sick  man  : — '  Your  soul  is  now  in  you.  The  sick  man 
asked  his  soul  what  was  the  cause  of  his  leaving  him  1  The  soul 
replied : — ( I  will  tell  you  the  reason,  it  is  because  you  became  a 
MERCHANT  last  spring,  this  is  the  reason  why  I  left  you.' 

"  John  Chief  then  said,  '  he  would  so  blow  upon  his  mouth  as. 
to  blow  his  soul  up  and  down  in  his  body  and  make  it  stay  in/ 


212  APPENDIX. 

John  Chief  did  so,  and  the  sick  man  was  very  glad  that  his  soul  got 
back  to  him  again." 

John  Sunday,  in  his  peculiar  satirical  manner,  adds  : — 
'•'  Tell  our  Indian  brethren,  never,  never  to  desire  to  become  mer 
chants,  lest  their  souls  should  leave  them,  as  did  this  sick  man's." 

Notwithstanding  all  the  power  and  vanity  of  John  Chief's  mune- 
doos,  the  poor  backsliding  sick  man  died,  and  his  soul  in  earnest  left 
his  body. 


(K) 

AT  a  Conference  held  at  Colborne-on-Thames,  the  27th  January 
1841:  —  Present:  The  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs;  Eev 
Eichard  Flood,  Eev.  Solomon  Waldron  (Missionaries] ;  and  the 
Chiefs  of  the  Delawares,  Oneidas  and  Chippewas. 

The  Chief,  CANOTING,  arose  and  said,  that  he  was  appointed 
to  speak  for  the  three  tribes,  and  addressed  the  Superintendent  as 
follows : — 

"  Fqther, — We  have  met  in  council,  to  take  into  consideration  a 
subject  which  has  engaged  the  attention  of  our  white  brethren 
throughout  the  country.  We  mean  the  destruction  of  the  monu 
ment  erected  on  Queenstown  Heights  to  the  memory  of  a  great 
warrior,  who,  like  Tecumseth,  fell  in  defence  of  his  sovereign.  We 
have  a  few  chiefs  and  warriors  still  living  who  fought  under  the 
command  of  the  great  and  good  General  Brock ;  and  we  remember 
when  he  travelled  on  that  road  (the  Long  Woods)  he  said  to  us,  '  I 
bring  iny  sword  to  fight  against  your  enemy  and  mine  ;  and  now  I 
tell  you  plainly,  they  must  not  throw  us  down  ;  rise,  follow  me,  that 
your  children  may  partake  of  all  the  privileges  which  you  have 
ever  enjoyed  under  the  protection  of  your  great  Father.'  These 
words  struck  deep  into  our  hearts,  and  with  one  shout  we  flew  to 
aid  him.  Our  hearts  are  yet  afflicted  by  the  loss  of  many  a  brave 
chief  and  warrior  who  fell  in  that  war  ;  and  when  we  heard  that 
the  ashes  of  that  warrior  had  been  disturbed,  and  the  monument 
shattered  by  the  hand  of  the  cowardly  white  man,  our  indignation 
was  aroused,  and  we  all  declared  our  abhorrence  of  such  wicked 
ness  against  the  will  of  the  Great  Spirit,  who  was  pleased  to  place 
him  there. 


APPENDIX.  273 

"  Father,— The  three  nations  here  assembled  have  agreed  to  sub 
scribe  each  the  sum  of  ten  pounds,  towards  the  re-construction  of 
his  monument ;  and  we  request  you  to  communicate  to  our  great 
father,  Sir  George  Arthur,  our  sentiments  on  this  subject ;  and  to 
assure  him  that  it  is  our  firm  determination  to  retain  the  same 
zeal,  loyalty,  and  devotion,  that  glowed  in  the  bosoms  of  our  fore 
fathers,  who  bravely  defended  the  Eoyal  Standard,  under  which  we 
have  the  happiness  to  live,  and  to  claim  the  proud  distinction  of 
British  subjects. 

"  Father, — We  salute  you  and  our  friends  the  missionaries,  with  a 
hearty  shake  of  the  hand. 

(Certified)        J.  B.  CLENCH,  S.  I.  A." 


To  our  Brother  SIR  GEORGE  ARTHUR,  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the 
Province  of  Upper  Canada. 

"  Brother,— The  chiefs,  warriors,  and  people  of  the  Six  Nations 
Indians,  heard  with  feelings  of  the  greatest  horror,  that  white  men 
from  the  American  Nation  had  desecrated  the  grave  of  the  brave 
and  lamented  warrior,  Sir  Isaac  Brock. 

"  The  tomb  of  the  brave  warrior  has  always  been  esteemed  sacred 
among  us,  from  the  earliest  period  to  which  the  tradition  handed 
down  to  us  from  our  fathers  extend. 

"  Brother,— It  has  given  to  the  chiefs,  warriors,  and  people  of  the 
Six  Nations,  great  pleasure  to  hear  that  you,  our  brother,  called  a 
meeting  of  your  white  people,  at  the  spot  where  the  brave  warrior 
fell,  fighting  in  defence  of  his  and  our  country ;  and  that  it  was 
resolved  to  erect  anew  a  monument  sacred  to  his  memory,  to  record 
his  valour  to  future  generations. 

" Brother— We  and  our  fathers  endured  the  fatigues  and  priva 
tions  of  war,  fighting  by  the  side  of  the  illustrious  dead,  and  wish 
to  contribute  from  our  funds  the  sum  of  seventy-five  pounds,  to 
forward  the  speedy  completion  of  the  work  ;  to  commemorate  our 
veneration  for  the  name  of  our  illustrious  and  valiant  brother, 
deceased  ;  and  to  record  our  horror  at  the  perpetration  of  so  base 
a  deed  as  the  destruction  of  the  tomb  where  his  hallowed  remains 
have  been  interred. 

T 


274  APPENDIX. 

"  Brother, — We  have  transmitted  to  our  Chief  Superintendent  an 
order  for  that  amount,  which  we  request  may  be  paid  for  the  above 
purpose,  out  of  our  funds  in  the  hands  of  Government. 

"  In  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  the  Six  Nations. 

"  MOSES  WALKER. 
"JOHN  S.  JOHNSON. 
"  PETER  GREEN. 
"  AARON  "FRAZER. 
"NOAH  POWLIS. 
"  PETER  POWLIS  (^  his  mark). 
"Witness— J.  MARTIN, 
"Sup.Ind.Dep." 


To  our  Great  Father,  SIR  GEORGE  ARTHUR,  K.C.H.,  Lieutenant 
Governor  of  the  Province  of  Upper  Canada,  and  Major- 
General  Commanding  Her  Majesty's  Forces  therein,  &c. 

"Father, — Our  ears  have  been  shocked  in  hearing  that  some  per 
son  or  persons  have  had  the  wickedness  to  destroy  the  sacred  grave 
of  our  late  Great  Father  Major-General  Sir  Isaac  Brock,  the  brave 
hero  of  Upper  Canada. 

"  Father, — We  cannot  find  language  sufficient  to  express  our  utter 
detestation  of  such  an  outrageous  conduct. 

"  Father,— Some  of  our  people  fought  and  bled  by  the  side  of 
that  brave  chief.  He  was  so  brave  that  he  feared  no  death.  He 
was  beloved  by  all  the  red  coats,  and  by  all  the  inhabitants,  and 
by  all  your  red  children. 

"  Father,-— We  shall  ever  remember  the  debt  of  gratitude  we  and 
our  children  owe  to  that  great  chieftain.  Whilst  your  red  children 
were  sitting  together,  like  a  family  of  helpless  children,  in  danger 
of  being  tomahawked,  the  brave  hero  flew  with  only  a  few  brave 
warriors  to  our  rescue.  His  wisdom,  skill,  and  bravery,  saved 
us  from  the  destroying  enemy. 

"Father, — Our  hearts  were  made  very  glad,  when  we  heard  that 
your  Excellency,  and  your  great  officers  and  inhabitants  of  Upper 
Canada,  were  about  to  re-construct  the  grave  of  our  late  Great 


APPENDIX.  275 

Father  ;  and,  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to  his  memory,  we  wish  to  give 
ten  pounds,  out  of  our  annual  land  payments,  towards  re-building 
the  same. 

"  Father, — We  feel  truly  grateful  to  the  British  Government,  for 
the  kind  care  they  have  ever  manifested  towards  us. 

"Father, — We  love  our  Great  Mother  the  Queen,  and  all  her 
children  over  the  great  waters. 

"Father, — We  are  happy  and  contented  to  live  under  the  protec 
tion  of  such  a  wise,  good,  and  powerful  Government;  and  we  hope 
nothing  shall  ever  separate  us  from  the  protecting  hand  of  our 
Great  Mother  the  Queen  ;  and  may  the  blessing  of  our  Great  Spirit 
rest  upon  Her  Majesty  —  upon  her  great  chiefs  —  and  upon  her 
people.  This  is  all  we  have  to  say. 

"  Signed  in  behalf  of  the  Eiver  Credit  Indians. 

"JOSEPH  SAWYER. 
"PETER  JONES. 
"JOHN  JONES. 

"THOMAS  SMITH. 
"JAMES  YOUNG. 
"DAVID  SAWYER. 
"River  Credit, 

"  January,  2nd,  1841." 


The  QUEEN'S  Thanks  to  the  Indians  who  subscribed  for  the  Rebuilding 
of  Brocks  Monument. 

(Copy)  "  CHIEF  SECRETARY'S  OFFICE, 

"Kingston,  June  22nd,  1841. 

"  SIR, — I  am  commanded  by  the  Governor-General  to  inform  you 
that  Her  Majesty's  Government  having  had  before  them  a  pamphlet 
containing  the  addresses  connected  with  the  subscription  of  the 
Indian  tribes  in  Upper  Canada,  in  aid  of  the  re-construction  of  the 
monument  of  Sir  Isaac  Brock,  His  Excellency  has  been  directed 
to  convey  to  these  tribes  the  thanks  of  the  British  Government  and 
nation  for  their  zealous  co-operation  in  this  patriotic  undertaking, 
and  to  renew  to  them  the  assurance  of  the  Queen's  regard  for  their 
welfare. 

T2 


276  APPENDIX. 

"  You  will  have  the  goodness  to  communicate  to  the  Indians  who 
took  part  in  the  subscription  the  sentiments  which  Her  Majesty 
has  been  pleased  to  express  on  the  subject. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

"  Your  most  obedient  humble  Servant, 
"(Signed)  T.  W.  C.  MURDOCK, 

"  Chief  Secretary. 

"S.  P.  JARVIS,  Esq., 
"  Superintendent  of  Indian  Affairs,  <£•<?.  <£•<?. 
"  Upper  Canada." 


(0.) 

Copy  of  a  Letter  to  the  Hon.  Commissioners  appointed  to  enquire 
into  Indian  Affairs. 

MUNCEY  MISSION  HOUSE,  Nov.  2,1st,  1842. 

"  GENTLEMEN, — I  beg  to  inclose,  for  your  consideration,  a  copy 
of  my  letter  to  Dr.  Luckey,  and  his  reply,  on  the  subject  of  the 
School  of  Industry  at  Missouri. 

"From  the  knowledge  I  have  of  the  Indian  character,  and  from  per 
sonal  observation,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  system  of 
education  hitherto  adopted  in  our  common  schools  has  been  too  ineffi 
cient.  The  children  attend  these  schools  from  the  houses  of  their 
parents,  a  number  of  whom  are  good  pious  Christians,  but  who,  never 
theless,  retain  many  of  their  old  habits  ;  consequently,  the  good  in 
structions  they  receive  at  school  are  in  a  great  measure  neutralized  at 
home.  It  is  a  notorious  fact  that  the  parents  in  general  exercise  little 
or  no  control  over  their  children.  Being  thus  left  to  follow  their  own 
wills,  they  too  frequently  wander  about  in  the  woods  with  their 
bows  and  arrows,  or  accompany  their  parents  in  their  hunting 
excursions.  Another  evil  arises  from  their  not  being  trained  to 
habits  of  industry,  so  that  by  the  time  they  leave  the  schools  they 
are  greatly  averse  to  work,  and  naturally  adopt  the  same  mode  of 
life  as  their  parents. 


APPENDIX.  277 

"  Under  these  considerations,  I  am  very  anxious  to  see  manual 
labour  schools  established  among  our  people,  that  the  children  may 
be  properly  trained  and  educated  to  habits  of  industry.  I  see 
nothing  to  hinder  the  entire  success  of  such  a  plan,  and  as  the  school 
in  the  Missouri  country  is  answering  the  most  sanguine  expectations 
of  its  promoters,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  same  success  would 
attend  the  like  operations  among  our  Indians.  I  am  happy  to  inform 
you  that  all  the  Indians  with  whom  I  have  conversed  highly  approve 
of  the  project.  They  are  ready  and  willing  to  give  up  their  children 
to  the  entire  control  and  management  of  the  teachers. 

"  I  beg  also  to  state  that,  in  my  opinion,  unless  something  be  done 
in  this  way,  the  Indians  will  for  ever  remain  in  their  half-civilized 
state,  and  continue  to  be  a  burden  to  the  British  Government  and 
the  missionary  societies.  But,  on  the  contrary,  by  the  blessing  of 
the  Almighty  on  our  proposed  efforts,  I  see  no  reason,  why  they  may 
not  be  raised  in  their  condition,  so  as  to  become  useful  subjects  of 
our  Great  Mother  the  Queen,  and  an  ornament  to  society.  I  do  not 
mean  to  insinuate  that  our  past  efforts  to  Christianize  and  civilize 
the  red  man  of  the  forest  have  altogether  proved  abortive ;  far  from 
it,  we  have  many  examples  at  our  various  mission  stations  of  indus 
trious  Indians  who  cultivate  their  farms  to  the  best  of  their  know 
ledge  ;  such  have  been  induced  from  religious  principles  to  abandon 
the  chase,  and  turn  their  attention  to  husbandry  ;  but  we  have 
observed  that  in  general,  where  this  motive  is  wanting,  the  Indian 
still  adheres  to  his  old  habits. 

"  With  regard  to  the  means,  I  would  suggest  that  part  of  the  ex 
penses  be  borne  out  of  the  Indian's  land  payments,  and  the  other 
out  of  the  Parliamentary  grant  to  the  Indian  department.  I  cannot 
help  expressing  my  opinion  that  a  large  amount  of  that  grant  might 
be  saved  by  curtailing  the  expenses  of  the  department.  The  Wes- 
leyan  Missionary  Society  of  the  Canada  Conference,  who  are  very 
anxious  to  see  such  schools  in  operation,  would,  in  all  probability, 
aid  in  their  establishment  and  support. 

"  I  am  not  able  to  make  any  positive  estimate  as  to  the  amount 
necessary  for  the  erection  of  the  buildings,  &c.,  &c.,  as  that  will 
depend  on  the  magnitude  of  the  establishment.  I  should  suppose 
that  a  school  that  would  accommodate  100  scholars  might  be  put  in 
operation  for  about  .£1,500,  or  .£2,000  currency. 

"  I  beg  to  inform  you  that  when  I  was  in  England,  in  the  year 


27  S  APPENDIX. 

1838,  I  brought  this  subject  before  the  Colonial  Secretary,  Lord 
Glenelg,  who  was  pleased  to  forward  a  despatch  to  his  Excellency 
Sir  George  Arthur,  recommending  the  Colonial  Government  to 
take  the  matter  into  consideration,  and,  if  practicable,  to  do  some 
thing  in  the  way  of  promoting  the  general  welfare  of  the  Indian 
tribes." 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

"  Gentlemen, 

"  Your  most  obedient  and  humble  Servant, 
(Signed)  «  PETER  JONES, 

"  Indian  Missionary  and  Chief. 

"  To  the  Hon.  Commissioners  on  Indian 
Affairs,  &c.>  &c.,  Kingston" 


RICHARD  BARRETT.  Printer,  13,  Mark  Lane,  London. 


Books    Lately  Publiihed 

5,  Bifhopfgate  Without,  London. 


Crown  8vo,  Illustrated,  price  6s. 

Settlers  and  Soldiers ;  or,  the  War  in  TaranakL 

Being  a  Chapter  in  the  Life  of  a  Settler.  By  Re\r. 
THOMAS  GILBERT,  formerly  Paftor  of  the  General 
Baptift  Church,  Ditchling,  SufTex. 

Crown  8vo,  Illustrated. 

Malta  under  the  Phenicians,  Knights,  and 
Englifh.  By  WILLIAM  TALLACK,  author  of 
"  Friendly  Sketches  in  America." 

Crown  8vo,  price  6s. 

The  Stockman,  and  other  Tales.  Illustrative 
of  Life  in  Australia.  By  HORACE  EARLE,  Esq. 

Cloth  extra,jos.  6d.,  Illustrated. 

Will  Adams.  The  Firft  Englimman  in  Japan. 
A  Romantic  Biography.  By  WILLIAM  DALTON. 

Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  33.  6d.,  poft  free. 

Narrative  of  Ten  Years'  Imprifonment  in  the 
Dungeons  of  Naples.  By  ANTONIO  NICOLO,  a 
Political  Exile. 


Books  lately  Publijhed. 


Just  published,  crown  8vo.,  55. 

Friendly  Sketches  in  America.  By  WILLIAM 
TALLACK.  Contains  Notices  of  Vifits  to  Friends  in 
Indiana,  Ohio,  Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  New 
England,  with  defcriptions  of  Scenery,  Colleges, 
Schools  and  Cities ;  and  Anecdotes  of  Waftiington, 
Whittier,  Macaulay,  &c.  Particulars  of  the  divifions 
of  the  American  Friends  into  "  Orthodox,"  "  Hick- 
fite,"  «  Evangelical,"  and  "  Wilburite."  Notices  of 
Unitarianifm,  Slavery  and  Politics,  &c. 

Poft  8vo.,  cloth,  price  6s.  6d, 

A  Memoir  of  William  Allen,  F.R.S.  By  the 
Rev.  J.  SHERMAN,  of  Surrey  Chapel. 

Poft  8vo.,  cloth,  price  45.  6d. 

Curiofities  of  London  Life  ;  or  Phafes,  Phylio- 

logical    and    Social,    of    the    Great   Metropolis.      By 
C.  M.  SMITH. 

Poft  8vo.,  cloth,  price  IDS.  6d. 

The  Three  Archbifhops.  Lanfranc — Anfelm — 
A'Becket.  By  WASHINGTON  and  MARK  WILKS. 

Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  45.  6d. 

The  Campaner  Thai ;  or,  Difcourfes  on  the 
Immortality  of  the  Soul.  By  JEAN  PAUL  FR. 
RICHTER.  Tranflated  from  the  German  by  JULIETTE 
GOWA.  Second  Edition. 

Crown  8vo.,  cloth,  price  45. 

The  Half- Century ;  its  Hiftory,  Political  and 
Social  (1800  to  1850).  By  WASHINGTON  WILKS. 
With  a  chronological  table  of  contents,  and  a  tabular 
arrangement  of  the  Principal  Officers  of  State  from 
1800  to  1850.  Second  Edition,  revifed,  and  con 
taining  a  Supplementary  Chapter. 

London  :  A.  W.  BENNETT,  5,  Bifhopfgate  Without,  E.G. 


X 


THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


