Le 


w 
oO 

x 
*. 





Ex Lihria 





NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE 


es 


Te 


TRENT UNIVERSITY | 
LIBRARY | 














THE PUBLICATIONS OF 
THE CHAMPLAIN 
SOCIETY 


V 






| AG SAC NI ANA i 


6 sa je PRIME. a “4 





; CU 
dis ‘ 
y aged. a ~k 
SN a … me = 
4 ow) 4 oe 7 = 
à f 2 ; b : ‘ ) 7 : ah a, 
x a : A à a : , . _ 
‘ À ns F3 
A 
4 ) 





in ce L “NES 


di. > 


THE 
PUBLICATIONS OF 
THE CHAMPLAIN 
SOCIETY 


LE CLERCQ: 
NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 





TORONTO 
THE CHAMPLAIN SOCIETY 


Five Hundred and Twenty Copies of 
this Volume have been printed. Twenty 
are reserved for Editorial purposes. 
The remaining Five Hundred are 
supplied only to Members of the 
Society and to Subscribing Libraries. 


This copy is No. 63 


NEW RELATION OF 
GASPESIA 


With the Customs and Religion of the 
Gaspesian Indians 


BY 


FATHER CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ 


TRANSLATED AND EDITED, WITH A REPRINT 
OF THE ORIGINAL, BY 


WILLIAM F. GANONG, Px.D. 


PROFESSOR IN SMITH COLLEGE 


TORONTO 


THE CHAMPLAIN SOCIETY 
IQIO 


E632 40 


ei SA 








| | | ee Sal 
‘ a È . 
| | ? de Von 
er roe | d'A er NA 
ry TVA n JE + 
L ‘2 Le f - 
4 ‘ Et w Ete Pele ME 
aoe | | | rs | Fa 





PREFACE 


HE eastern parts of Canada are fortunate in many 
respects, and among others in the character and 
quantity of the original literature devoted to their 

exploration. The narratives of Cartier, Champlain, Les- 
carbot, the Jesuit Fathers, Denys, Father le Clercq, and 
Diéreville, constitute a treasury which, for historical import- 
ance and absorbing human interest, can be rivalled by few 
countries. It is a satisfaction to recall that no less than five 
of these seven great works are, or are soon to be, accessible 
in worthy form, both in reprint and annotated translation. 
Of the remaining two, Father le Clercq’s work is presented 
in this volume; and it is no breach of confidence to add 
that a similar edition of Diéreville’s book is in preparation 
by the same editor. 

In the above list, the names of our eminent first writers 
are given in chronological order, but, incidentally, this order 
also expresses very nearly the relative importance of their 
works. The Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie of Father le 
Clercq, the subject of the present volume, certainly should be 
placed after the works of all of his predecessors, but it is 
not on that account of mediocre worth. It is true, it narrates 
no very important events, and the historian of Canada may 
justly pass it with only brief mention; but it yields to no 
other in the value and interest of its matter from other 
points of view. I need not anticipate by explaining its charac- 
teristics at this place, for I wish now simply to make clear its 
general place in the historical literature of Canada, and the 
reason for its inclusion in the publications of the Champlain 


Society. 


vii 


Vill PREFACE 


As in the case of the work of Nicolas Denys, which I 
have already had the privilege of editing for the Society, 
my right to undertake the translation and annotation of 
Father le Clercq’s book is based neither upon special know- 
ledge of old French, nor upon any particular competency as 
a translator, but it rests upon a somewhat intimate, and 
certainly very loving, knowledge of the matters to which it 
is devoted. My deficiencies as a translator, however, have 
been an advantage to the work, since my consciousness 
thereof has led me to enlist the aid of others who could 
speak upon the various doubtful matters with high autho- 
rity, as the list of their names, to be given a little later, will 
sufficiently attest. 

A translator, as I have found, can never please everybody. 
Some would have him render the original, regardless of its 
literary merits, into a book of clear and flowing English : 
others hold that the original should be followed just as 
literally as clearness will permit, while many insist that only 
a middle course is suitable. I have considered that this 
multiplicity of opinions leaves me free to please myself, and 
accordingly I have tried to make just such a translation as 
I like to read, viz., one which renders clearly the meaning of 
the original while retaining as much as possible of its flavour. 
For this reason, I have not been at pains to avoid awkward- 
ness where the original exhibits it, although, for the sake of 
clearness, I have sometimes had to depart rather widely from 
a literal rendering. I should consider it wholly wrong, even 
had I the power, to make a translation marked by a literary 
elegance absent from the original. As to proper names, I 
have left them in all cases untranslated, and in their exact 
original spelling, excepting only in a few cases of very 
common words, like Nouvelle France, and St. Laurent, where 
I have used the familiar English form. 

In the reprint of the French text at the end of this 
volume, I have sought to reproduce the original in every 
detail as exactly as modern type can be made to do it. It 


PREFACE i 


is therefore copied word for word, letter for letter, misprints, 
typographical accidents and all, even to the extreme of re- 
taining at one place (at the end of page xxii of the Dedication) 
an erroneous catchword, which becomes misleading, or at 
least meaningless, in the reprint. Iam well aware that some 
of my fellow-students will condemn such a policy as accuracy 
run mad, but I believe it is the only logical plan. If, in 
reprinting a book, an editor begins to make changes or cor- 
rections of any sort, there is no logical stopping point, and 
the reader will never know how far he can trust the reprint. 
The French text has been set direct from a copy of the ori- 
ginal work, and the proofs have been read repeatedly and 
very carefully ; consequently I feel confident that few, if any, 
mistakes have managed to creep into this part of the work. 
The original pagination is included, at the requisite places, in 
square brackets, but that of the Dedication and of the Table 
of Contents, given in Roman numerals, is added by myself 
for convenience of reference, since the original is unpaged. 

There is one feature to be expected in a work of this 
kind which the reader may miss, and that is a bibliography 
of works connected with Father le Clercq and his book. 
Such a bibliography I prepared, but for sundry practical 
reasons I found it better to distribute it through the foot- 
notes, in which I believe it is complete. The reader can 
readily find the title of any desired work through the Index, 
in which it is suitably indicated. 

In the preparation of this work I have taken full advan- 
tage of the friendliness with which scholars are accustomed 
to aid one another in their researches, and I have not scrupled 
to call upon many for such aid as I have thought they could 
render. I have tried to acknowledge all such assistance at 
suitable places in the pages which follow, but there are certain 
kind correspondents whom I wish especially to mention at 
this place. First of all, is M. Philéas Gagnon, Keeper of the 
Judicial Archives of Quebec, who has done me the great 
service of reading my translation, in conjunction with the 


L 


x PREFACE 


original, throughout. His suggestions have saved me from 
errors and improved my interpretation in many places ; and 
he has also furnished me with many valued items of informa- 
tion, and certain of the best of my illustrations, notably the 
autograph of Father le Clercq. Invaluable also has been the 
aid of two other scholars whose names are often mentioned 
in the notes in the following pages, Fathers Hugolin and 
Odoric of the Franciscan Monastery of Quebec. They have 
read the proofs throughout, have made many valuable sugges- 
tions, and have especially, out of their rich stores of accurate 
knowledge, supplied many invaluable facts concerning the 
early Recollect missionaries. The connection of Fathers 
Hugolin and Odoric with this work has given me a parti- 
cular satisfaction, not simply because of their direct and 
valuable contribution towards its completeness and accuracy, 
but also for another reason, with which I am sure the reader 
will fully sympathise. The Franciscans are the successors in 
Canada of the ancient Recollects, of whom Father le Clercq, 
our author, was one of the most prominent members; it is, 
therefore, particularly pleasing and appropriate that the heirs 
of his order and of his service in Canada should thus take a 
prominent part in the publication of this record of the life 
and work of their illustrious predecessor. I am perfectly 
ready to agree to the reader’s natural thought at this point 
that it would have been more appropriate still, and perhaps 
also greatly to the benefit of the work, had I left its prepara- 
tion entirely to them; but it can readily be understood that 
this was forbidden by many circumstances. Among others 
whose aid I would especially acknowledge, is my friend, Mr. 
Victor H. Paltsits, State Historian of New York, who has 
contributed not only the bibliographical description which 
bears his name, but much advice and other assistance as well. 
I am greatly indebted, likewise, to Mr. Wilberforce Eames, 
of the Lenox Library, who kindly lent his unrivalled collec- 
tion of editions of the Nouvelle Relation from which the 
bibliographical description and several of the illustrations of 


PREFACE yi 


this work are made, and to Mr. Frederick L. Gay, of Brookline, 
Mass., through whose courteous aid I am able to present the 
valuable illustrations from his uniquely-illustrated copy of the 
Nouvelle Relation. Also, I have received many courtesies from 
the authorities of the Harvard College Library, and from Mr. 
Thomas J. Kiernan in particular; they have generously lent 
me many valuable books for the furtherance of this study. 
And I have had aid which calls for warm acknowledgment 
from several others: from Rev. Father Pacifique, of the 
Indian Mission at Restigouche, in connection with Indian 
matters ; from Mr. H. P. Biggar, of the Canadian Archives, 
for his successful pursuit of the Jumeau map, reproduced in 
this book, long lost and only recovered by his persistence ; 
from M. Placide Gaudet of the Canadian Archives, for his 
expert aid in the solution of some difficult problems, and from 
Professor J. M. Clarke of Albany, for several items about 
Gaspé, of which he has a unique knowledge. I wish also to 
express my obligation to Dr. Doughty of the Canadian 
Archives, and at the same time my conviction, based upon 
considerable experience, as to the invaluable service which the 
Archives Branch is rendering to historical investigation in 
Canada, and my admiration for the enlightened policy which 
secured its foundation and promotes its development. Finally, 
I wish to acknowledge also the aid of the President of the 
Champlain Society, Dr. B. E. Walker, who has read the proofs, 
and of the Secretary, Professor G. M. Wrong, who has not 
only read the proofs, but has rendered courteous service to 
the author at every possible turn. To all of these, and those 
others whose names are mentioned in the following pages, I 
wish to express not only my acknowledgments, but also my 
warm appreciation and sincerest thanks. 


W. F. GANONG. 


NORTHAMPTON, MASS., 
february 1910. 


A 146 7 


EAU ré 


« 
~ 





CONTENTS 


PAGE 


PREFACE . : « Û : : : k . 3 > wi 
INTRODUCTION . x : à : : : : : I 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE NOUVELLE 
RELATION DE LA GASPESIE . : : : 42 


(By Vicror HuGO PALTSITS.) 


TRANSLATION OF THE NOUVELLE RELATION . : 47 
TEXT OF THE NOUVELLE RELATION . ‘ : 032: 
INDEX : y : : : : : ‘ : ; 445 


xiii 





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


AN AUTOGRAPH OF FATHER LE CLERCQ 
A SPECIMEN PAGE OF FATHER LE CLERCQ’S 


BOOK 


EXAMPLES OF THE SYSTEM OF MICMAC HIERO. 
GLYPHICS, OR CHARACTERS, ORIGINALLY 


INVENTED BY FATHER LE CLERCQ 


FOUR ILLUSTRATIONS FROM A SPECIAL COPY 


OF FATHER LE CLERCQ’S BOOK 


TITLE-PAGE (1691) 
TITLE-PAGE (1692) 
TITLE-PAGE (1758) 


FATHER JUMEAU’S MAP OF 1685 . 


PORLION .OF THE 


MAPS 


CARTE 


. To face p. 


2 


» Lo face p. 


PORTION OF CARTE DU CANADA OU DE LA 
NOUVELLE FRANCE, BY DE L'ISLE, 1703 


GENERALLE 


ACCOMPANYING FATHER LE CLERCQ’S 
Premier Etablissement de la Foy, 1691 


GASPÉ BAY . 
PERCÉ VILLAGE 
BARACHOIS . 
NEPISIGUIT . 


ROUTES FROM NEPISIGUIT TO MIRAMICHI 


FORKS OF MIRAMICHI 


XV 


On page 


2 


1 


27 


28 
42 
44 
46 


12 


14 


65 
78 
161 
175 
179 





INTRODUCTION 


FATHER CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ, AND 
HIS GASPESIAN WORK 


HE Gulf of Saint Lawrence lies right across the 

ancient way to Canada, and all that part of its 

j coast which is south of the track of the ships forms 

a remarkable semicircle, sweeping grandly round from Gaspé 
on the north to the Isle of Cape Breton on the east. This 
region exhibits physical features so different, and has had a 
history and development so largely distinct, from Canada on 
the west and Acadia on the south, as to make it well-nigh, 
even though not quite, an independent geographical and 
historical province. It was first explored and mapped, in 
large part, by Cartier, who found there a considerable Indian 
population. Later it became the resort of French fishermen 
and traders, and the field of the labours of many a zealous 
missionary. Then it was the scene of the efforts of the 
Denys, father and son, to establish a vast seigniorial estate 
and a separate sub-government. In time it became the 
refuge of exiled Acadians, and for a while was the only 
Acadia. Finally, its historical distinctness persisted even to 
our own period, for it received the ancestors of its present 
English-speaking settlers direct from Great Britain, and not 
by way of the older English colonies as did the neighbouring 
districts. Yet, strangely enough, in all this time it never 


achieved a name of its own. At first it was viewed as 
1 
A 


2 INTRODUCTION 


nothing but an indefinite part of New France ; later it was 
treated by many as a part of Acadia; to the Denys it was 
only Les costes de la Grande Baye; a few called it Gaspesia ; 
while in our own day the residents of the four Canadian 
provinces among which it is divided know it always as the 
North Shore. To this coast, as à missionary to its Indian 
tribes, there came, in 1675, a Recollect priest of marked 
capacity, Father Chrestien le Clercq, who laboured for nearly 
twelve years in the Indian settlements from Gaspé to Mira- 
michi, and, after his return to France, published a book 
describing these Indians and his life among them. This is 
the book, this the author, and this the subject which form 
the theme of the volume now before the reader. 

Concerning the life of Father le Clercq we know but little, 
and that is mostly told by himself. Both Henry Harrisse 
and John Gilmary Shea have made studies of his biography, 
as recorded in their works mentioned below, and it is only 
by virtue of the almost microscopic character of the study I 
have had to make of Father le Clercq’s book that I am able 
to add anything to the accounts of these two distinguished 
scholars, and to correct some of their minor errors. 

Father le Clercq was born, according to Harrisse, who, 
however, cites no authority, in the province of Artois, which 
is in the Department of Pas-de-Calais, France, while Shea,” 
without mention of the source of his information, further 
locates his birthplace at Bapaume in that province. Some 
slight support is accorded to the correctness of the province 
at least by our authors own affectionate reference to Artois 
in his book.® 


1 Notes pour servir a P Histoire... de la Nouvelle France, Paris, 1872, 
158. 
2 Introduction (6) to /zrst Establishment of the Faith in New France. 
By Father Christian le Clercq, Recollect Missionary. Now first translated, 
with Notes, by John Gilmary Shea. New York: John G. Shea, 1881. 2 vols. 


Pp. 410 and 354- 
8 His Nouvelle Relation, translated in this volume, 557. 


INTRODUCTION 3 
The year of his birth is given by the biographical dic- 


tionaries —which, however, are so erroneous as to the date 
of his coming to Canada and his first voyage to France as 
to throw suspicion upon this—as about 1630, while Shea, 
again without citation of authority, gives it as about 1641. 
The latter date, however, is confirmed by the census of 1681, 
which gives his age as forty years. According to his own 
Statement in another book which he wrote,” he was the first 
to enter into the novitiate of the Recollects, or Reformed 
Franciscans, after the erection of the new Franciscan pro- 
vince of Saint Anthony of Padua ; and, according to custom, 
he must have assumed the name Chrestien at this time, 
his earlier baptismal name being different. Nothing further 
is known of his life or work until 1675, when, as he tells 
us himself,* he inducted into the novitiate at the Monastery 
of Arras that Emmanuel Jumeau who was afterwards his 
devoted colleague in the Gaspesian missions. Meantime he 
was chosen for the Canadian missions, he and Father Zénobe 
Membré’ being the first of the religious selected. In 167 5, as 
he states himself,*® and in August according to an authentic con- 
temporary document,’ he landed for the first time in Canada. 


* Biographie Universelle, and others copying one from another. 

? Published in Sulte’s Æisoire des Canadiens-Français, V, 53. 

° His Premier Etablissement de la Foy, described later on page 19 of this 
volume (Shea’s First Establishment of the Faith, 1. 88). 

* Nouvelle Relation, 188. 

° His Premier Etablissement de la Foy, 11. 116 (Shea’s First Establishment 
of the Faith, 11. 88). Father Membré was his cousin, and a letter is extant in 
which he makes inquiry for the health of Father Chrestien (Margry, Découvertes 
... des Français, 11. 212). As Fathers Hugolin and Odoric tell me, Father le 
Clercq had also a brother, Maxime, likewise a missionary in Canada. 

$ Nouvelle Relation, 22. 

* Histoire chronologique de la Province des Récollets de Paris sous le titre 
de St. Denis en France, depuis 1612 qu’elle fut érigée jusq'en l'année 1676. 
Composée par le Très Revérend Père Hyacinthe Lefebvre, Père de la Province 
des Récollets d'Artois, des Custodies de Flandres et Provincial de la province 
de Paris. A Paris, chez Deny Thierry, rue St. Jacques, a Penseigne de la ville 
de Paris 1677. A copy (apparently unique) exists in the Bibliothèque Nationale 
at Paris, and it contains at the end a MS. addition for the years 1676 to 1686, 


4 INTRODUCTION 


The beginning of Father le Clercq’s new labours was 
under conditions not at all auspicious. Despite the fact that 
the Recollects had laboured zealously and successfully in 
Canada from the first foundation of the colony down to its 
seizure by the English in 1629, they had been excluded 
thereafter down to the year 1669, when they were permitted 
to return as an offset to the increasing power and growing 
unpopularity of the priests of the Jesuit order. When the 
first of the new group of the Recollects reached Canada in 
1670, the supreme ecclesiastical authority was in the hands 
of Monseigneur de Laval, afterwards first Bishop of Quebec, 
who was not in sympathy with the influences which had 
brought them to Canada, and perhaps not friendly to the 
methods of the Recollects themselves.’ He appears to have 
assumed that they had come to Canada rather for meditation 
than for active service, whereas, naturally enough, they 
desired their share of labour in the Indian missions. The 
Governor, Frontenac, was, however, wholly their friend, and 
it was through his intervention that the Gaspé mission was 
assigned to the Recollects, or, as our author® puts it; En 
mission has been assigned to us with the consent of Mon- 


In Chapter XXII. it is stated that Father le Clercq set out from La Rochelle, 
along with Fathers Ozon, Hennepin, Buisset, and Membré in June, and reached 
Quebec in August. I am wholly indebted to Fathers Hugolin and Odoric for 
a knowledge of this precious work. 

A different date, viz. 25th September, is given for Father le Clercq’s arrival 
in Canada by Réveillaud, in a work mentioned a few pages later in this volume 
(page 8, note 3); but the statement is unsupported by authority, and is probably 
incorrect. 

1 In this statement I have been influenced by Shea’s Introduction to his 
First. Establishment of the Faith, which seemed to be confirmed by some 
other evidence. Fathers Hugolin and Odoric, however, have shown me an 
important letter (published in the Revue du Tiers-Ordre et de la Terre Sainte ; 
Bulletin Mensuel Publié par les Franciscains du Canada, July 1908), written by 
Bishop Laval, in November 1670, to the Recollects, in which he expresses the 
greatest friendliness to them and good wishes for the success of their Order in 
Canada, to which they were then returning. 

2 First Establishment of the Faith, \1. 30; also Nouvelle Relation, 20. 


INTRODUCTION 5 


seigneur de Laval . . . by Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac.” 
This was in the year 1673, at which time the mission, a 
vast one which extended indefinitely towards Cape Breton, 
was vacant, although the Jesuit Fathers had laboured there 
at several places long before, as their Relations amply attest, 
and as our author himself takes occasion to mention. The 
first Recollect priests of the mission were Fathers Hilarion 
Guesnin, who came to Canada in 1670, but whose connection 
with the mission is not clear, and Father Exuper Dethunes, 
who came to Canada apparently in 1671, and went to Isle 
Percée in 1673, where he remained as priest to the French 
fishermen and residents until 1683! Then in 1675 Father 
le Clercq was assigned to service among the Indians of this 
mission, and took up the labours which he continued with 
only minor interruptions for the next twelve years. 

It was in the autumn of 1675 that our author, provided 
with a licence from the Bishop of Quebec permitting him 
to exercise priestly functions for three years,® set out from 
Quebec for Isle Percée, which he reached after a stormy 
passage on October 27% Soon afterwards he took up his 
residence at Petite Riviere, now called Barachois, where 
Pierre Denys, Sieur de la Ronde, had a fishing and trading 
establishment, and began to prepare himself, through the 
study of the Indian language, for the work of his mission. 
He spent most of the winter of 1675-76 at Petite Rivière 
in a way he fully describes‘; but towards the spring he 
began his life in the Indian wigwams at a village on Gaspé 
Bay.” He spent the summer of 1676 with the Indians of 
Restigouche, and in September went to Nepisiguit, where 


1 First Establishment of the Faith, Il. 80, and note on page 75 of the 
present volume. 

2 The licence is given in a note on page 202 of this volume. 

3 Nouvelle Relation, 22. 

* OD. cit., 24. 

5 Of. cit., 498, and note on page 288 of this volume. 

5 Op. cit,, 273, and note thereto on page 192 of this volume. 


6 INTRODUCTION 


he remained four months! Then in January 1677 he went 
to Miramichi, making that difficult midwinter voyage, replete 
with hardship and danger, which he describes so fully and 
oraphically in his book? He remained at Miramichi appa- 
rently until summer, after which he seems to have visited 
Quebec.? It was sometime during this year* that he invented 
the remarkable system of characters, or hieroglyphics, which 
he designed as an aid to the memories of his Indians in 
repeating their prayers. This system, which has survived 
down to our own day, has played a great part in the religious 
instruction of the Gaspesian, or, as we now call them, the 
Micmac Indians ; and it is a subject of such interest that 
I shall give it a special discussion later in this chapter. 

Despite the devotion with which he laboured among his 
Indians, Father le Clercq soon felt the force of the colossal 
obstacles to their conversion, in their indifference, superstition, 
and drunkenness, which had discouraged his predecessors ; 
and in 1679, after four years of effort,> he questioned whether 
it was worth while to waste his strength longer in so fruitless 
a field. He placed the matter before his Superior, Father le 
Roux, who wrote him the unanswerable letter which our author 
reproduces in full in his book ;° and with renewed courage 
he resumed his labours. His own book appears to state’ that 
he visited Father le Roux at Quebec in the same summer 
(1679), but, as will be shown later in this volume,* he seems 
to have confused two events, and the visit from which he 
was carried by his impatient Indians back to Restigouche 
probably occurred in 1678. He appears to have accepted 
the invitation of Father le Roux, contained in the letter 


1 Data in his book, as explained in a note on page 164 of this volume. 
2 Nouvelle Relation, chapter xi. 

3 Op. cit., 281, and note on page 195 of this volume. 

4 Op. cit., 141, and page 22 of this volume. 

5 Op. cit., 278, and note at page 194 of this volume. 

ESOP MeC 270; ODu CL 133° 
5 Footnote to page 128. 





re 
+ = 


LS 


your dla Deron De flarser 76 8° 


ele baptize Che; Weansteur De eka rete al 
Coste” De wt otege AA. ES 
De eur Jours Le De france 7 dr. je 


ey 7e — 
De Canne rll Ses pere SF TTREE fouts ca 


gfrorr cots De Sahooe ok AE fan Ps Ss fe pees ot Fe ae 
a ie 
De  cfpge Je porerr fes af. 1° ph > 
pipe af, 
c1rchereaus Ch eee “DeegreeF fou 
Gh Oe oo aroisse De lee 
oe ? 0 PES 
era | Chresher oe 


A PIECISTOTRATE 2 Le g7 7 
vs 
beg De st Loco gra? cha ee 


Le ee le fire os 
(A ke D quel 


AUTOGRAPH OF FATHER LE CLERCQ 


Photographed from the original in the Roman Catholic Bishop’s Palace at Quebec 


(About three-fourths the original size) 


INTRODUCTION ic 


afore-mentioned, to spend the winter of 1679-80 in Quebec, 
for on October 30, 1679, he was at Ste. Anne de Beaupré 
near Quebec, as shown by a certificate! of à marriage cere- 
mony which he celebrated at that time, while on February 2, 
1680, as shown by the very precious autographic certificate 
presented herewith,? he was at Coste de St. Ange, now 
St. Augustin, near Quebec. Early in the next summer 
(1680), he was sent to France on an important errand 
connected with the building of a Recollect hospice at 
Quebec and the foundation of a Recollect establishment 
at Montreal.? On the way he stopped at Isle Percée, and 
then occurred the very interesting incident of the Indian 
speeches which he describes so fully in his final chapter. 
In the same chapter he relates some incidents of his winter 
in France and of his voyage back to Quebec, which he 
reached in the summer of 1681.4 He then made a journey 
to Montreal in connection with the same business, and two 
days after his return to Quebec, in the latter part of October, 
he departed for Gaspesia to resume the duties of his mission.® 

This voyage to France marks off the period of Father 


1 For a copy of this document I am indebted to Fathers Hugolin and Odoric. 
It is not written by Father le Clercq, nor signed by him, but is the work of a 
curate. 

2 For the photograph of this most interesting document, the only known 
autograph of Father le Clercq, I am indebted to the kind interest and aid of 
M. Philéas Gagnon, of Quebec, who was enabled to obtain the copy through 
the courtesy of Abbé Lionel Lindsay. I find that its existence and importance 
have long been known to Fathers Hugolin and Odoric. 

The location of the Coste de St. Ange, mentioned therein, was unknown 
to me, and apparently to other students as well; but M. Placide Gaudet, of 
the Archives Department at Ottawa, applied to the problem his great know- 
ledge and investigating skill, and settled beyond question that the Coste de 
St. Ange was an early name for the modern St. Augustin, above Quebec. 

3 Of. ctt., 528; the year is fixed by data given in a note under page 571 of 
his book (page 321 of this volume). 

4 Of. cit., 571, and note thereto at page 321 of this volume. | 

5 Op. cit. 571. The census of 1681, cited on an earlier page (3) of this 
volume, appears to show that he was in Quebec on 14th November, so that, 
writing from memory, he apparently puts his departure too early. 


8 INTRODUCTION 


le Clercq’s Gaspesian labours into two nearly equal parts—an 
earlier about which we know something, and a later about 
which we know little. The obscurity as to his second mission, 
as he calls it, is largely explained by the fact that he intended 
to describe its events in his other book,! though in fact no 
such account appears in that work, for reasons which will be 
given a few pages later. We know, however, this much. In 
1684 he was still at work among his Gaspesians, as a mention 
in Father Bigot’s Relation of that year” makes plain, and a 
document was signed by him in November of that same year at 
Quebec, as “ Frére Chrestien Le Clercq, P.R., missionnaire des 
Gaspesiens.” * The chronology of his movements for the next 
three years I have not been able to elucidate. He could not have 
been at Miramichi in 1684—8 5-86, for the facts given by Mon- 
seigneur de Saint Valier in his well-known book * show that Father 
Thury was on that river in those years, and certainly these two 
missionaries could not have been there at the same time. Nor 
could he have been the “ good religious of the order of Recol- 
lects,” whom Monseigneur de Saint Valier mentions as living 
with great regularity among the French at Isle Percée, for his 
duties lay not with the French but the Indians.’ It is altogether 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 572. 

2 Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, Ixili. 71; reprinted in a note to page 
206 of this volume. 

3 Réveillaud, Eug., Histoire Chronologigue de la Nouvelle France ou 
Canada . . . par le Père Sixte le Tac, Recollet. Publiée pour la première fois 
d'après le manuscrit original de 1689 ef accompagnée de Notes et d'un Aj- 
pendice tout composé de documents originaux et inédits. Paris, 1888, ix.+ 266 pp. 
page 229. The part of this work by Le Tac, which in any case is whollya 
compilation from known works, has only a slight connection with our present 
subject, but several of the new documents presented by the editor are of much 
value for the data they give upon Father le Clercq’s movements, and upon 
the history of Isle Percée where he laboured. 

4 Estat present de l’Eglise et de la Colonie françoise dans la Nouvelle 
France, par M. 1’ Evéque de Quebec. Paris, 1688. Also a reprint, Quebec, 1857. 

5 Besides, as Fathers Hugolin and Odoric point out to me, this good 
religious was certainly Father Joseph Denis (Denys), of whom a biography 
by Father Hugolin is now appearing in the Revue du Tiers-Ordre et de la 
Terre Sainte, mentioned in the footnote on page 4 of this volume. 












de laGafpefie. 1939 
aax Deputez te Chef de 
cette Nation m’avoit envoïez, 
de la riviere de Sainte Croix 
à Nipifiquit, pour me prier de 
les aller catechifer. 





CHAPIERE Xi: 


Relation dw penible Vorage de 
_L Aatenr, allant annoncer la Foi 
aux Gafpefiens Perte-Croix. 


I: eft bien vrai qu'il n'y a 
que Dieu feul qui puiffe 
adoucir , par l’onétion de fa 
grace, les travaux Apoftoli- 
ques des Miffions laborienfes 
de la Nouvelle France: auffi 
faut-il avoüer ingenûment, 
que toutes les forces de la 
Nature ne ferviroient qu’à 
augmenter les peines des Mif- 
fionnaires , fi la Croix d’un 
R üi 


A SPECIMEN PAGE OF FATHER LE CLERCQ’S 
NOUVELLE RELATION 
(Original size) 


INTRODUCTION 9 


likely that in these years Father le Clercq spent most of his time 
at Restigouche, and elsewhere around the Baie des Chaleurs. 
During this period he inducted into the Miramichi mission his 
well-beloved colleague Father Emmanuel Jumeau, an event 
which probably occurred in 1682 or 1683: Before his return 
finally to France, and probably in the year 1686, he dedicated 
the church of Saint Peter at Isle Percée, nearly losing his life 
in the preparations therefor, as he relates fully in his book.? 
He tells us positively in his other book, and more than once 
implies in this, that he returned finally to France in 1687.8 
Since, however, a letter written by Monseigneur de Saint Valier 
early in 1687 speaks of him as then in France,‘ he must have 
returned the preceding autumn, unless, like Monseigneur de 
Saint Valier himself, he left Canada late in 1686 and reached 
France early in 1687. After this date we know very 
little indeed concerning him. He became Superior of the 
Monastery at Lens, as the title-pages of his books attest. 
Harrisse who is followed by Shea,f gives the date of his 
death as 1695, citing Paquot’s Mémoires’ as authority, but, 
as I know from a personal search, Paquot makes no such 
statement, and the date is no doubt taken from the unreliable 
biographical dictionaries already cited. On the other hand, 


* Nouvelle Relation, 188, and note thereto on page 153 of this volume. 

? Op. cit., 17; the year is fixed by data given in a footnote on page 73 of 
this volume. 

3 Premier Etablissement de la Foy (First Establishment of the Faith, X, 316), 
and Nouvelle Relation, 31, 279. 

‘ Published by Réveillaud in Le Tac, Histoire Chronologigue, 231. The 
date (1685) assigned by Réveillaud to the letter is obviously wrong, since its 
own statements show that it was written after its writer’s return to France, 
which was in February 1687. Other internal évidence shows that it was 
written early in that year. 

5 Notes, 158. 

$ Introduction to First Establishment of the Fatth, 1. 22. 

* Paquot, M., Mémoires pour servir a l'Histoire litteraire des dix sept 
Provinces des Pays-Bas, de la Principauté de Liege et de quelques contrées voisines. 
Louvain, Vol. III, 1770, page 555. This work gives a sketch of Father le 
Clercq, containing, however, very little except a synopsis of the more interest- 
ing matters in his Vowvelle Relation. 


10 INTRODUCTION 


Father Hennepin’s Nouvelle Découverte of 1697, or at least 
the English edition, 4 New Discovery, of 1698* speaks of 
him as “Definitor of our Recollects of the Province of 
Artois,” implying that he was living in that year. Father 
Hennepin, it is true, should not be cited as authority on 
historical matters, but I cannot conceive of any motive he 
could have had in falsifying an incidental remark of this 
nature. But as to the real year of his death, or any further 
facts concerning his later life in France, we have no informa- 
tion so far as I can discover.” 

Such is our scanty knowledge of our author’s life, which 
was more useful than eventful. Aside from the good that 
he did, which does not die, few memorials of him exist, and 
of these the most important are his two books, his system 
of hieroglyphics, and a few scattered records connected with 
his missionary duties. Indeed, although many of the latter 
must exist, I have seen a copy of but a single one—the very 
interesting autograph certificate which is presented in photo- 
graphic facsimile herewith, and which exhibits this phase of 
our author’s personality in a very pleasing light. But his 
memory has not been without honour in our own day, as two 
incidents attest. A few years ago his name was applied to a 
prominent mountain near the head of the Nepisiguit River,” 
although it is too early as yet for us to know whether it will 
persist and come into general use. And finally, more recently, 
a true lover and eminent scientific investigator of the land 
where Father le Clercq laboured so long has applied his name 


1 Thwaites’ edition of 1903, II. 370. 

2 Fathers Hugolin and Odoric write me that a MS. Zable générale des 
Récollets de la Province de St. Denis, of about 1750, of which a copy is in their 
possession, mentions Father le Clercq among the deceased religious, but with- 
out stating the date of his death, which appears to have been even then 
unknown. My own several efforts to discover, through the aid of local students 
at Lens and Arras, any additional facts about the later life and the death of 
our author have been fruitless. (On a possible portrait, see note to page 27.) 

3 As recorded in the Bulletin of the Natural History Society of New 
Brunswick, Vol. IV., 1899, 254. 


D SES PORT SS, Seinen ie 


2 Be ni - = - à 
ro Seabees FEES ace r SP eo ; EPS ETS ENT nes 
a ae A > * é . TX are ie : ic F ; 7 7 L a! ae : ah = He.” 
3 : é Eve “as pen ù 





… 
¢ 








aol CBE, 
DAML LOTTI CED | fi 


sre! 


~ ~ 
‘ CRO: 72 g : 

Per ie JE one 3 ue i. vay & 2 
st: TP “a 


. metas > aL. + 
“vcafia fe RTE LA. 


RMI 
ser 


+ LACTIEEA Cog . 


ETAL do ral o. 
nt Sete 





(2215 Jww18140 377 Spary-omy 72097) 
oyeuonjeu enbayzornqrq au} ur Jeurst.410 9} OI} ydur803ouq4 
S89T AO AVA SAVANNL AHHILVA 




















Le Vp ART AS F4 HN 
rerie ge Bree OT pp? : s J ae 
; Bae Sanity LE ee: oa or € re : D AZ oN È a & 
: : ; LOS; eh Pat S7 
; : : So ODIs a Ae 
BED OF CSS c if 
SE DD d 1 He “J 
RESF D | =f 
nae ee ESS oo Aas 


: É A =p: £ 2 4 
Li im’ >. > ig 
ayo b-prpu ; =, 
DIU OUT LA TIPL AE À : 
pre veceiag agen EY. 
PNA RE} 
ae Der 7, Pick 2ÉPIPIE, UT RAD 27 
WADA eave Lanta Vous rss rate 
Pour 2 sO ure we, part 20g 2a Fe 
TA 2 WOLD EMATT DR CBDLGG A 
B29 07 277074 PA rat 
Se COTE OY TS EE 20 24 Bf 
COAG LO! RAE 29 oan raat 
{ DNS TR MG OEE of PRE, we Lares 
al oy RIT rytmlbe tr nice 
-SAOULEI Dans wy - 3 > 25 p} 
19: wae: “7 DS eee 2g 222 
AIRE AT pd que PO) us 





VERY 7 vagues y and ps 
pe pes = enn 
pe se jure À POAC “2 ¥> ap tsp 
hte PPD VG FE xO F LBRO Axe abel 


Por AZO 723 Ha #7 quo Chee 
rec 2. 

7 re 22. F269, pS 

5 « : : 

D EEE 


SUS Y 
x ao 


LL 44 
DY Be 8 
Hu 


PK 





> a 





INTRODUCTION 11 


to two fossils newly discovered at Percé Rock and Gaspé 
Basin.! 

We turn now to consider the book which js translated 
and reprinted, both for the first time, in the present volume. 
It is a neatly-printed little duodecimo of about six hundred 
pages, the appearance of which can be learned from the sample 
reproduced herewith,? while all of the interesting details as 
to its bibliographical history and characteristics are presented 
by the hand of a master a few pages later in this volume. 
The book contains no pictures, and usually no maps, although 
the map of New France, made to illustrate his other book, 
is sometimes found in this. The Eastern portion is reproduced 
in this volume,’ partly because it is our author’s, and partly 
in illustration of his own travels in this country. But a far 
more important map exists, virtually a map of Gaspesia, drawn 
in great detail by our author’s friend and colleague, Father 
Emmanuel Jumeau ; it illustrates Father le Clercq’s book as 
perfectly as if he himself had drawn it for the express purpose, 
and accordingly it is reproduced in this volume. 


* Professor J. M. Clarke, in his Early Devonic Æistory of New York and 
Eastern North America (Albany, New York, 1908), 117 and 228. The fossils 
are called 7enfaculites leclercgia, and Pleurotomaria sulcomarginata, var. 
leclercgt. 

* Opposite page 9. * Opposite page 14. 

* Opposite this page. Its title, printed upon it, reads thus in translation :— 

“The Grande Baye of Saint Laurens in New France,—shown in a light 
in which tt has not up to thts time appeared,—correciness, curious features 
and accuracy having been embodied therein so far as has been possible, and 
as the information of the residents of the same country have been able to 
Jurnish; in addition to this is the actual knowledge which the geographer 
has of several places, especially of the River of Sainte Croix, where in making 
his mission he has several times had the honour to worship great crosses 
erected in the midst of the wastes and the woods by the native Indians belonging 
to those places, and named porcrots, having received the cross miraculously 
Jrom heaven a long time before the arrival of the French in this country. 
Made by the R. Father Emmanuel Jumeau, Recollect missionary in Canada, 
4 Oct. 1685.” 

The place of this map in the cartography of this region is discussed in the 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, I11., 1897, ii. 363, and ellie 
1906, ii. 58, and another note thereon is contained on page 152 of this volume. 


12 INTRODUCTION 


The title of the book, Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie, in- 
volves two matters needing comment. The Nouvelle was no 
doubt used to mark a distinction from the older Relations 
of the Jesuits, some parts of which were concerned with the 
same country and subjects. The name Gaspesie was apparently 
adapted from that of the Indian inhabitants (Gaspesiens), who 
in turn derived their name from Gaspé,’ the most prominent 
place of their resort. They had been called Gaspesiens from 
the time of Lescarbot, who used the equivalent form Gas- 
peiquois,” while the Jesuit Relations of 1667-68 and later’ 
called them Gaspesiens, as does our author. But the place- 
name Gaspesie here makes its appearance for the first time. 
It was adopted by the geographer De l'Isle on his important 
type map of 1703, as the accompanying excerpt will show, 
and it appears also in a few other records of that time. This 
map of De l'Isle, by the way, has à particular interest in this, 
that it assigns to Gaspesie definite bounds and limits, which, 
except for running too far west, correspond in general with the 
nearly-natural historical and geographical province of which 
I have already spoken, and with the territory of the Denys 
which they called “les costes de la grande baye.”* But the 
name Gaspesie, or its equivalent Gaspesia, never came into 
general geographical use, which is a pity, for Canada, 
Gaspesia, and Acadia constitute a strikingly pleasing trio of 
place-names. The word has, however, survived, like Acadia, 
in literary usage ; and, moreover, it is said that the French 
residents of the modern district of Gaspé still use it, in the 
form Gaspesy, as a general name for the region.” In my 


1 A discussion of the origin of this word is contained in a note on page 
63 of this volume. 

2 In Les Muses de la Nouvelle-France, under “ La Deffaite des Savvages 
Armovchiqvois.” 

® Thwaites’ edition, LI. 175; also LX. 262, and LXIII. 71. 

4 Our author himself once speaks of the region under the name “great 
bay” (First Establishment of the Faith, ll. 103). 

5 In J. M. Clarke’s Sketches of Gaspé (Albany, New York, 1908), 6. 


(2215 Jou15140)) 
9ISI,] 2P SUWNEJINO iw 


(SOL) ZINVYA ATTAANON VT 44 NO VAVNVO ANG ALAVI AO NOILHOd 






11 
241978 as 
6 prurap, 
03 dr 
yrnour 


SIU2]PE 
ATID UD] 









é 7227, frou bs 














TH SE 
io "tan 13 = 
fava yp AO ” = 
hub]. \ ae "rays À à 
st per? MHD a , 3 
+ oF. x a * 2 
Ce BB 24. } sirurr ee 


ft 


QVILOU OID AT 
ine es 


+ he ‘= 3 


se, FE 
QUO SE EE 
. et 24217 Joon sl a Pre I 


: 2 . 
snob yy Mies 27 B82 Le eS PAST 7, 
IS 0S OA ER y P age ; 











np who uorsr nosd yop 








uve pre. ds > a ee eon a a 
“9 +10, Faly Be ge’ TE Cite a SANdTEUT sp» A 
ff LES 4 Surepopr pw 
KG 3 2 mi Pp fs DT 





LNSMAV’ Ls T0 




















3 a= 61084 2uypusarue 
ao? ont 2 9,9 7 . 202. ar TE 
PL XX , es ss) oP] 
seh SL op. & 7 
aa ee 
date 
ry sraviudg = ? WIN = = . 
dk hy = > : vi 
hopouz op hr = me ; ent Sr b ee St 
shog Re Pr ale yo ee 


Be Lro | 


[ 





INTRODUCTION 13 


translation I have used Gaspesia (and Gaspesians) rather than 
Gaspesie (and Gaspesiens) in order better to preserve the 
analogy with Acadia and Canada. 

The book opens with a Dedication, graceful but inflated, 
to the author’s patroness and friend, the Princesse d’Epinoy. 
The first chapter, professing to deal with Gaspesia in general, 
is awkwardly composed, and bears evidence of hasty re- 
arrangement in order to admit a letter of Father Jumeau. 
But this letter was worth the disturbance, for it contains by 
far the most detailed account we possess of the destruction 
of the settlement at Isle Percée in 1690, an event for which 
we must henceforth blame not the expedition of Phips, as 
commonly supposed, but privateers from the State of New 
York. This chapter contains a rather unsatisfactory descrip- 
tion of the country, but some valuable notes on the origin 
of the mission, our author’s arrival, and his early labours 
there. His second chapter discusses the origin of the 
Gaspesians, according to their own traditions and European 
speculations, and introduces our author’s favourite theme of 
the worship of the Cross among the Miramichi Indians,—a 
subject of such prominence in the book that I shall give it 
a separate discussion later in this Introduction. The third 
chapter, devoted to the birth customs of the Gaspesian 
Indians, introduces those clear, matter-of-fact, detailed de- 
scriptions of Indian life and customs, in part confirmatory 
of other accounts and in part new matter from personal 
observation, which constitute the most valuable material 
embodied in the book. The fourth chapter contains the 
narration of the author’s observations as to the Indian dress, 
ornaments, painting of the face, dressing of the hair, and 
other related matters, and he testifies to the modesty of the 
Gaspesian women. The fifth chapter describes, in the same 
satisfactory manner, their wigwams and home life, both 
material and moral, to the advantages of which the writer 
is by no means insensible ; and nowhere in our literature 





14 INTRODUCTION 


have we a better picture of the home life of the Indians.~ 
This chapter is enlivened by one of those logically unanswer- 
able Indian speeches in which our author seems to take a 
considerable pleasure. The sixth chapter treats of the food, 
cooking, famines, suffering, and occasional cannibalism of the 
Indians, all as before with much valuable detail. The seventh 
chapter, after certain comments upon the ignorance and a 
natural cleverness of the Indians, is devoted chiefly to an 
account of the invention and use by our author of a system 
of hieroglyphic characters designed to aid the memory of his 
converts in remembering their prayers,—another subject of 
such importance and interest that I shall treat it apart in a 
later place in this Introduction. The eighth chapter, on the 
language of the Indians, is all too brief, for it gives but a few 
pages of general remarks to a subject which our author could 
have treated as a master. The ninth chapter deals with their 
religion, but gives little more than an account of their ancient ~ 
worship of the sun as introductory to a subject of more 
consequence in our author’s mind—their worship of the 
Cross—to which he devotes the entire tenth chapter. The 
eleventh chapter, abnormally long, contains a most interesting 
and well-written narrative of the author’s adventurous mid- 
winter voyage from Nepisiguit to Miramichi, during which 
he was like to have perished ; and incidentally he gives some 
very precious facts as to local settlements and their pro- 
prietors, notably Richard Denys, Sieur de Fronsac, and 
Philippe Enault, Sieur de Barbaucannes. He then describes 
some incidents of his mission to his Cross-bearer (Miramichi) 
Indians, and again comes back to the origin of their worship, 
giving us incidentally a clue to its real meaning, as will be 
shown in the section devoted to the subject later in this 
Introduction. He also tells how he wavered in his labours 
and thought of leaving a field productive of so little fruit, 
and he prints a long and illuminating letter from his Superior, 
Father le Roux, who answers his objections in a way which 


(2225 JHu15140) 
AOJ D] 0P JUOUIESS1]Q0JA LIU14 SOOUAIO A1 AAHLVA 
ONIANVANOOOV (1691) HONVAAX ATIHANON VT 44 ATTIVAANAIY ALAVO AHL AO NOILHOd V 


BAVC 
ao N 






Ae 
= 


4 SIwv4 





los op agey2ey 
SSW AdW-? 
SET -TPW 9 
FN UW? 


Bang 2 = 
RE EE EE EN HE HN wat WML WW UOT CCI ry (A 


Aa Es CLE. \OEE. CLE ace, 1£ ork Gok 00 











INTRODUCTION 15 


left him no course but to remain. In his twelfth chapter he | 
gives at length an Indian tradition concerning Papkootparout, 
ruler of the Land of Souls, and the way in which he gave to 
men the gift of corn and tobacco ; and the tale is of interest 
for the clearness with which it reflects the Indian conception 
of a desirable future life-~ In the thirteenth chapter our 
author returns to his personal observations upon the Indians, 
and gives a very interesting account of their jugglers or 
medicine men, with some details not elsewhere recorded ; and 
then he adds a number of the many superstitions prominent 
in their daily lives and habits. And he tells how certain 
Indians, women as well as men, assumed the functions and: 
aped the ways of the priests. The fourteenth chapter de- 
scribes the duties and the limited authority of the chiefs,: 
their striking conception of soblesse oblige, their treatment of 
law-breakers, and many of their customs which had the 
force of laws. The fifteenth chapter describes the customs of 
the Gaspesians, their admirable physique and sturdy health, 
their simple and peaceful life, their hospitality, certain 
peculiarities of their temperament, and again the modesty of 
the women. He does not spare their uncleanly habits and 
disgusting eating manners, including their habitual drunken- 
ness, of which the ravages are strongly pictured, with a 
denunciation of the liquor traffic. The sixteenth chapter tells 
in detail of their marriage customs, in that matter-of-fact and 
obviously observational spirit which gives so much value to 
these chapters on Indian customs. The seventeenth chapter 
describes their mode of making war, gives accounts of their 
“battles with their hereditary foes the Esquimaux, and relates 
a highly ornamented tradition as to the origin of their strife. 
The eighteenth chapter treats of hunting the moose, beavér, 
and other animals, and gives brief accounts and lists of the 
various Gaspesian mammals, birds, and fishes. But our 
author was no naturalist, and this chapter does not rise to 
his opportunities, though his comments do contain several 


16 INTRODUCTION 


welcome items of information. Chapter nineteen treats of 
the Indian amusements, shows the high place held in their 
lives by their innumerable feasts and their many kinds of 
speeches, and describes their dances and games. The 
twentieth chapter mentions the few remedies sufficient in 
their healthy lives, and tells systematically of their sicknesses, 
death and funeral customs—all in the direct, clear, systematic 
manner which becomes increasingly manifest as the book pro- 
gresses. The twenty-first and final chapter is devoted to the 
author’s first voyage to France after a residence of five years 
in Canada. On the way he stopped at Isle Percée, and there 
his Indian foster-father made to him the remarkable speech 
which is given in full. And finally, with an account of his 
winter in France, and the incidents of his return to Canada 
and his mission, Father le Clercq closes this book. 

Such are the principal matters set forth in Father le 
Clercq’s Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie. It is evident that 
he who seeks in its pages any material of wide historical 
significance will find disappointment, and he may even agree 
with Father Charlevoix, who said of this book: “A coast 
that is a waste; some little islands and harbours where the 
fishery is made; Indians who come and go from Acadia 
and its neighbourhood ;—that is what Gaspesie is and the 
Gaspesians, whom our author names Porte-Croix from a false 
tradition. It is not the wherewithal from which to fill up 
a volume of 600 pages with very interesting matters) eit 
is by no means necessary for us to seek an explanation of 
this opinion in the fact that Father Charlevoix was a Jesuit 
and Father le Clercq a Recollect, for such an opinion was 
natural enough to any student who was seeking material for 


1 Histoire de la Nouvelle France, 1. lv. The words in the original are: 
“ Une Cote déserte, quelques petites Isles, & des Havres, où l’on fait la pêche ; 
des Sauvages, qui vont & viennent de l’Acadie & des environs ; voilà ce que 
Cest que la Gaspesie, &° les Gaspesiens, que l’Auteur appelle Porte-Croix, 
sur une fausse tradition ;}& ce nest pas de quoi remplir un Volume de 600. 
pages de choses fort intéressantes? 


INTRODUCTION 17 


a great work intended to interest the reader of that time. 
The value of the Nouvelle Relation to us is of a kind of which 
neither author nor critic could have had any idea. As one 
of our minor historical sources capable of yielding materials 
of value to modern critical study, as a repository of interesting 
fact concerning the early days of our native land, as a piece 
of the rare but precious literature having the power to make 
us feel something of the spirit of its times, the book has a 
high and enduring even though very local value. 

We turn now to the important question as to the value 
of the work as an authority. In places the author’s statement 
of facts is inaccurate, as in the case of the erroneous dates 
and inscription he assigns to Cartier’s voyage, and the 
inconsistent chronology of his own life in Canada? He 
obviously exaggerates many details, and invents others for 
the purpose of giving some incidents a more instructive or 
dramatic treatment, as in his narrative of the Basque mur- 
derer,® and his account of the importance of the Cross to 
the Indians of Miramichi. But so many of his statements 
are fully confirmed from other sources, while most of them 
withal are given in so matter-of-fact and direct a manner, 
that I believe there is no question as to the trustworthiness 
of his treatment of all important matters in the entire Relation. 
Certainly there is no doubt, in my opinion, as to the author’s 
intention to tell always the literal truth, though at times, it 
is true, he tells it to better advantage than the bare facts by 
themselves could do. If we make allowance for the fact that 
most of his data were doubtless written down purely from 
memory, and that he had a marked temperamental tendency 
to magnify and embellish matters which could be turned to 
account in his calling, for the rest we may trust his work fully. 


1 Nouvelle Relation, v., and note thereto in this volume (page 50). 
? Of. cit., 136, and note thereto in this volume (page 128). 

> Op. cit., 453, and note thereto on page 268 of this volume. 

* Page 37 of this Introduction. 


18 INTRODUCTION 


In places in the book there is obvious influence of other 
works which the author used in preparing his own. His 
treatment of some matters strongly suggests that of Father 
le Caron as contained in a document which he gives in full 
in his other book ; while here and there, in certain turns and 
topics, I think I can detect the influence of Denys’ well-known 
work. But a perfectly plain case is his use of Father le 
Jeune’s Relation of 1634, from which he extracts a striking 
brief passage, together with a less important longer one, 
taking them almost word for word, but with such changes 
as were necessary to make them apply to his Gaspesians.” 
This latter statement expresses, I think, the nature of the 
use he made of these books. He had them beside him as 
he wrote, and used them to refresh his memory, and as 
sources of suggestion for matters which he might otherwise 
have forgotten to speak of. Now and then, when he found 
a passage which expressed particularly well the matters he 
was describing, he followed it closely, sometimes even to the 
very words ; but in such cases he modified or altered the 
statements of fact to make them express the truth about his 
particular subject. His plagiarisms, which in any case were 
in accord with the custom of the time, were not so much 
of matter or ideas as of form. Moreover, some of his 
apparent use of material from other works is doubtless simply 
the result of the use by all authors of the time in common 
of certain conventional phrases, stories, or ideas which were 
then in wide circulation. . 

In general the book is clearly written, but it is curiously 
uneven in style. In some places, and notably in the very first 
chapter, it is clumsy, and occasionally a little obscure. Else- 
where it is perfectly clear, strong, and even graceful. In 
general it may be said that the book improves in literary 
merit as it advances, and some passages taken by themselves 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 447, 477, with notes thereto on pages 277 and 263 of 
this volume. 


INTRODUCTION 19 


justify a far more favourable judgment than can be accorded 
to the book as a whole! Here and there occur curious 
irregularities of another sort, in certain disjointed passages 
which obviously do not stand in their original relations to 
their context,’ and they have to me an appearance suggesting 
that the manuscript of the book was longer, but was cut for 
brevity in the printing. The book has a few misprints in 
the French text, perhaps two dozen in the entire work, but 
in the Indian words and sentences the misprints are very 
humerous, as the notes under those words will show. This 
seems to indicate that the proofs of the book were carefully 
read by some one familiar with good French, but quite un- 
familiar with the Micmac expressions, which in turn is 
evidence that Father le Clercq was not himself the proof- 
reader. This point may have some bearing upon his part 
. in the publication of his other book, for it shows almost 
certainly that he did not see in proof, as probably he did 
not in the final MS., the remarkable material which appeared 
in that work under his name. 

The Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie was not Father le 
Clercq’s only book, for in the same year he published another 
. with the following title :— 

Premier Etablissement de la Foy dans la Nouvelle France, 
contenant la Publication de l'Evangile, l'Histoire des Colonies 
Françoises, & les fameuses decouvertes depuis le Fleuve de Saint 
Laurent, la Loüisiane € le Fleuve Colbert jusqu'au Golphe 
Mexique, achevées sous la conduite de feu Monsieur de la Salle. 
Par Ordre dv Roy. Avec les Victoires remportées en Canada 
par les armes de Sa Majesté sur les Anglois € Les Iroquois en 


* Thus, in the Champlain Society’s edition of Denys’ work, 25, I have 
expressed a far more favourable opinion of the literary merit of this book than 
I can now endorse after a more thorough study. It may be some explana- 
tion to say that I had been reading its best passages in comparison with the 
average of Denys, to whose work it is certainly greatly superior in a literary 
way. 

* Nouvelle Relation, 52, 153, and notes thereto in this volume. 


20 INTRODUCTION 


1690. Dedié à Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac, Gouverneur 
€ Lieutenant General de la Nouvelle France. Par le Pere 
Chrestien le Clercq Missionnaire Recollet de la Province de Saint 
Antoine de Pade en Arthois, Gardien des Recollets de Lens. 
Tome I. A. Paris, Chez Amable Auroy, rue Saint Jacques, 
attenant la Fontaine S. Severin à l'Image Saint Jerome. 
M.DC.XCI. Avec Privilege du Roy. Tome I. pp. XXVIII. + 


559; Tome LI. pp. 458. 
This work is of much more general importance than the 


Nouvelle Relation, because it includes some original material, 
nowhere else accessible, upon the early explorations of the 
Mississippi Valley. It has been translated by J. G. Shea 
under the title, First Establishment of the Faith, and Shea’s 
Introduction leaves little to be added as to the historical status 
of the work. As Harrisse, Shea, and others have pointed 
out, it is a remarkable book, containing material, especially 
satirical attacks upon the Jesuits, which it is ‘altogether 
unlikely that Father le Clercq wrote, although other parts 
are undoubtedly his work. It was early asserted that 


1 This work, identical in every detail of the text, was also issued under two 
other titles. The first, 1691, bore only the author’s initials, and the title began : 
Etablissement de la Foy dans la Nouvelle France, Contenant l'Histoire des 
Colonies Françoises, & des Découvertes, qui s'y sont faites jusqgues a present, 
&c., &c. The other, published anonymously in 1692, is entitled: Azstoire 
des Colonies Françoïses et les fameuses découvertes depuis le fleuve de S. 
Laurent, la Loitisiane & le fleuve Colbert jusqu'au Golphe Mexique, achevées 
sous La conduite de feu Monsieur de la Salle, &c., &c. The full biographical 
details are given in Shea’s well-known translation of the work, entitled Fzrs¢ 
Establishment of the Faith (described in a note to page 2 of this volume). 

A number of investigators have considered the historical status of this work, 
and its author’s part therein, of which the principal are : Shea, in his Discovery 
of the Mississippi Valley, in Louisiana Historical Collections, 1V., 1852, 78, 
and the Introduction to his First Establishment of the Faith; Harrisse in his 
Notes pour servir à l'Histoire . .. de la Nouvelle France, 158 ; Charlevoix, 
Histoire de la Nouvelle France, 1. 1v.; Rochemonteix, Les Jesuites et la 
Nouvelle-France au XVII Siècle (Paris, 1896), 1IL. 37 ; Margry, Découvertes 
et Etablissements des François (Paris, 1879), I. xviii. ; Parkman, Pioneers of 
France, edition of 1901, II. 4; Field, Indian Bibliography (New York, 1873), 
231; Biggar, Early Trading Companies of New France (Toronto, 1901), 290. 


INTRODUCTION 21 


Frontenac, or Father le Roux, had something to do with 
its preparation, but this is uncertain. In view of the problems 
as to its authorship, I have been especially interested in 
reading the work carefully (in Shea’s translation, for I have 
not seen the very rare original) in comparison with the 
Nouvelle Relation. It is plainly very uneven in style, and 
characterised by some sudden transitions of both matter and 
motive. In places I have thought, though this may be fancy, 
that I could detect interpolated passages. A notable feature 
of Father le Clercq’s style in the Nouvelle Relation, and one 
which has given me much trouble in the translation, viz. the 
use of two coupled words meaning almost the same thing, 
does not appear at all for pages together in the Premier 
Etablissement (at least not in the translation), although in 
other passages it is prominent. Moreover, as is well known, 
the Premier Etablissement does not contain mention of certain 
matters, viz. an account of the Gaspesian missions after 1681 Ë 
which are said in the Nouvelle Relation to be there. All of 
the facts taken together, including the point as to the proof- 
reading mentioned on a preceding page,? appear to be in 
harmony with the probability that Father le Clercq prepared 
himself the manuscript of both books, but that he entrusted 
the Premier Etablissement to some other who, omitting a part 
of our author’s material in order to make room for his own, 
inserted such matter as he wished in condemnation of the 
Jesuits, who are mentioned only with respect in the Nouvelle 
Relation. I am of opinion that an exhaustive comparative 
study of the style of the two books would enable a competent 
student to separate Father le Clercq’s own matter from that 
of his unknown co-author. 

We turn now to consider more closely certain matters 
of special importance in Father le Clercq’s Nouvelle Relation. 
First comes the system of written characters, or hieroglyphics, 
which he designed as an aid to the memory of his neophytes 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 572. * Page 19 of this volume. 


22 INTRODUCTION 


in repeating their prayers. He tells us? that he first con- 
ceived the idea of them in the second year of his mission, 
that is in 1677, and that they were suggested to him when 
he noticed that certain Indian children made marks with 
charcoal upon birch bark, and counted these off as they 
repeated each word of the prayers. This use of marks, of 
various kinds, as aids to the memory, was widespread among 
American Indians, as is amply attested by the evidence set 
forth in technical works? and by various records in connection 
with the Algonquian tribes. Thus in the Relation of the 
Jesuits for 1642-43 ° it ss said of certain Indians at Sillery : 
«When the Father began to instruct them, they would count 
the points and the questions on their fingers ; but, the num- 
ber coming to exceed that of the fingers, they would mark 
them on pieces of bark, making certain figures which re- 
presented for them the sense of some clause.” Again, in 
the Relation of 1646,' it is said of the Montagnais that some 
of them “wrote . . . after their fashion, on small pieces of 
the bark of trees.” Again, Father Druillettes, referring to 
the Abnakis, wrote in the Relation of 1651-52°: ‘Some 
would write their lessons after a fashion of their own, using 
a bit of charcoal for a pen, and a piece of bark instead of 
paper. Their characters were new, and so peculiar that one 
could not recognise or understand the writing of another,— 
that is to say, they used certain signs corresponding to their 
ideas ; as it were, a local reminder, for recalling points and 
articles and maxims which they had retained. They carried 

away these papers with them, to study their lessons in the 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 141. 

2 For example, in Mallery’s great monograph upon Picture-writing of the 
American Indians, in the Tenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, D.C., 1888-89). This work contains an excellent brief discussion 
of the history and nature of these hieroglyphics, with citations from our author’s 
work. 

8 Thwaites’ edition, XXIV. 83. 

4 Op. cit.. XXIX. 133. 5 Op. cit. XXXVIII. 27. 


INTRODUCTION 23 


quiet of the night.” And Bressani, in the Relation of 16 $33 
speaking of the Indians of New France in general, says ! : 
“Fourthly, a very tenacious memory. ‘They have neither 
books nor writings; negotiations are carried on through 
embassies, in which I have been amazed to see how many 
things and how many circumstances they recollect. But this 
faculty shines forth still more in the Captains, who use little 
sticks instead of books, which they sometimes mark with 
certain signs, sometimes not. By the aid of these they can 
repeat the names of a hundred or more presents, the decisions 
adopted in the councils, and a thousand other particulars, 
which we could not rehearse without writing.” It seems at 
first sight anomalous that a people with memories so good 
as are ascribed to these Indians should need memory-aids 
of such nature as their sticks or marks; but the explanation 
is contained, I believe, in a peculiarity of the Indian mind 
very clearly set forth by Father Biard in his Relation of 1616. 
in speaking of the Micmacs: “They have a very good 
memory for material things, such as having seen you before, 
of the peculiarities of a place where they may have been, of 
what took place in their presence twenty or thirty years 
before, etc.; but to learn anything by heart—there’s the 
rock ; there is no way of getting a consecutive arrangement 
of words into their pates.” Father Biard’s statement agrees 
with other evidence we possess in showing that while the 
Indians had very good memories for individual matters, 
including the association of facts, events, or even _ ideas with 
visible objects, their memories were very poor for sequences 
or series of facts, events, or ideas—just such sequences as 
are the essential feature of “committing to memory.” An 
obvious equivalent for committing to memory in their case 
would be, therefore, the method of associating each idea with 
a definite symbol and arranging these symbols in the desired 
order ; and this method the Indians obviously had hit upon 


1 Thwaites’ edition, XXXVIII. 261. 2 Opucets W112 73. 


24 INTRODUCTION 


for themselves. It was the method, indeed, by which they 
read” all of their wampum records. It would not matter 
what the form of the symbol for a certain idea might be, 
and therefore different Indians could use different symbols 
for the same idea, while the same Indian could use different 
ones at different times. No doubt, however, the signs were 
fundamentally of the picture-writing type, that is, they were 
more or less conventionalised pictures; and it is possible 
the Indians had some which were understood by them all, 
though of this we have no definite knowledge since no 
specimens of these aboriginal symbols, for the Algonquian 
tribes at least, have come down to us. 

Such was the foundation which Father le Clercq had for 
his system when he began its elaboration in the early days 
of his mission—a foundation which had been equally available 
to all of his predecessors, but which he was the first to have 
the keenness to utilise. In brief, we may say that he found 
his Indians capable of remembering tenaciously any association 
of word, fact, or simple idea with a written arbitrary symbol ; 
he found them more or less accustomed to the use of series 
of such symbols to aid in recalling a sequence of facts or 
ideas ; and perhaps he found them provided with some 
generally understood picture-symbols for the commonest 
objects, though these must have been extremely few. No 
doubt our author, in developing his system, made use of all 
existent symbols, and in other respects utilised everything 
already available in this connection ; but the words and ideas 
involved in the prayers he desired to teach were so many 
and so unfamiliar that he must have had to begin practically 
anew. He tells us? that he “formed” (formez) these 
characters, by which he could only mean that he invented 
them, and then he describes them thus: “Each arbitrary 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 129. The important sentences in the original are: 
certains caracteres que jay formez, and chague lettre arbitraire signifie un mot 
particulier, quelque-fois même deux ensemble. 


INTRODUCTION 25 


letter signifies a particular word, and sometimes two together.” 
In another place! he speaks of his system as a formulary to 
aid the memory through the use of certain characters ; but 
unfortunately, although he speaks often of the “instructive 
papers ” on which they were written, and of their extensive 
use by the Indians, he nowhere gives any further description 
of the characters themselves, much less any examples. He 
made, however, a great many, for he says* he augmented their 
number to enable him to teach not only the Prayers of the 
Church, but the Sacred Mysteries of the Trinity, of the Incar- 
nation, of the Baptism, of the Penitence, and of the Eucharist. 

Such is the record of the invention by Father le Clercq 
of a hieroglyphic system of characters for representing the 
Prayers of the Church to the Micmac Indians. As is very 
well known, there has long been in use, and indeed still 
survives, among these same Micmacs, but not among the 
allied tribes, a system which agrees in every respect with 
that of our author in so far as he describes it. The con- 
clusion is natural that the two are one and the same, and 
this it would probably not occur to any one to doubt were 
it not for two circumstances—namely, it is generally believed 
by those having knowledge of the existent Micmac system 
that it was invented by l’Abbé Maillard, a prominent, 
scholarly, and active missionary to the Micmacs in the middle 
of the eighteenth century, and moreover l’Abbé Maillard 
himself appears to claim that he invented them. In a letter 
written by l’Abbé le Loutre in 17387 it is stated that 
M. (later l'Abbé) Maillard is “introducing his system, to 
which he has been giving thought for some time. It is that 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 141. pe OD Cit, DA2. 

8 In Le Canada-Français, Documents Inédits, 1. 21. The words in the 
original are: .. . mit au jour son sistéme auguel il pensoit il y avoit quelque 
temps. Ce sont des hyéroglifes differents auxquels il a determiné sa signification 
par le moyen desquels nos Sauvages, après en avoir appris la signification, 
comme des enfants qui apprennent celle des lettres alphabétiques, lisent dans les 
cahiers qon leur donne aussy bien que les françois dans leurs livres. 


26 INTRODUCTION 


of different hieroglyphics, to each of which he has assigned 
a meaning ; and by means of them our Indians, after having 

learned their meaning, as the children learn that of the letters _ 
of the alphabet, read in the copy-books which are given them 
as readily as the French read in their own books.” Later he 
writes! : “M. Maillard has given me all the prayers of the 
Indians with an interpretation of the words which are con- 
tained therein—the hieroglyphics.” Again, in a letter written 
by l'Abbé Maillard himself, at a date unknown, but certainly 
much later than that of l'Abbé le Loutre, he says: “ In order 
to make them learn more quickly, and with much more ease 
than they could heretofore, the prayers, the chants, and the 
instructions that we desire they should know, we distribute 
among them copy-books on which we have traced in hiero- 
glyphics, which we have invented ourselves, all the words of 
which these prayers, chants, and instructions are composed. 
With the aid of these different characters they learn in a very 
short time everything they wish to learn, and when they have 
once got into their heads the form and value of each character, 
they name with astonishing ease everything of the same sort 
which is written in their books. We make them read them 
from left to right, as in our own writing, all the hieroglyphics 
being placed horizontally on a straight line and separated 
from one another by little horizontal marks.” He then 
describes the way the Indians were taught to use the charac- 
ters, and adds: “ We congratulate ourselves very much upon 
having found this means to teach them to learn the prayers 
iy heart so easily.” * He then adds a description of their use 
by the Indians which agrees very closely with the statements 
1 Op. cit. 22. The words in the original are: Mr. Maillard ma donné 


toutes les prieres des Sauvages avec une interpretation des mots qut y sont 
contenu, les hyérogliffies. 

2 Published in Les Soirées Canadiennes, I11., 1863, 355- 

3 The words of the original are: Pour leur faire apprendre plus prompte- 
ment et avec beaucoup plus de facilité qu'ils ne faisoient cy-devant les prières, 
les chants et les instructions que nous souhaitons qu'ils sachent, nous leur 
distribuons des cahiers sur lesquels nous leur avons tracé en hiéroglybhes, 
que nous avons inventez nous-mêmes, tous les mots dont se trouvent composes 


INTRODUCTION 27 


of Father le Clercq, and he gives much more of interest in 
the same connection, though nothing essential to our present 
inquiry. It happens, fortunately, that l’Abbé Maillard has 
left us examples of his characters written by his own hand, 
and a page of these is reproduced in the accompanying photo- 
graph.’ It is only necessary to compare this sample with 
some of the modern examples given upon the same plate to 
settle one point of our inquiry : namely, the modern hiero- 


glyphics of the _Micmacs are identical with those used by 
l'Abbé Maillard. 

We now face the crucial question of this inquiry— Was 
PAbbé Maillard’s system invented by him anew, or does it 
bear some relation to that of Father le Clercq? ‘This can 
only be settled finally by the possession of a good sample of 
our author’s system, and such, I believe, we possess in the 
first of the illustrations reproduced on the following plate? 


ces prières, ces chants et ces instructions. À l'aide de ces différens caractères, 
ts apprennent en très-peu de temps tout ce qu'ils veulent apprendre; et quand 
zls ont une fois bien mis dans leur tête la figure et la valeur de chaque caractère, 
ts nomment avec une facilité étonnante tout ce qui ce trouve écrit de même dans 
leurs cahiers. Nous les faisons lire de gauche à droit comme nous, tous Les 
hiéroglyphes étant placez horizontalement sur une ligne droite, et séparez les 
uns des autres par un petit trait horizontal. And then later: Vous nous 
Jélicitons fort d'avoir trouvé ce moyen de leur faire apprendre si facilement par 
cœur les prières et les chants, &c. 

* For this copy I am indebted to the kind aid of M. Philéas Gagnon, to 
whom, indeed, this book owes very much. The MS. is in the Library of the 
Archbishopric of Quebec, and is that mentioned in Pilling’s Bibliography of 
the Algonquian Languages (Washington, D.C., 1891), 334.  Pilling questions 
whether this part of the MS. book is by l'Abbé Maillard, but M. Gagnon, who 
has examined it, assures me that he has no doubt whatever upon this point. 

* There is not, I believe, any question as to the genuineness of the con- 
nection between the authorship of these illustrations and of the Vowvelle 
Relation.  Aside from the characters shown by the first, the second reproduces 
the peculiar form of the Micmac canoes so faithfully, and the third and fourth 
show a use of the cross, and other features, so like the testimony of the text, 
that it seems to me certain they cannot be the work of any conventional illus- 
trator, but only of some one who knew personally and sympathetically the 
matters treated in the book. Accordingly I think it likely they were drawn 
by Father le Clercq himself, or else by Father Jumeau (whose map at page 11 
shows his skill as a draughtsman). In the latter case the priest shown in the 
first picture may represent Father le Clercq. 


28 INTRODUCTION 


By careful comparison I find that about half of the characters 
shown on the tablet against the tree are identical with those 
still in use. It is perhaps a matter of some weight, also, that 
PAbbé Maillard had apparently been in Acadia only a short 
time when he was ready to make use of his system in 1738. 
Indeed, the only statements I have been able to find as to the 
time of his first arrival in Acadia place the date in 1738 or 
later,! though l'Abbé le Loutre speaks as if l'Abbé Maillard 
then knew the Micmac language. It is of course possible, 
but unlikely, that in the short period of l’Abbé Maillard’s 
residence among the Indians he had independently developed 
characters for representing “all of the prayers.” It is true that 
Father le Clercq had commenced to develop his system within 
two years after his first arrival, but his development of the 
characters for most of the prayers obviously, from his own 
statement, followed later. On the other hand, if lAbbé 
Maillard was making use of a system already in existence, 
but which he was engaged in improving and extending, his 
gift of a set representing all the prayers to l’Abbé le Loutre 
is perfectly explained. Possibly the point that the characters 
are still known to the living Indians by the name of 
“ character,” the very name by which Father le Clercq in- 
variably calls them, and not as “hiéroglyphes,’” which 
appears to have been l|’Abbé Maillard’s favourite name, may 
have some value, though this cannot be great since l’Abbé 
Maillard also designates them, though secondarily, as 
characters. A consideration of more weight is the fact that 
Father le Clercq spread the characters so widely, and his 
Indians learned and taught them to others so eagerly, that 
it is wholly unlikely their use had died out utterly in the 
half-century after his departure. 

The evidence, therefore, seems to prove that l’Abbé Maillard 


1 Appleton’s Cyclopedia of American Biography gives the date as “about 
1738.” Tanguay’s Repertoire du Clergé Canadien gives 1741, as does the 
Liste Chronologique of 1834 (as 1 am informed by M. Gagnon). 












NOR 
=< ag’ ae 
# vid? > “n 

aia fi 
ro Motte 


ots 


; : + | 
i ‘ 
Pine 
€ a. @ 
| fé 


























} 
i = "M 
, 
m5) ru 
” r, 
g ) LUF 
! { 
% | dite 
0 - b al 
un ~ x 
pi” : si 
ae}! re © Jus 6 a 
Es ARR EE | se j atti 
= ie lm. ei os, 
ee sa , ~ ICONE 
. : ; n Ni ial 
? 0 Fr | Lie i 
Wi ; : is ite À a 
wn we’ 
Ÿ Fr rent is #0 if , 
re ; a 
1 : re if “ 5 J a x oe nf ‘ib i 7 
ai L f. vee ? ¥ | ti ; ve \ “> à 1e we i 4 : 
4 è 7 
Wee > vid 3e a’ ES 
l — i ÿ oe 
7 a { Dr x 4 ip as oe 
© A 5 > = a $ ne 
ARE | L i’ Le 
CR | u® | r 
a 


ef 
=» 


> 





a 


a 


= 
nhs 


iS 


a 


INTRODUCTION 29 


found Father le Clercq’s system still in some use among the 
Micmacs, and at once adopted, and substantially improved 
upon it, making it thus to a considerable extent his own. The 
anonymous editor of l’Abbé Maillard’s letter above cited calls 
attention to the prior existence of Father le Clercq’s characters, 
and queries whether l'Abbé Maillard, in saying “we have 
invented” this system, is not speaking in the name of the 
missionaries generally, rather than of himself in particular. 
This is possibly true but probably is not, for the appropriation 
without credit of the literary product of others was common 
in that day and justified in the literary morals of the time, 
inexcusable though we should consider it now. Father le 
Clercq does something of the same sort when he gives an 
epigrammatic remark of an Indian as said to himself, whereas 
he took it exactly from a much older work, even though in 
doing so he had to substitute a Micmac for a Montagnais 
sentence." 

To complete this subject we may now trace briefly the 
history of these so-called Micmac hieroglyphics (which should \ 
be known technically as Micmac ideograms), down to the 
present. After Abbé Maillard’s day there is a long gap in 
their history, at least so far as any records I can find are 
concerned. A specimen belonging to the eighteenth century 
has been reported by Shea as existent in the British Museum? 
but I am informed by the keeper of MS. that no such docu- 
ment can now be found. Another, however, undated but 
apparently of early date, is in the Bibliothèque Nationale, and 
a photograph of a portion thereof is reproduced herewith. 
I am of opinion that this is one of l’Abbe Maillard’s MS., 
since it shows so clearly the connecting hyphen of which he 
speaks. There is then a further gap in their history, and 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 477, and note thereto on page 277 of this volume. 

® Historical Magazine, V., 1861, 292. L 

° This is the MS. mentioned on page 359 of Pilling’s Bibliography of the 
Algonquian Languages (Washington, D.C., 1891). An English word sow/s 
occurs on the third line of the part reproduced. 


30 INTRODUCTION 


they only reappear in a “ Mass and Vesper Book in Micmac 
written in hieroglyphics by a chief of Cape Breton in 1858,” 
mentioned in Pilling’s Bibliography,’ along with several others 
of similar sort. ‘These manuscript books of prayers appear 
to have existed in considerable numbers, and some are still 
in possession of the Micmacs of Nova Scotia. Two of them 
which I have seen have a very long-used and ancient appear- 
ance, looking old enough to date back to the day of l'Abbé 
Maillard. À part of a page from a copy in the Library of 
Congress is given herewith.” In 1861 a brief review of the 
history of the characters was published by J. G. Shea,’ who 
ascribes the honour of their invention to Father le Clercq, 
although he knew nothing as to the claims of l’Abbé 
Maillard. A very important feature of Shea’s paper was his 
presentation, on the authority of Father Christian Kauder, 
of the Lord’s Prayer, in characters, in Micmac and in 
English ; and this copy is of such importance, as a kind of 
standard for any study of this subject, that it is reproduced 
herewith. Father Kauder, however, has played a much 


1 The work mentioned in the preceding note ; page 359. 

2 For the opportunity to present this page | am indebted to the kind per- 
mission and aid of the Librarian of Congress. I have also had the use of 
one of these books lent me by Father Pacifique. 

3 “ Micmac or Recollect Hieroglyphics,” in Æ/#s/orical Magazine, V., 1861, 
289. Published simply under the initial S., its authorship is fixed by a refer- 
ence in Shea’s First Establishment of the Faith, 1.18. This paper was trans- 
lated into Italian by Father Marcelino de Civezza, and published in 1862, and 
again in 1879, according to Pilling’s Bibliography, 461 and 557. 

« Inthe Introduction to his translation of Father le Clercq's Premier Etablisse- 
ment de la Foy, published in 1881, Shea gave again an account of the invention of 
the hieroglyphics, accompanied by a new plate of the Lord’s Prayer in character, 
Micmac and English. A comparison of this plate with that of 1861 (the one 
here reproduced) shows that the characters are from the same type, rearranged 
to fit the narrower page ; but the work has been done so carelessly that three 
of the characters are dropped out altogether and one is inverted. Further, the 
Micmac text has been very greatly changed in spelling, and in many cases the 
Micmac words are applied to different characters. It only requires a com- 
parison of the characters with the Lord’s Prayer of Kauder’s printed work, and 
of the Micmac text with Rand’s Dictionaries, to show that the copy of 1861 is 
correct, and that of 1881 very much in error, in all of these features. Yet 


INTRODUCTION 31 


larger part than this in the history of these hieroglyphics. 
He was born near Luxembourg in 1817, and after his 
ordination as priest came to the United States ; he served 
in the ministry in various places, and after 1852 retired, 
because of broken health, to the Monastery at Tracadie, 
Nova Scotia. Here he became interested in the Micmacs 
and their hieroglyphics, of which he appears to have made 
a thorough study. And his interest was very practical, for, 
with the aid of influential patrons in Austria, he had a font of 
type cut in the characters, from which three books—a Catechism 
(really a book of prayers), a Book of Meditations, and a 
Book of Chants—were printed at Vienna in 18661 ‘These 
books, which are sometimes found all in one volume and 
sometimes separately or in different combinations, were 
printed almost wholly in character, only the title and dedica- 
tion and the separate headings being in German, while the 
tables of contents are in Micmac printed in Roman letters.? 
As the accompanying reproduction will show, the characters 
are faithfully reproduced by the type, though in somewhat 
more regular and ornate form. These books are highly 
valued by their possessors, and are by no means common. 
It is said that comparatively few ever reached the Indians, 
for most of the consignment was lost by shipwreck. A few 
unfortunately it is the copy of 1881 which has been reproduced in illustration 
of the subject by Mallery in his Monograph on Picture-writing, and by Pilling 
in his Bibliography; and Pilling actually attributes it to Le Clercq ! 

' The title-page of the three parts collectively is printed in both character 
and German. It is reproduced in facsimile in Pilling’s Bibliography, opposite 
page 275. The German title reads : Buch das gut, enthaltend den K. atechismus, 
Betrachtung, Gesang. Die katserliche wie auch konigliche Buchdrucheret 
hat es gedruckt in der katserlichen Stadt Wien in Oesterreich, 1866. (“The 
good Book, containing the Catechism, Meditations, and Songs. The Imperial 


and Royal Press has printed it in the Imperial City of Vienna in Austria, 
1866.” 

= fae facts are taken in part from Pilling’s Bibliography, 375, in part 
from Shea’s paper of 1861, and in part from my own copy of the work. My 
efforts to obtain, from the Trappist Monastery in Tracadie, facts about Father 
Kauder’s later life have been fruitless. The present Father Superior has kindly 
informed me that neither records nor recollections of him now exist there. 


32 INTRODUCTION 


of the older Indians in Prince Edward Island and Cape 
Breton can still read them, and some indeed can read nothing 
else, but reading knowledge of them has practically dis- 
appeared from Restigouche.! With the older generation of 
Indians now living their use will come to an end ; for the 
younger generation is being taught to read and write English 
or French, and have prayer-books in Roman letters in their 
own tongue. 

A second matter of distinctive interest in Father le Clercq’s 
book is his description of the ancient worship of the Cross 
among the Gaspesians of Miramichi, whom he calls therefore 
Porte-Croix, or the Cross-bearers. It is, indeed, his favourite 
theme, to which he returns again and again. He alludes to 
it on his title-page, and thus states the matter in brief in his 
Dedication, after speaking of the Cross erected by Cartier on 
his first voyage : “Thus, by a special act of divine Providence, 
our Gaspesian Indians, with as much of joy as surprise, 
beheld in their own country a Cross like that which they were 
worshipping without knowledge thereof. They drew it, and 
wore it, religiously upon their bodies and their clothes: it 
presided over their councils, their voyages, and the most 
important affairs of their nation: their cemeteries appeared 
more like those of Christians than of barbarians, by reason 
of the number of Crosses which they placed over their tombs. 
In a word, they were, Madame, the Athenians of a new 
world, who were rendering their homage and their adoration 
to the Cross of an unknown God.”*? He touches upon 
the matter in his chapter on the origin of the Gaspesians, in 


1 According to information sent me by Father Pacifique of Restigouche, 
Que., Father MacDonald of Grand River, P.E.I., and Father MacPherson 
of Glendale, C.B. These generous correspondents have sent me much more 
information upon the subject than I have been able finally to use in this work. 

It is of interest to add here that the Protestant missionary, Rand, made no 
use of the characters, and has expressed an unfavourable opinion of them (in 
his Legends of the Micmacs. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1894, 226). 

2 Nouvelle Relation, Dedication, v. 


INTRODUCTION 33 


a connection which shows that he had in mind the possibility 
of the origin of this worship, like the origin of the Indians 
themselves, from a very ancient immigration of Christian 
Europeans shipwrecked on the coasts of America! He comes 
back to it again, and naturally, when treating the religion of 
the Gaspesians, repeating his belief that it must have had 
Origin in ancient Christian teachings, and adds that the Cross- 
bearers considered it “a mark of honour which distinguishes 
them from the other nations of Canada.”2 Then he devotes 
his entire Chapter X. to a discussion of “the Origin of the 
Worship of the Cross among those Gaspesians called Cross- 
bearers.” * He gives first the Indian tradition, which was 
to the effect that in a certain time of great national calamity, 
some of their wisest old men saw in a dream a beautiful 
stranger who showed them a Cross and told them that if 
the nation would make the like and hold it in respect, it 
would bring an end of all their ills. This they did, and the 
result was in accord with the promise ; and thereafter these 
Indians held the Cross in high honour. They never appeared 
in public without exhibiting it either in their hands, on 
their skin, or on their clothes ; it was erected in the midst 
of their councils; it was given to deputies sent to other 
peoples as the honourable symbol and mark of their 
ambassadorship ; the chief carried it like a rod in walking, 
and stood it in the most honoured place in his wigwam ; and 
they all placed it at each end of their canoes in making their 
voyages. Such was the worship of the Cross by these Indians 
in former times according to their traditions. Father le 
Clercq then adds that these sentiments survived in his day, 
for “there is not a single one of them who does not wear it 
upon his clothes or upon his skin. The swaddling-clothes and 
the cradles of their infants are always adorned with it, while 
the barks of their wigwams, their canoes, and their snowshoes 





1 Nouvelle Relation, 41. 2 Op. cit., 170. 
3 Of. cit., beginning page 172. 


84 INTRODUCTION 


are all marked with it. The pregnant women work it in 
porcupine quills upon that part of their garment which is 
over the womb, in order to place their offspring under the 
protection of the Cross. In fact there is scarcely one of 
them who does not preserve very carefully in his privacy a 
little Cross made with wampum and beadwork, which he 
keeps and esteems much as we do the relics of the Saints.’’* 
He illustrates their high respect for the Cross by an anecdote, 
and then repeats his earlier statement as to the crosses over 
the graves in their cemeteries, adding that they also ordered 
it to be buried with them because “they would not be 
recognised by their ancestors if they had not with them the 
symbol and the honourable token which distinguishes the 
Cross-bearers from all the other Indians of New France.” ? 
He adds that they erected crosses also at their principal 
hunting and fishing localities. Our author then states, some- 
what inconsistently, that when he made his first mission 
among these Indians they were found to have relapsed from 
the original devotion of their ancestors to the Cross, and 
they preserved only a shadow of the former customs. He 
found some who lacked respect for the Cross (a statement 
not in harmony with his earlier remark that there was not 
one who did not cherish a Cross in private), and they had 
all abandoned its use in their councils. But he, and especially 
his colleague, Father Jumeau, took steps to restore the ancient 
usage as they understood it; and a full description is given 
of the interesting ceremonies by which Father Jumeau 
“obliged them to make honourable amends to the Cross 
by rendering to it, through these people, a part of the honour 
of which the negligence of their ancestors had robbed it.’’® 
In connection with his first voyage to these Miramichi Indians, 
Father le Clercq also tells of finding a fine Cross embellished 
with beads set in the place of honour in a wigwam ; and the 
owner told him that he had received it from his ancestors 


1 Nouvelle Relation, 181. 2 Op. cit., 186. 3 Op. cit., 194. 


INTRODUCTION 35 


by inheritance, and that he preserved it preciously “as the 
honourable symbol which distinguishes the Indians of Mira- 
michi from all the other nations of New France.”! The 
first sermon of his first mission to the Cross-bearers was based 
upon the message of Saint Paul to the Athenians after that 
Apostle had seen their altar to the Unknown God. Father 
le Clercq explained to the Indians the mysteries of the Cross, 
and told them they were under special obligations to profess 
the faith of Jesus Christ, since it was by a special favour that 
they had been given this sign. They promised to follow his 
advice, and protested that they were sorry their ancestors had 
neglected so long the worship of the Cross.2_ Father le Clercq 
then returns to the subject of the origin of the Cross in a 
very important passage in which he gives the reasons why 
he believes it was held in veneration by these Indians before 
the arrival of the French in the country. The reasons are 
based wholly upon the testimony of the old Indians and 
French, confirmed by a work of Monseigneur de Saint Valier, 
of which more anon. Wishing to make the Indians admit 
that they had learned the worship of the Cross, after the 
arrival of the French, from missionaries who had preceded 
him, they pointed to an aged Indian who had seen the first 
ship to reach that country, and reminded our author that 
he had been told by this man, who knew and had heard from 
his ancestors, that the usage of the Cross was far older than 
the arrival of the French. Then they added this argument, 
that the Indians of Restigouche, who had been instructed by 
the missionaries, had not the Cross, while they of Miramichi 
who had the Cross had never been baptized ; and therefore 
it could not have come from the missionaries. Our author 
then adds: “It will be said that this reasoning is savage. 
That is true, I admit, but it is not for that reason less 
persuasive nor less convincing. For it is a fact that the 
Indians of Restigouche are baptized, and that nevertheless 


+ Nouvelle Relation, 240. ? Op. cit., 260. OP. cé, 270: 


36 INTRODUCTION 


they do not wear the Cross, but the figure of a salmon, 
which in old times they hung from the neck as the mark of 
honour of their country. For it is to be noted that it has 
always been the custom of all our Gaspesians to wear some 
particular figures, which are somewhat like coats of arms, to 
distinguish them from the other Indians, in accordance with 
the different places where they ordinarily live”: This is the 
last mention our author makes of the subject in his book. 

Such are the statements made by Father le Clercq about 
the worship of the Cross by the Gaspesian Indians of the 
Miramichi. We consider now their significance. And first 
we ask whether they are confirmed by others. Only one other 
known work makes any mention of the matter, and that is 
Monseigneur de Saint Valier’s Estat Present de l'Eglise, which 
gives a synoptical account substantially like that of our author, 
though with some differences of minor detail? But it is 
perfectly plain from the context that his data were obtained 
from the same sources as Father le Clercq’s, if not from 
Father le Clercq himself. None of the Jesuit Relations, or 
any other known work, makes any reference to the subject, 
so that substantially the whole matter rests upon the testimony 
of our author alone. And that testimony has been questioned 
by later writers. Father Lafitau, in his work of 1724 on the 
American Indians,? examined the whole subject, pointed out 
various weaknesses in our author’s Re/ation, and makes much 
of the lack of confirmation in the Refations of the Jesuits, 
who could hardly have failed to mention so remarkable a 
custom had it existed. His conclusion was that the matter 
represented a great exaggeration of Father le Clercq’s, with 
some relics of the labours of earlier missionaries as a basis. 
And as an indication of the way in which the use of the Cross 

1 Nouvelle Relation, 274. 

2 Monseigneur de Saint Valier’s account of the matter is quoted in full in 
a note on page 189 of this volume. 


8 Mœurs des Sauvages Ameriquains, Paris, 1724, vol. II. of 12mo. ed., 133 
(I. 429 of 4to. ed.). 


INTRODUCTION 37 


may have arisen among the Porte-Croix Indians, he quotes a 
well-known statement of Father Perrault, from the Re/ation 
of 1635, as to the readiness with which the Indians at Cape 
Breton adopted the sign of the Cross and painted it on their 
bodies.! He also calls attention to the fact that the Cross 
is not an exclusively Christian symbol, but goes back to a far 
antiquity. Father Charlevoix, in his Histoire de la Nouvelle 
France considers the matter briefly, to the conclusion that 
our author was misled by such a use of the Cross as Father 
Perrault describes. The subject is discussed fully by De 
Roo in his History of America before Columbus,? and he con- 
cludes that the presence of the Cross among these Indians 
was evidence of their contact with Christian Europeans in 
pre-Columbian times. 

Thus it appears that much diversity of view has prevailed 
among Father le Clercq’s critics, both as to the credence to 
be given his statements, and the meaning of the phenomenon 
if true. It is of course obvious that our author, naturally 
predisposed to make the utmost of a discovery so remarkable, 
and so serviceable in his ministry, exaggerates the details, as he 
does for sundry other matters in his book. Yet this being 
allowed, I believe we can fully trust the fundamental fact that 
these Indians did actually hold the sign of the Cross in a re- 
spect, and made a constant use of it, which distinguished them 
from the remainder of the Micmac tribef®) We must remem- 
ber his statement that he found a Cross in a place of honour 
in a wigwam of these Indians when on his way to visit them 

* Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, VIII. 163. The passage reads thus: 
“They very willingly make the sign of the Cross, as they see us make it, 
raising their hands and eyes to Heaven and pronouncing these words, ‘ Jesus, 
Mary,’ as we do,—so far that, having observed the honor we render to the 
Cross, these poor people paint it on their faces, chests, arms, and legs, without 
being asked to do so,” 

? Shea’s translation, edition of 1902, II. 120. 

* Published at Philadelphia, by J. B. Lippincott Co., 1900, I. 441, 610, and 


II. 274,278. The author, on page 448, cites several other writers who have 
examined the matter. 


38 INTRODUCTION 


for the first time, and that he says they marked the Cross upon 
their various articles of daily use. We cannot reject such direct 
statements as these without accusing our author of a deliberate 
mendacity for which there is certainly no other evidence. 
The existence of the Cross among these Indians being 
granted, there are two possible explanations of its origin, 
aside of course from the Indian explanation, which is not 
to be seriously considered. The first possibility is that which 
is advocated by our author and by De Roo, viz. that the 
existence of the Cross at Miramichi was a relic of Christian 
teaching, either in very early times or else by our author’s 
immediate predecessors, for he had such predecessors despite 
the denial of the Indians.1 Against this is the very great, 
even though not logically conclusive, difficulty of explaining 
why this single division of the Micmac tribe and no other 
should have the sign. The other explanation, which seems 
to have been overlooked by all students of the subject, is 
incidentally suggested by our author himself when he says 
that the Indians of Restigouche do not wear the Cross, but 
the figure of a salmon, which in old times they hung from 
the neck as the mark of honour of their country. And then 
he adds that it has always been the custom of the Gaspesians 
to wear some particular figure which was somewhat like a 
coat of arms to distinguish them from the other Indians, 
according to the places where they ordinarily live. Again 
and again our author, in speaking of the Cross among these 
Indians, points out that it was a special mark of honour, 
distinguishing those of the Miramichi from all others. The 
Cross, therefore, according to our author himself, was the 
distinguishing totem sign of the Miramichi division, or elan, 
of the-Micmacs, precisely as the salmon was of the Resti- 
gouche division ; and all of the facts our author gives are in 
full harmony with this explanation, which I believe is correct. 
But it still remains to be explained whence they drew this 


1 As considered in a note on page 192 of this volume. 


INTRODUCTION 89 


sign. If a totem sign it could not have been originally the 
Christian symbol, since it must have been long aboriginal. 
It is true the Cross is not necessarily a Christian emblem, 
since it was not only known in times long pre-Christian, but 
was widely employed by the aboriginal American Indians in 
various significances and connections.’ But totem signs, 
among these Indians at least, were always animals, and that 
of our Miramichi Indians must have been something which, 
when drawn in outline and more or less conventionalised 
according to custom, fell somewhat into the form of a cross. 
What animal this was I do not yet know, but it is possible 
that it signified a wild goose or other waterfowl! in full flight, 
the appearance of which, when seen against the sky, is sug- 
gestive of a cross form. This view has a certain support 
in the fact that the large waterfowl are as characteristic a 
feature of the lower part of the Miramichi, especially of the 
great sand flats and shallows near its mouth, as the salmon 
is of the Restigouche® Probably, however, it was not the 


* The pre-Christian use of the Cross is discussed for the old world by 
Baring-Gould in his Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, 341, while its wide use 
by the Indians of aboriginal America is treated in synopsis in Brinton’s Myths 
of the New World, 3rd edition, 113, in the Handbook of American Indians (Wash- 
ington, 1907), 365, and in the Reports of the Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 
for 1880-81, 268, for 1887-88, 479 (mentions Father le Clercq), for 1888-89, 724. 

® A striking case of Indian conventionalisation of an animal to an exact 
cross (in this case the animal was a dragon-fly) is given by Mallery in his 
Picture-writing of the American Indians, 725, and an example of a totem sign, 
obviously an animal, but somewhat like a cross, is contained near the bottom 
of a plate in Baxter’s Pioneers of France in New England, 118. According to 
the order of names on that plate this is a Huron sign, though the Micmac sign 
immediately follows it. 

$ I have, of course, made efforts to determine the knowledge among the 
living Micmacs of Miramichi as to the totems of their ancestors. The subject 
is beset with difficulties, since such knowledge is fast vanishing from among 
them. But I have been told by Lemey Renou, one of the most reliable Indians 
of Miramichi, that the Indians of that river in old times had three totem signs 
—those of the Main Southwest had the sturgeon, those of the Little Southwest 
had a beaver, while those of the Northwest “used the mark of a man with a 
bow and arrow drawn, done in bead-work on the clothes and marked on to the 
canoes.” This leads one to ask whether the drawn bow and arrow could 


40 INTRODUCTION 


original totem sign, cross-like though that may have been, 
which Father le Clercq found in use by these Indians, but 
the totem cross modified by Christian influence. For it must 
inevitably have happened that the influence of the Christian 
teaching they received would have tended to make these 
Indians merge the appearance and attributes of the Christian 
Cross with their own. And this must have occurred even 
aside from the possibility, or probability, that some of our 
author’s missionary predecessors, like our author himself and 
like other missionaries in all times and: places, had seen the 
advantage of utilising this pagan symbol for Christian pur- 
poses, and had thus made use of it with a result of transform- 
ing the pagan totem into the Christian Cross. Therefore in 
its origin as a sub-tribal totem sign, originally the con- 
ventionalised figure of some animal, later modified, whether 
unconsciously or deliberately, under the influence of Christian 
teachings, we have, I believe, the natural, consistent, and 
correct explanation of the Cross which Father le Clercq found 
among the Indians of Miramichi. 

A third feature of marked interest in the book is the 
presence of numerous Micmac words, names, and phrases, 
most of which, as the footnotes will show, are readily com- 
parable with modern Micmac by reference to the invaluable 
Dictionaries of Dr. Silas Rand.t It will be of interest, to 
some philologists at least, if these expressions are collected 
together, and they here follow, with the pages on which they 
are respectively found. Most of them show variations in 
spelling when repeated, but I have given only the first form ; 
and many of them are badly misprinted, as the notes explain. 


have suggested the sign of the Cross, though I set no store by this idea, nor do 
I place much reliance upon this information. The salmon is still known to 
have been the sign of the Restigouche Indians. 

1 These expressions were partially collected, with comments, by J. G. Shea 
in a note entitled “ Language of the Gaspesians,” in the //zstorical Magazine, 
V. 284. Though published anonymously, the authorship is fixed by a reference 
in another article by Shea cited in a note on page 30 of this volume. 


INTRODUCTION 41 


matachias, 45, 58, 60, 61, 63, 68. 


Ouahiche, 47, 331, 332, 336, 343, 
3445 345, 346, 347. 


Tissaouhianne, 59. 

tabagannes, 70. 

cacamos, 114. 

Nigaiou, 119, 

Kignamotinoer ou Kateguenne, 130, 
148, 151, 534. 

akahie, 147, 148, 538. 

Mouhinne, Mouhinchiche, 152. 

Paniah, Nibk, Taoiiak, Kesic, 158. 

Thours, 150. 

Bonodemeguiche, ponamon, 160. 

kir, 163. 

Smagnis, 164. 

Koucdedaoui, 164, 247, 264, 265. 

Ho, ho, ho (or Hé, hé, hé), 168, 
179, 264, 527. 

Ejougouloumoüet, 233, 234,228, 
239, 257. 

Quioudo, 272. 

Papkootparout, 310, 316, 319, 
320, 321, 324, 325, 327. 

Ledelstaganne, 318, 324, 508. 

Bouhinne, 336, 339, 517. 


Emkadoui, 336. 

Tchougis, 338, 341. 

Kenibeki, 365. 

Medousaotiek, 405. 

Ndegouche, apche mou, adadaseou, 
apche mou oiiahgahi, apche mou 
kedoukichtonebilchi, 414. 

Oagando hi guidanne, 473. 

Pactagane, 474. 

Tahoë messet kogoiiar pajo ne dati 
dogoiitl mkobit, 477. 

Metauh, Oüaspous, 400. 

caribous, 491. 


Tahoë  nkameramon  ignemoub ; 
nkameramon achkou  oitiguidex, 
500, 541. 

Chigoïidah, ouitbarino, ouragan, 
503- 


Chagat, 508. 

Tamahoë, 516. 

Oued, ové, ové, 521. 

Ouce chotien tahoe, 546. 

Tarbasouy 537. 

Koutche, kitche chibar, chaktou, ba- 


guisto skiginouidex, 547, 540, 552. 
Nemidoiiades, 554. 


In addition to these words, Father le Clercq uses three 
others of American-Indian, though not Micmac, origin, namely, 
sagamité, 89, 264; boucannée, 93, 118; and Quinquajou, 


343; 347, 491. 


Such in substance is all that I have been able to glean 
concerning Father Chrestien le Clercq and_ his Gaspesian 
book. Though not very much, ’tis enough to show that the 
man is worthy of our honour and his work of our praise. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE 
NOUVELLE RELATION DE LA GASPESIE 


By VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS 


State Historian of New York 


In presenting a bibliographical account of Le Clercq’s Nouvelle 
Relation de la Gaspesie, we are fortunate in being able to note 
the existence of three distinct issues. Happily, all three 
issues are in the remarkable American-Indian collection of 
Wilberforce Eames, Esq., of Brooklyn, N.Y., and he has 
most generously placed them at our disposal for as long a 
time as was found desirable for this inquiry, and our fac- 
similes have been made from his copies. 

Hitherto, American bibliographies have described only 
the original issue of 1691. That issue is by no means 
uncommon. Our conspectus of extant copies is not intended 
as a definitive census, but is none the less the fullest record 
ever given. The results are deduced from an extended 
inquiry, prosecuted by correspondence, personal examination, 
or otherwise. We give also exact facsimiles of the three 
title-pages and a characteristic page of the text. 


ISSUE OF 1691 


For the title-page, see the facsimile. 

Collation: Title, verso blank, one leaf; dedication, “a 
MADAME | LA PRINCESSE | D’EPINOY.” |, pp. (24); 
“Extrait du Privilege du Roy”, “donné a Paris le 30. 
Decembre 1690,” with registration dated “/e 5. Janvier 1691,” 
and date of printing “ pour de premiere fois, le vingtiéme Avril 





ocre 


RELATION 
DE TA 


QUI CONTIENT 


Les Mœurs & la Religion des Sau 
vages Gafpefiens Some Croix, 
- adorateurs du Soleil, & d'autres 
= Peuples de l'Amerique Septen- 
trionale, dite le Canada. 

DEDIEE A MADAME LA 


PRINCESSE DEPINoY, 


| Par le Pere CHRESTIENLE CLERCQ, 
MMiffionnaire Recoller de la Province de 
Saint Antoine de Pade en Artois, &, 
Gares du Convent de Lens, 


GER 


pA PARIS. 





Chez AmABLr Aurov, rue Sainr 


Jacques, à PImage S. Jerôme, attenant 
da Fontaine S. Severin, 
iM DC Scr 
“AEC PRIVILEGE DY ROY, 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 43 


1691,” pp. (2); text (21 chapters), pp. 1-572. Most copies 
agree with this collation, but a smaller number have a 
“TABLE | DES CHAPITRES | contenus en ce Livre.” Rs 
pp. (4). This table is quite evidently an afterthought and 
an insert. The waterlines of the paper of these two leaves 
run lengthwise (from top to bottom of the printed pages), 
whilst in the rest of the volume they run crosswise or 
horizontally. The table is not bound in uniformly ; some- 
times it follows the title-page, or is between the “Epitre” 
and “ Privilege,” or precedes the first page of the text, or 
is found at the end of the volume. The Lenox copy, in the 
New York Public Library, had these leaves laid in loose until 
a few years ago, when they were pasted in at the end of the 
text to preserve them against loss or fraying. We have also 
found these leaves with the outer edges stained and uncut 
in a copy of the issue of 1692, which is otherwise trimmed 
and gilt-edged. 

Signatures : à in eight, & in four, ï in two, A—Aaa alter- 
nating from eights to fours, Bbb in two; the table has two 
leaves without signature, has no fixed location, but logically 
would best follow the title-page. 

Page 238 is misprinted 328, and 328 is erroneously 
numbered 228. The heading of p. 106 appears as “ Novuelle 
Relation.” We find also broken letters in the headings of 
PP- 227, 407, 457, and 547. All of these vagaries are found 
in the three issues, which have also an identical colophon at 
the foot of p. 572, viz.: “De l’Imprimerie de Laurent | 
RONDET.” | Le Clercq ceded his rights of “ Privilege ” 
to Amable Auroy, the bookseller. 

Copies : The following libraries have copies with the table : 
British Museum ; Boston Public Library ; Harvard College 
Library (Francis Parkman’s copy); New York Historical 
Society ; New York Public Library (Lenox copy) ; Wisconsin 
Historical Society ; and those of Philéas Gagnon, of Quebec, 
and Frederick L. Gay, of Brookline, Mass. Copies without 


44 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


the table are in the Bibliothèque Nationale; American 
Geographical Society ; Boston Atheneum ; Harvard College 
Library (second copy) ; John Carter Brown Library ; Library 
of Congress ; Library of Parliament, Ottawa; Library of the 
Legislature of Quebec; Laval University, Quebec; New- 
berry Library; New York Public Library (Astor copy) ; 
New York State Library, and the private collections of the 
late E. Dwight Church, of Brooklyn, N.Y., Wilberforce 
Eames, of Brooklyn, N.Y., Dr. William F. Ganong, and the 
Hon. Peter A. Porter, of Niagara Falls, N.Y. Copies, of 
uncertain status as to the table, are also in possession of 
Edward E. Ayer, of Chicago, M. L. W. Sicotte, of Montreal, 
and the libraries of l’École Normale de Jacques Cartier and 
of Laval University, both in Montreal. 

Prices: At the Field sale (1872), a copy with the table 
brought $5; the Brinley copy (1879) was bid as high as 
$21; the Murphy copy (1884) fetched $5.75; the Barlow 
copy (1890) realised $27.50, and the Bourinot copy, without 
table, sold in 1906 for $21. From these and other memo- 
randa, the auction record seems probably below an average 
of twenty-five dollars. Naturally, the booksellers, who are 
themselves the principal bidders at auction, have demanded 
higher prices. Leclerc, of Paris, asked 140 francs in 1878 ; 
Dufossé, of Paris, 90 francs in 1887 ; Chadenat, of Paris, 
from 1889 to 1906, priced copies without the table and in 
varying conditions, all the way from 80 to 150 francs : 
Stevens, Son & Stiles, of London, in 1899 and 1907 offered 
an identical copy at £8, and Dodd, Mead & Company, of 
New York, priced a copy in 1908 at $50. 


ISSUE OF 1692. 


For the title-page, see the facsimile. This title is entirely 
independent, has not the author’s name, and was printed for 
Thomas Amaulry, bookseller of Lyons. We have here the 


M ur LE 
RELATION 
DE LA 
G ASPESIE, 


QUI CONTIENT 


Les Mœurs & la Religion des Sau- 
vages Gafpefiens Porte-Croix , 
adorateurs du Soleil , & d’autres 
Peuples de l'Amerique Septen- 
trionale , dit le Canada. 





Imprimé à Paris , & fe vend 


A LYON, 
Chez THOMAS AMAULRY, 


ruc Merciere , au Mercure Galanr. 
a 





a: 


M, DC. XCIL. 





BIBLIOGRAPHY 45 


same status as in the case of Le Clercq’s Premier Etablissement 
de la Foy. That work in two volumes was issued first at 
Paris by Amable Auroy, in 1691; but in 1692, Thomas 
Amaulry brought out a reissue at Lyons, under the title of 
Histoire des Colonies Françoises. 

The only change is the title-page ; otherwise the collation 
is in agreement with the issue of 1691, and it has the same 
mispaging and other vagaries. It is not probable that Auroy 
put out an issue in 1692, as inferred by Faribault many years 
ago. We have taken note of three copies of Amaulry’s issue, 
each of which has the table, but again variously placed. 

Copies: Private collection of Wilberforce Eames, of 
Brooklyn, N.Y., which is the Stevens copy, mentioned 
below ; Historical Society of Pennsylvania ; the F. L. Gay 
copy, mentioned below. 

Prices : Chadenat, of Paris, in March-Abpril, 189 5, offered 
a copy for 120 francs. It was bound by Champs in levant 
morocco, tooled, and had also inserted the following four 
interesting pen drawings, of the end of the seventeenth 
century, viz.: (1) Indiens apprenant à lire sur un tableau 
contenant des caractères spéciaux à leur langue ; (2) Indiens 
assistant à la messe dite au bord d’une rivière, canots, etc. : 
(3) Scène de chasse a l’original; (4) Scéne de danse. A 
copy of this issue was sold in the Pratt sale, April, 1899, 
for $30, having four extra drawings inserted. Apparently 
this is the identical copy offered by Chadenat, mentioned 
above. This Pratt copy was sold again, December 5, 1901, 
at Libbie’s, Boston, for $25, and again, on April 13, 1910, 
for $125, when it was bought by Mr. Frederick L. Gay, who 
has most kindly allowed us its use for the reproduction of 
the illustrations given opposite page 28 of this volume. In 
October, 1899, Henry Stevens, Son & Stiles, of London, 
offered in their catalogue, No. LXVIII., for £11, 10s., a 
copy bound by W. Pratt in red crushed levant morocco, 
but did not sell it. In 1907 it was offered anew in their 


46 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


catalogue of “Rare Americana,” item 422, for £10, and was 
purchased by Mr. Eames. It is a beautiful copy of this 


excessively rare issue. 


ISSUB OF (17.53, 


For the title-page, see the facsimile. This issue is a 
publisher’s “trick,” and the title is a curiosity. It is denoted 
as “Novuvette Eprtrion”; has the authors name, but 
singularly retains the name and business address of Amable 
Auroy, as in the original issue of 1691. The “ Privilege ” 
leaf is omitted, because the data it contained would have 
revealed the incongruity. There is no table. In every other 
respect we have here the original book issued at Paris in 
1691, and at Lyons in 1692, with the vagaries and Rondet’s 
colophon. 

. Copies : The only copy known to us is owned by Wilber- 
force Eames, of Brooklyn, N.Y., who purchased it from 
Philéas Gagnon, of Quebec, in January, 1908. Mr. Gagnon 
has informed us that he bought it from a bookseller of 
Munich, Germany. A good copy of the very rare map: 
“Carte Generalle de la Nouvelle France,” 1691, is inserted 
in this copy. This map really is foreign to the book, but 
belongs to Le Clercq’s Premier Etablissement de la Foy. 


NOUVELLE 
RELATION 
DE LA GASPESIE ; 


QUI CONTIENT 


“Les Moeurs & la Religion des Sau- 
_vages Gafpefiens Porte - Croix , 
Adorateurs du Soleil , & d’autres 
Peuples de l'Amérique Septentrio- 
nale , dite le Canada. 
>» *“DÉDIÉE À MADAME 
LA PRINCESSE DEPINOY, 
Par le Pere CHRESTIEN LE Crerca, 
Miffionraire Recollet de la Province de 
Saint Antoine de Pade en Artois , & 
Gardien da Couvent de Lens. 


Novve tre Epirion 


nd 


A PARIS, 
Chez Amante Auroy, ruc S, Jacques , A 
VImage S. Jerome, attenantla Fontaine 
S. Severin. 


M. DCCLVIIL 
AVEC PRIVILEGE DU RON. 


NEW 
RELATION 


GASPESIA 


CONTAINING 


The Customs and Religion of the Gaspesian Cross- 
bearer Indians, Worshippers of the Sun, and 
of other Peoples of North America, 
called also Canada 


DEDICATED TO 


MADAME LA PRINCESSE D’EPINOY 


By Father Curestien te Ciercg, Recollect Missionary of the 
Province of Saint Anthony of Padua in Artois, and 
Superior of the Monastery of Lens 


PARIS 


At Amaste Avroy’s, Rue Saint Jacques, at 
the Image of S. Jerome, adjoining 
the Fountain of S. Severin 





MDCXCI 
With the Kings License 





[] Zo MADAME LA PRINCESSE 
D’EPINOY 


MADAME, 


E not surprised if I take the liberty to present to you, 
and to give to the Public under the favourable fii] 
auspices of your illustrious name, this New Relation 

of Gaspesia. For that country is by rights in your debt, and 
it is the part equally of its duty and its gratitude to offer you, 
through one of its missionaries, whatsoever it has of religious 
importance before God and of practical consequence before 
men. Thus it may discharge to-day those just obligations 
in which, for more than a century past, it has been indebted 
to the piety of your ancestors, for having been brought under 
the laws of the Church and of the greatest Monarch of the 
universe, through the devotion [iii] of their zeal for the 
service of the State and of Religion. 

In fact, MADAME, a truthful history teaches us that 
Monsieur Philippe Chabot, Count of Buransais and of 
Chargny, Seignior of Brion and High Admiral of France, 
who lived in high honour and glory in the reign of Francis 
the First, wishing to open up ways to the preachers of the 
Faith in a land where it had never been proclaimed, gener- 
ously gave to Jacques Cartier, along with his commissions, 

* The Princesse d’Epinoy, to whom Father le Clercq dedicates this work, 
was Pelagie Chabot-Rohan, who married, 11th April 1668, Alexandre Guillaume 
de Melun, Prince d'Epinoy. She was a widow at the time our author wrote, 
and she died at Versailles 18th August 1698. The principal facts about her 
life, as well as her relationship to Philippe Chabot (mentioned in the next 
paragraph of the text) may be traced through Père Anselme’s Histoire . . . de 


la Maison Royale de France (Edition of 1868, IV. 532, and elsewhere). 
49 
D 


50 DEDICATION 


three [iv] ships, which were equipped at his own cost and 
expense and provided with everything needful to further 
the first discoveries of the country, as well as to lay the 
foundations of that flourishing colony of New France now 
obviously so well established in Canada. Infusing into the 
heart of this famous navigator a part of that noble ardour, 
so common and so natural in all members of your house, 
for magnifying and extending the glory of JESUS CHRIST 
and of our Kings, he commanded him to erect there the 
Cross, the Fleur-de-Lys and that [v] celebrated inscription 
which acquired for the Kingdom of France more than two 
thousand leagues of those vast countries. It was the year 
1535, and the sixth of July, when it appeared for the first 
time in Gaspesia, and a few days later upon the banks and 
shores of the River of Saint Laurence, in these words: 
Franciscus Primus, Dei gratid, Rex Francorum, regnat. 

Thus it iss MADAME, that all France is indebted to your 
noble house for the conquest of this new world, and thus, by 
a special act of [vi] divine Providence, our Gaspesian Indians, 
with as much of joy as surprise, beheld in their own country 
a Cross like that which they were worshipping without know- 
ledge thereof. They drew it, and wore it, religiously upon 
their bodies and their clothes ; it presided over their councils, 
their voyages, and the most important affairs of their nation ; 
their cemeteries appeared more like those of Christians than 
of barbarians, by reason of the number of Crosses which they 
placed over their tombs. In a word, they [vii] were, 
MADAME, the Athenians of a new world, who were render- 
ing their homage and their adoration to the Cross of an 


1 Francis the First, by the grace of God, King of the French, reigns. This: 
sentence would have made a far stronger inscription than the one which 
Cartier actually used, for our author is in error on this point as in others 
relating to this matter. As all of the accounts of Cartier’s voyages agree, 
it was in 1534, and on July 24, that Cartier erected the cross at Gaspé, while 
its inscription, which was displayed only once, consisted in these words: Vive 
le Roy de France. 


DEDICATION 51 


unknown God at that very time when the Princes of 
Epinoy and of Melun, along with Saint Louis and our 
other Kings of France, were nobly undertaking their most 
celebrated journeys to the Holy Land in order to redeem 
it from the shame in which it lay among those infidel 
nations, and to make it adored by all the world. 

Animated by the spirit of Saint Paul, these noble men, 
[viii] MADAME, wished, like this Apostle of JESUS CHRIS 1 
no other glory than that which they eagerly sought in the 
Cross of the Son of God ; and, counting as nothing both 
the great number of victories which they had won over 
the enemies of the Faith, and also those heroic feats of arms 
which had won for them the surname of Carpenters, because 
of the victorious power of their arms and the weight of their 
blows, they held it as the highest of honours to go on the 
Crusades with the bravest of the [ix] Kingdom. Before all 
the world they displayed this sacred sign of our salvation 
as the shining mark of their Christianity. They made their 
wills and put their affairs in order before setting out for 
the conquest of the Holy Land, since they had the intention 
to die there as martyrs, or else to establish the reign of 
JESUS CHRIST. They were Eli’s who died every moment 
of regret at seeing this Ark of the Covenant in the power 
of those indomitable Philistines. And finally they desired 
that the Cross should be engraved upon their sepulchres 
with the arms of your [x] house, in order to indicate to all 
posterity that they placed themselves even after death under 
the protection of the Cross of the Son of God, whose interests, 
during their life, they had maintained with so much zeal 
and glory. 

T should exceed, MADAME, the limits of a Dedication, 
and I recognise with pleasure that I should need large volumes, 
if I were now to recall the glorious and triumphant memory 
of those illustrious heroes: the antiquity of their nobility, 
more ancient even than the birth of Christianity [xi] in our 


52 DEDICATION 


France, according to the report of Gregory of Tours, who 
makes it descend from that famous Aurelian who arranged 
the marriage of Sainte Clothilde and King Clovis with so 
much sagacity, judgment, and prudence, that this great 
prince gave him the County of Melun with its dependencies, 
as a reward for this important service: those stately and 
great unions of your house with crowned heads, and with 
the most noble and august families of Europe : the profound 
erudition of so [xii] great a number of learned prelates, 
whose orthodox teachings have given lustre to the church 
of JESUS CHRIST, and have scattered the darkness and 
errors which were like to ruin or corrupt it: the austere 
virtue and the sanctity of so many abbesses who have 
founded, reformed, and sanctified the cloisters : and that 
piety and that pity, so natural and so obvious through the 
foundation of such a number of monasteries, churches, 
chapels, oratories, and hospitals, endowed by the property 
of your ancestors, and sustained, MADAME, by your own 
[xiii] generosity, at Bethune, at La Bassée, at Abbeville, at 
Baugé, and in several other places of the Kingdom. 

I should never end, MADAME, and I even venture 
to say, with all that frankness and candour with which 
my native land endows me, it would be useless, to recite 
here in detail the deeds and heroic virtues of your illustrious 
ancestors, because it appears that Nature and Grace have 
happily agreed to unite in your own person everything which 
they both [xiv] had granted your ancestors of nobility, of 
vivacity of spirit, of judgment, of wisdom, of courage, of 
virtue, of piety, of faith, and of religion. These appear 
to-day with so much brilliancy in your illustrious person 
that you yourself attract no fewer blessings than Mademoiselle 
de Melun, your sister, has received in living and in dying 
in the odour of sanctity, and in the practice of those loftiest 
virtues of Christianity, upon which you take pleasure in 
regulating and modelling [xv] all the actions of your life. 


DEDICATION 53 


Indeed, if it were permissible for me to make such a 
challenge as that of the sage referring to the virtuous woman, 
it would be this, MADAME, to find one who could rival 
you in that greatness of soul and zeal which attaches you 
inviolably to the interests of God, of religion, and of the 
state ; in that loftiness and breadth of universal genius which 
permits you to think of nothing but what is noble ; in that 
charity without limit which renders your heart [xvi] sensitive 
to the miseries of others, opens your hands with the liberality 
and profusion of your great riches in order to relieve them, 
makes of your house an asylum and refuge for the afflicted, 
pleads with King and with ministers on behalf of the un- 
fortunate, renders easy and ready the access to your presence 
both for the great and the lowly, leads you to do good to 
all people, inspires in you a humility without abasement, and 
a holy pride without arrogance, and gives YOU Min tac 02 
heart conformable to that of God. It is these virtues which 
have won you now so [xvii] justly, the esteem of the greatest 
of Monarchs, and the veneration of the Court. 

Let not your modesty, MADAME, take offence. Enemy 
of flattery and of vanity as you are, it is known that you 
found your greatness only upon that which can render you 
pleasing to him who exalts a soul so Christian as yours just 
in so far as it humbles itself in his presence. But, indeed, 
even if, in order to please you, I would pass in silence the 
little I have just said as to all those rare advantages of Nature 
[xviii] and of Grace which you possess, they would none the 
less be known by all the world through the reflections and 
visible impressions which you have made of them in the 
hearts and in the spirits of Messieurs the Princes your sons, 
who have distinguished themselves in their first campaign 
with such valour, bravery, judgment, and wisdom, that the 
King has been pleased to entrust to the courage of Monsieur 
le Prince d’Epinoy, at the age of eighteen years, the Regiment 
of Picardy, and to favour Monsieur his brother with a 


54 DEDICATION 


company [xix] of cavalry, in order to recognise and to 
encourage the valour of these two young heroes, who arouse 
such high expectations among all the brave men of the 
Kingdom. 

Worthy of the choice of LOUIS LE GRAND, and 
sacredly animated by the all-consuming zeal of their noble 
ancestors for Religion and for the State, they have been 
pursuing glory, and following Monseigneur into Germany 
in support of those same interests. They are doing their 
part to-day in Flanders and upon the Rhine in order to be 
everywhere the defenders [xx] of our altars, and to revive 
the memory of the courage and the zeal of the Williams and 
the Adams de Melun, and of the other heroes of Christianity, 
who have stopped the progress of the infidels, subdued the 
rebellion of heretics, and vanquished everywhere the enemies 
of France. 

Filled then as I am by sentiments of profound respect 
for the virtue of a mother so glorious, and charmed by the 
zeal and high spirit of children so worthy of their birth, 
what more ought I to do, MADAME, after having presumed 
[xxi] to dedicate to you this New Relation of Gaspesia, to 
give it to the public under your auspices? I can only offer 
to God my prayers, my vows, and my sacrifices, for the 
sake of imploring him urgently to turn abundantly the 
fulness of his blessings upon your illustrious person, and 
to preserve Messieurs the Princes your children in the 
dangers, perils, and hazards of war, to which the intrepidity 
of their courage, seconded by a true zeal for Religion, exposes 
them every moment on behalf of the Catholic Religion and 
in the service of the [xxii] first, the most august, and the 
most religious Monarch of Christendom. 

I find myself, MADAME, all the more bound to these 
rightful duties for the reason that I have the honour to be 
not only Superior of the Recollects of Lens, who have the 
good fortune to preach the gospel of JESUS CHRIST to 


DEDICATION 55 
your people of the principality of Epinoy, but also Superior 


of a community as strict and zealous for religious perfection 
as that of your nuns of La Bassée, of which you are the 
foundress. [xxiii] We ought all of us together to recognise 
before God at the foot of His altars, the mighty obligations 
that we owe to you and to all of your illustrious family. 
In the hope that your goodness will be pleased to receive 
this little attempt at a history of Gaspesia as favourably as 
it received myself when I had the honour, on my arrival 
in Paris, to testify to you, as I do again now with all possible 
respect, that I am and [xxiv] shall be all my life, by inclination 
as by obligation, 


MADAME, 


Your very humble, and very obedient 
servant, Friar CHRESTIEN Le CLerco, 
Recollect Missionary of the Pro- 
vince of Artois, and Superior of 
the Convent of Lens. 


Gxv] Extract from the King’s License. 


Y Grace and License of the King, given at Paris the 
30th December 1690, signed, by the King in his 
Council, Menesrrer; It 1s permitted to the 
Reverend Father CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ, Recollect Mis- 
sionary, Superior of the Convent of Lens in Artois, to have 
printed by whomsoever he pleases, a book entitled New 
Relation of Gaspesia, containing the Customs and the Religion 
of the Gaspesian Cross-bearer Indians, worshippers of the Sun, 
and other peoples of North America, caled also Canada, 
during the time and duration of eight consecutive years, 
counting from the day on which the printing of the said book 
shall be finished for the first time. And it is forbidden to 
all printers and booksellers [xxvi] to print, sell, and issue it, 
under any pretext whatsoever, even with a foreign imprint, 
or otherwise, without the consent of the said applicant or 
of his assigns, under penalty of fifteen hundred livres fine, 
payable by each of those contravening, of confiscation of 
all the copies, and of all costs, damages, and interest, as is 
more fully specified in the said License. 

Registered in the book of the Community of Booksellers and 
Printers of Paris, the 5th January 1691, according to the decree 
of Parliament of 8th April, 1653, and that of the Privy Council 
of the King, of the 27th February, 1665. 

Signed  AuBOÜYN, Syndic. 

The said Reverend Father has ceded his license to 
Amagce Auroy, Merchant Bookseller. 


Finished printing for the first time the twentieth of April 1691. 


56 


[i] 
TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS 


CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK 


CHAPTER I 

On Gaspesia in General : à ; : ‘ . page [1] er 
CHAPTER II 

On the Origin of the Gaspesians . : : : ; : [34] 84 


CHAPTER III 


On the Birth of the Gaspesians . ; : : . à [42] 88 
CHAPTER IV 

On the Clothes and Finery of the Gaspesians à : : [52] 93 
CHAPTER. V 

On the Wigwams and [ii] Dwellings of the Gaspesians . à [67] 100 
CHAPTER VI 


On the Manner of Life of the Gaspesians, and on their Food . [89] 109 


CHAPTER VII 


On the Ignorance ofthe Gaspesians . : : : M [i27)mer2s 





1 Of the present translation. 
57 


58 TABLE 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Language of the Gaspesians : : ; / . [160] 


CHAPTER IX 


On the Religion of the Gaspesians . à à : : 24:65] 
CHAPTER X 
On the Origin of the Worship of the Cross among those Gaspesians 
called Cross-bearers  . ; E ; ; : “(1321 
CHAPTER XI 
Account of the arduous Voyage of the Author on his way to announce 
the Faith to the Cross-bearer Gaspesians . 2 à . [199] 
[iii] CHAPTER XI 
On the Belief of the Gaspesians concerning the Immortality of 
the soul : 2 : : ‘ : ” : . [308] 


CHAPTER XII 
On the Superstitions of the Gaspesians . ’ : : . [329] 


CHAPTER XIV 
On the Rulers and the Laws of the Gaspesians : : 11377) 


CHAPTER XV 
On the Customs of the Gaspesians . : : ‘ : uf gor} 


CHAPTER XVI 
On the Marriage of the Gaspesians , ‘ Sy) lt Jae ate 


PAGE 
140 


143 


159 


207 


215 


234 


240 


259 


TABLE 


CHAPTER XVII 
On the Manner in which the Gaspesians make War : - [450] 


CHAPTER XVIII 
On the Hunting of the Gaspesians : : ; ; - [470] 


CHAPTER XIX 


On the Feasts, the Dances, and the Amusements [iv] of the 
Gaspesians . : ‘ : : : : ‘ - [496] 


CHAPTER XX 
On the Remedies, Diseases, and Death of the Gaspesians al sro] 


CHAPTER XXI 


First Return of the Author to France, and the Speech that the Chief of 
the Gaspesians made to Him on his Departure . : . [528] 


59 


PAGE 


265 


274 


288 


296 


304 













RSR 7h ee 


~ 


a reads oe ae 
1 


‘te - ay wap 5 
DE de ee re ‘a> geen ome co 
1H Lit wd) his +f : es : 


LME TI IV 
ER pire @he) se HARAS RS 


| . ® 0 7 , 1 A 
1 sain agties te 
Mid)? ey ® se". als Tintin 
: ÉD TE vrai t'a ii 
He, Babette are a 
any . . 
’ . 1 
iene 
. ; L L 


A . 

ne aah M4 A Ne PE 

We 7 

a 

a ¥ ‘ i So Me 

ù 

En . okt PR rev ? \ d ie a2 a 
a 


nr. a ee oa Khe 


vis) nn \ <. 


Sas: 
ore ee si 
rt ‘gana 


Aou a ee. ss a? ee Le Po 
SN Pa € 7 "LEE ae no a Me A 
) De ¥ Le TS ce * | ra Pat S hae > 


a ae 


+ wi 
Te ' 
a 


Fe AT = 
A 
27 


[1] NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


CHAPTER I 


On Gaspesia in General 


ASPESIA, or Gaspé, whence our Indians derive 

their origin and name of Gaspesians, has ever been 

a renowned and conspicuous place. Such it was 

among the nations of North America,! [2] both on account 
of the ancient and habitual residence which the first leaders 
and chiefs,> the kings and rulers of these peoples, have 
established there, in the course of several centuries, as the 
seat of their empire, and of such a government as can be 
found in Canada among the barbarians of New France, and 
also because of the bloody wars, and the fury of their victor- 
ious and triumphant arms, which they formerly carried even 
to the homes of the Eskimaux and of the other Indians who 
live along the banks of the great River Saint Lawrence. Not 
only this, but it is also very important to us, as much on 
account of the fishery for cod, which is made there every year, 
as because of the mine of [3] lead, which was discovered there 
some years ago, but which, nevertheless, has had unfortunately 
to be abandoned after a very great expense had been incurred. 
1 This opening paragraph is the clumsiest piece of composition in our 
author’s entire book. It shows marks of haste, and I have no doubt that it 
was added, or at all events rearranged, in connection with the interpolation, 
at the last moment, of Father Jumeau’s letter, which begins at page 7. 


Apparently the book began originally with the paragraph which is now 
the second. 

? This and the immediately preceding words read in the original /es Chefs 
et les Capitaines, Throughout his work our author uses the word Chef for 
a leading person of any grade, and therefore it can mean either the head 
of a family or of a settlement, or even a “chief” in our sense. But to designate 
the chiefs in particular he uses always me word Capifaines. 


62 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


This mine has not proven sufficiently rich to yield the profit 
and advantage which was hoped. This is, perhaps, so far as 
I was able to judge of the matter when I was in that place, 
because the miners who were sent there from France have 
sought to find at the opening of the mine the vein! which 
they could have found much more easily at the foot of the 
rock concealing this metal, of which the nature approaches 
nearer, or at least as near, that of tin as ‘that of lead? [4] 


1 The word in the original is 27/07, which is an obvious misprint for jon, 

a mining term meaning “ vein.” 
2 Deposits of lead ores, not, however, extensive enough for profitable mining, 
are well-known at Gaspé at several localities from Little Gaspé and Grand 
= a Gréve to Indian Cove; 
and it was doubtless the 
former locality, the most 
important of all, to which 
our author refers. They 
are mentioned in the Re- 
ports of the Geological 
Survey of Canada (Report 
for 1880-82, 15 DD. and 
Vol. TV. 77 K-), and’ in 
Professor Clarke’s works, 
his Sketches of Gaspé, 39, 
and his arly Devonic 
History, 42. In saying 
that the metal was tin 
rather than lead, our 
author is mistaken, though 
he is in agreement with 
the belief of the Company 
of New France in 1653, 
when it reserved these 
+ “tin” mines from the 
ee 5 grant made that year 
ee to Nicolas Denys (7%e 
Champlain Society's Edition of Denys, 58). Denys also mentions the mine and 
makes the error of calling it antimony (O5. cif., 227 ; and Description, 1. 236). 
It was no doubt this mine which was visited, and unfavourably reported, in 
1665 by Father Bailloquet and some miners (/eswrf Relations, Thwaites edition, 
XLIX. 171). A very interesting account of an attempt to work these mines 
in the year 1665 is contained in the Journal du Corsaire Jean Doublet de 
Honfleur, edited by Charles Bréard, Paris, 1887, 33. This, no doubt, was 

the attempt to which our author refers. 











Seale 10 miles td inch 









ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 63 


Gaspesia, or otherwise Gaspé,! is a country full of mountains, 
of woods, and of rocks, the soil of which is wholly sterile 
and unfruitful. In a word, it is a bay, which lies at the 
entrance of the river Saint Lawrence in the latitude of forty- 


1 This important and pleasing place-name makes its first appearance in 1542 
in the “Routier ” or “ Course” of Jean Alphonse, where it occurs in the phrase 
Bay of Molues or Gaspé (Baxter’s translation in his Memoir of Jacques Cartier, 
New York, 1906, 251), It reappears in Champlain’s Sauvages of 1603 as 
Gachepé and Gachepay, and in his Voyages of 1613 as Gaspé, which form has 
been in constant use from that time to the present, and is now applied to a 
Cape, a Bay, a Basin, a County, and a District. The earliest attempt to explain 
its origin appears to be that of Joseph Hamel, who, in 1833, derived it from 
K'espèque, meaning “Bout de la pointe de terre” (Journals of the House of 
Assembly of Lower Canada, 1835-36, Appendix BB). This explanation was 
adopted by Dawson in 1858, who wrote that it means as nearly as possible 
“Land’s end” (Canadian Naturalist, 111. 323). The same explanation was 
given, apparently quite independently, in 1866, by Father Vetromile, who 
derives it from Gachepée or Kech’h1, meaning “the end” (7%e Abnakis and their 
History, New York, 1866, 46), though I set no great store by his authority 
since he promulgated many errors. Another explanation was given in 1870 
by PAbbé Laverdiére, who cites PAbbé Maurault as deriving it from an 
Abenaki word Xatsepi8i, meaning “ separate,” “separated from the mainland,” 
in description of the prominent rock, called the F orillon, which formerly stood 
at the extremity of Cape Gaspé (Œuvres de Champlain, 68). This explanation 
must have been communicated by l’Abbé Maurault to PAbbé Laverdiére, 
since it does not occur, so far as I can find, in the former's only published book, 
Histoire des Abenakis (Sorel, 1866). L’Abbé Laverdière’s great authority has 
led to the frequent repetition of this explanation, but the evidence on its 
behalf is badly grounded and for these reasons: first, l'Abbé Maurault, as 
I know from much study of that subject, was very superficial in his explanation 
of place-names ; second, his Abenaki philology cannot be transferred to Micmac 
territory ; and third, there is not, so far as I can find, in the extensive Micmac 
Dictionaries of Rand, any word which comes anywhere near to the form re- 
quired by this explanation. Recently, however, and again apparently quite 
independently, the interpretation of Hamel, Dawson and Vetromile, has been 
reaffirmed by Father Pacifique, a missionary among the Micmacs of Restig- 
ouche (in Rouillard’s Voms géographiques ... empruntés aux langues sauvages, 
Quebec, 1906, 35); he makes it mean “end” or “extremity,” and cites the fact 
that Yarmouth, the land’s end of Nova Scotia, is called in Micmac Gespogoitg 
(written by Rand Kespoogwit, meaning “Land’s End,” in his Micmac. 
English Dictionary, Charlottetown, 1902, 74), while Cape Breton is called 
Gespesaocg, and this explanation receives a certain confirmation from the fact 
that the Micmacs, according to Father Pacifique, formerly considered their 
country as a giant having his head at Cape Breton, and his feet at Yarmouth 
and Gaspé. Rand’s Dictionary, above cited (74), gives Kespak as meaning 


64 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


eight degrees, and is four to five leagues in breadth, and six 
to seven in depth. It ends in a very beautiful basin, and in 
three rivers very full of fish, which branch far within the 
country. It is distant only seven leagues from Isle Percée, 
which is not, as some imagine, an island capable of affording 
homes to residents, but only a very rough rock, everywhere 
precipitous, of an extraordinary height, and of a surprising 
abruptness. This rock [5] is also pierced open to such a 
degree in three or four separate places, that boats are 
accustomed to pass, with masts all up and under full sail, 
through the principal one of these openings. It is from this 
circumstance that it takes its name of Isle Percée,* although in 
fact it is only partially an island, or a peninsula. One can 
easily make the circuit around it on foot when the tide is low, 


“the end,” and Kespea as meaning “I am the last one”; and on the same page 
are several words beginning #espa or kespe, which has the signification of “last” 
or “end.” Taking all the facts into consideration, therefore, I think it wholly 
probable that the explanation of Hamel, Dawson, Vetromile, and Pacifique is 
correct. Since Gasfe or Kesfe appears usually as an inseparable prefix, it is 
quite possible that Gaspé is an abbreviated form of a longer word, perhaps of 
Kespoogwit, the same as,for Yarmouth ; but in any case it seems plain that the 
word means “end” or “extremity.” It is, therefore, no doubt descriptive of 
the geographical position of the place in relation to the territory of the Micmacs. 
We have no data as to whether the word was applied by the Indians simply to 
the Cape, or to a larger region inclusive of Gaspé Bay, but it seems most 
probable that they used it for the region or bay, which was the last place in 
their territory in which a part of their tribe resided. 

At the same time another possibility must receive consideration. The word 
goes back to Alphonse, and therefore practically to Cartier’s time. Now the 
Indians whom Cartier found in Gaspé are supposed to have been not 
Micmacs, but Huron-Iroquois. Hence the name Gaspé, which must have been 
taken in the first place from them, may be a word of their tongue, and not 
Micmac. If the reader is curious as to other explanations which have been 
given, though I believe they are all without any reliable historical basis, he 
will find them in Vetromile, of. cé¢., 46, in Rouillard, of, cit., 35, and in Roy’s 
Noms géographiques de la Province de Quebec (Quebec, 1906), 169, The history 
of the derived word Gaspesia will be found on page 12 of this volume. 

1 Our author’s account of Gaspé, and of Isle Percée, is accurate, as is to 
be expected from the intimacy of his acquaintance with them both. Their 
geographical relations are shown by the accompanying outline maps. Isle 
Percée is over a fourth of a mile long, very narrow, 288 feet high, everywhere 
precipitous, connected with the mainland by a bar, and pierced as our author 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 65 


while it has a resemblance to an island only at high water. It 
is separated from the mainland by not more than two or three 
arpents of land ; and it even appears as if it had formerly 
been joined thereto, and had only been separated by the 
storms and tempests of the sea. 


We have at that place! a somewhat important mission, and 
thence with much grief I learn [6] through one of our 
missionaries, the Reverend Father Emanuel Jumeau,? who 


States. Its characteristics are beautifully exhibited in the photographic illustra- 
tions of Professor Clarke’s works cited below. It is the most notable feature 
of a strikingly bold and beautiful region, which has attracted the appreciative 
notice of literary visitors from Champlain to those of our own day. The 
principal of the resulting descriptions, aside from those of Champlain and 
Denys, are by Thos. Pye in his Canadian Scenery, District of Gaspé (Montreal, 
1866) ; by Faucher de Saint Maurice, in his Promenades dans le Golfe Saint- 
Laurent (Quebec, 1881); by 
S. G. W. Benjamin, in 7%e Cen- 
tury Magazine for March 1884; 
by J. G. H. Creighton in Pictur- 
esgue Canada; by G. W. Browne 
in his Saint Lawrence River (New 
York, 1905) ; and by J. M. Clarke Church of 
in his Percé, a brief sketch of its ‘ ote ARE 
Geology (in Report of the New Ain, alle À 
York State Palæontologist, 1905), Fo MANS 
in his Sketches of Gaspé (Al- an 
bany, N.Y., 1908), and his Early 
Devonic History of New York and pi 
Eastern North America (Memoir LO Eh Scale 1 mile to 1 inch 
9 of the New York State Museum, 
Albany, N.Y., 1908). The second of these three last-named works is an 
appreciative, interesting, and beautifully illustrated general account of this 
region, while the first, and especially the third, although primarily scientific 
geological treatises, incidentally abound in matter of general interest, and 
especially in illustrations which give a vivid idea of the appearance and 
characteristics of the Gaspé country. A nearly contemporary map of Gaspé 
Bay, of 1693, is mentioned by Harrisse in his Notes, 212. 

! That is to say, at the village of Isle Percée, which is not on the island 
but on the mainland near by. This use of the name of the island for the 
neighbouring village long persisted, though in our times the name of the village 
is shortened to Percé. 

® A biographical notice of Father Jumeau will be found in connection with 
our author’s further mention of his work in Gaspesia, at page 188 of his book 
(page 152 of this volume). 





E 


66 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


has returned from Canada at the very time when this history 
is being printed, that the hospice and the church which we 
have had built there, and which even the most barbarous 
Indians of New France held in remarkable veneration, has 
not been safe from the fury and rage of the English, the 
Hollanders, and the renegade Frenchmen, who have reduced 
everything to ashes under circumstances calculated to make 
Hell itself shudder with horror. Here follow the contents 
of the letter which this good religious" writes me from Isle- 
Dieu, under date of the 15th October 1690 :— 


[7] “My Reverend F ather,—1 pass over in silence the harrow- 
ing details of the shipwreck which we experienced last year, m 
a terrible night on the twenty-third day of November, against 
the Cap des Rosiers, fifteen leagues from Isle Percee, and of the 
misfortune which we have suffered this year, in our capture by 
a privateer of Flessingue” ai fifty leagues from La Rochelle. 
This I do in order to let you share the sole grief which engrosses 
me wholly at present, and which, I am sure, will affict you no 
less than myself, since I have been a witness of the trouble that 
you have taken in the establishment of our mission at Isle Percée, 
and of the zeal with which you have there promoted the glory 
of God and the salvation of [8] souls. It seems as if our Lord 
had willed to save my life in the shipwreck only in order that I 
might be the witness of the total ruin and entire desolation of 
this place so that I could myself give you an account thereof. 
This narrative will suffice to convince everybody to what an 
extreme of impiety and rage heresy can attain, when once tt 
finds itself in condition to undertake and to execute all that 1t 
desires through the agency of its adherents. To be brief, I need 
only tell you that at the commencement of the month of August 

1 | have been no more successful than preceding translators in finding an 
English equivalent for the French word Religieux, and therefore in the following 
pages I am obliged to use “religious” as a noun. 


2 Now called Flushing, a port of Holland. At the time of which Father 
Jumeau writes the French and the Hollanders were at war, 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 67 


last, two English frigates appeared in the roadstead of the Isle 
of Bonaventure Jlying the standard of France, and, through this 
stratagem, they easily seized five fishing vessels, whose captains 


! Father Jumeau’s account of the capture of the French ships and the 
destruction of the settlement of Isle Percée is confirmed from other sources. 
Thus Sylvanus Davis, a New Englander, then a captive at Quebec, wrote 
in his journal under August 10: “News came to town that our English had 
taken six French ships at the Isle of Percey,” and again on September Benue 
wrote: “ News that our ships was gone from Isle Percey” (Collections of the 
Massachusetts Historical Society, 3rd series, I. 110), Another account, with 
additional details, was written by De Monseignat in a Relation of 1690, which 
reads : “Isle Percée, consisting of a few houses situate at the entrance of the 
Gulf of Saint Lawrence, has also been plundered this summer by some English 
pirates. That place is the rendezvous for a few vessels which come there to 
fish for Cod. It contained only seven or eight settlers with a Franciscan 
convent and a few friars ; six vessels were at anchor there and fishing with 
their boats, which were all taken without any resistance. The captains and 
the major part of the crews escaped into the woods along with the settlers, and 
finally got to Quebec in Biscayan longboats. The houses have been burnt and 
the Recollect church desecrated. Some of those who escaped returned hence 
to see if the enemy had left anything, but they have been attacked by the 
English army which was on its way to besiege us. They abandoned their 
vessel and escaped” (Zranslation in Documents relative to the Colonial 
History of the State of New York, 1X. 477). A briefer though otherwise similar 
account, apparently condensed from the original of this memoir, is given by 
De la Potherie in his Aistotrve de P'Amerique septentrionale, XII. (edition of 
1753), 90. A different date for the destruction of the churches is given in 
a letter from Du Champigny to the Minister, of May 10, 1691, a copy of which 
is in the Canadian archives. It reads, in translation, “The Recollects of 
New France entreat his Majesty to grant them some giftin consequence of the 
loss they suffered on the 18th of September last (1690) by the invasion of the 
English into Isles Percée and Bonnaventure, when the ornaments of the church 
and the sacred vessels were carried off, and their church and convent reduced 
to ashes.” 

The question now arises as to the identity of these two English /rigates, 
and their crews, whose destruction of the settlement and ships is perhaps 
excusable by the canons of war, but whose execrable treatment of the mission 
church is pardonable upon no basis whatever. One’s natural first thought 
would be that they formed part of the New England expedition led against 
Quebec in the autumn of that year by Sir William Phips; and this was the 
belief of Charlevoix, who states it without qualification (Histoire de la Nouvelle 
france, Shea’s translation, edition of 1902, IV., 161). Charlevoix has, of 
course, been followed by others. His confusion of Phips’ two expeditions 
of 1690, or rather his supposition that they were one and the same, was 
entirely natural; but we now know that the earlier expedition against Port 


68 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


and crews, wbolly occupied at the time with the fishery, were 
all [9] obliged to seek safety at Quebec, because they were not 
in a state to defend themselves, nor to resist so many nations 


Royal and Chedabucto set out from Boston in late April and returned partly 
in late May and partly in June, while his Quebec expedition did not leave 
Boston until August 9, and proceeded so slowly that it did not reach the vicinity 
of Isle Percée until mid-September, whereas the two English ships were at Isle 
Percée at the beginning of August. The two English ships were not, therefore, 
a part of Phips’ expedition. Nor were they English war ships, for such could 
not have been present at this time in these waters without mention in the 
records, and no such mention exists; nor was the conduct of their crews in 
accord with this character. On the other hand, about this time, there were 
present in Acadian waters two English vessels of a very different character, 
for in July of that year, two English “ pirate ” vessels had pillaged Port Royal, 
and committed other outrages on the Acadian coast (Charlevoix, of. cit, 10725 
Murdoch, History of Nova Scotia, 1. 195). It would seem probable that it 
was these two pirates which committed the deeds described by Father Jumeau, 
and this view receives the strongest confirmation from their designation as 
“ pirates” by De Monseignat in the passage cited earlier in this note. But 
our knowledge of these pirates does not end here, for records exist which prove 
their identity. In a letter of October 20, of the same year, Lieutenant- 
Governor Leisler, of New York, wrote to the authorities in England an account 
of the preparations for the land movement against Quebec, and added mention 
of “the forces sent by sea at the same time by us viz. Captn. Mason a Ship 
of 20 Guns Capt. Goderis a Brigandine, and Captn. Bollen a sloop all well 
appointed, who attacked Port Real, formerly Plundered.” Then follows a 
description of events agreeing closely with the accounts of the doings of the 
pirate vessels in Acadia, and ending “at the Isle Piercee, that they burnt 80 
fishing Chaloupes, despoyling great Quantitys of fish” (Documents relative to 
the Colonial History of the State of New York, Il. 751). The records above 
cited show that one of the three vessels was captured by a French privateer 
(Charlevoix, og. cit., 163), and there can remain no doubt, especially in view of 
the mention of “ Isle Piercee” in this connection, that the other two were the 
English frigates or pirates which plundered Isle Percée as described by Father 
Jumeau. Obviously they were not genuine pirates, but closely allied privateers 
(which are a kind of legalised pirates), authorised by the State of New York. 
Father le Clercq’s description of their crews as composed of English, Hollanders, 
and renegade Frenchmen, is obviously consistent with this origin ; for, coming 
from New York, they would naturally include some Dutch seamen, while the 
French renegades would be those who joined them during their operations 
in Acadia, including one at Miramichi, as mentioned in a footnote to page 179 
of the present work. It is not quite clear which of the three captains was 
the commander of whom Father Jumeau later speaks, but the implica- 
tion of Leisler’s letter would seem to ascribe this infamous prominence to 
Mason. 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 69 


banded against them. Then, these sworn enemies of the state 
and of religion attempted a landing, which succeeded as they 
hoped, and they remained there for eight entire days, during 
which they committed a hundred impieties, with all the excesses 
imaginable. And among other things they robbed, ravaged, and 
burnt the houses of the residents, who number at least eight to 
ten families,» and who, for the most part had already taken 
refuge hurriedly in the woods, in order to escape an encounter 
with, and the cruelty of, these pitiless heretics, who committed 
horrible carnage and laid everything waste with fire and sword. 
L shudder with horror at the simple [10] recollection of the 
impieties and sacrileges committed by these villains in our 
church, which they used as a guard-house and as a place of 
debauchery. Animated by the same spirit as the iconoclasts, 
they shattered our images, trampled them under foot, and hurled 
against them a thousand imprecations with curses and insults, 
as if they had been living beings. The pictures of the Holy 
Virgin and of Saint Peter were not exempt from their fury, nor 
from their passions, for both of these were riddled with more 
than a hundred and fifty gun shots, discharged by these miserable 
wretches, who pronounced each time in mockery and derision 
these words of the Litanies: Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis: 
Sancte Petre, ora pro nobis. Not a cross escaped their [11] fury, 
with the exception of the one which I had formerly planted upon 


* Curiously enough, the names of these families have been in large part 
preserved. Among the Clairambault papers mentioned in a later note (page 
77 of this volume), is a census of Isle Percée in 1688 made by Richard Denys 
de Fronsac, the testimony of which is sustained by a petition of these residents, 
of date 1685, and by the Census of 1686 (the documents are published in 
annotated translation in the Collections of the New Brunswick Historical 
Society, I11., 1907, 19 and 32, and the census in Murdoch’s History of Nova 
Scofia, 1. 172). The names of the heads of families were Vincent Chateigne 
dit Lepine, Nouel Boissel, one Richard, Pierre Valleau (perhaps) dit Le 
Garcon, one Jacque, with probably Pierre Dulion and Pierre Egron dit 
Lamote, while Pierre Filtoupier and Jacque Boisel were residents in 1676. 
None of these names now survives at Isle Percée, as I am informed by our 
best authority upon such subjects, M. Placide Gaudet of Ottawa. 


70 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the Table à Rolland, and which, because it was upon a mountain 
of too difficult access, stands still to this day all alone as the 
sacred token of our Christianity. The sacrileges of Baltazar 
who, in olden times in the midst of a festival, profaned the 
sacred vessels of the Temple of Ferusalem by making bis 
courtesans and bis concubines drink therefrom, were the same 
as those committed by these heretics, who, in the midst of their 
horrible debaucheries, extending through day and night, drank 
from our chalices their bumpers to the health of the Prince of 
Orange, whom they blessed, while launching on the contrary a 
thousand imprecations against their rightful King. The Com- 
mander, in order to distinguish himself as much by his impieties 
as be was by bis position, [12] arrayed himself in the most 
beautiful of our chasubles, and, with an ostentation as frivolous 
as it was ridiculous, paraded upon the beach with the silver 
monstrance attached to his hat, whilst he obliged his comrades 
by a thousand words of wickedness to offer him the same honours 
and reverences which the Catholics render in their most solemn 
processions to the very Holy Sacrament of the altar. They 
brought all these impieties to an end at length by a ceremony 
as extraordinary in its form as it is extravagant and abominable 
in all its details. They took the crowns of the Holy Sacrament, 
and of the Blessed Virgin, and placed them upon the head of a 
sheep ; they tied the feet of this animal, and, having laid it 
down upon the consecrated stone of the [13] high altar, they 
slaughtered it, and offered it 1m sacrifice, in derision. of the 
sacrifice of the Holy Mass. This they did in order to give 
thanks to God (so they said), for the first advantages they had 
secured over the papists of New France. They then set fire to 
the four corners of the church, which was soon reduced to ashes, 
as was likewise the church of our Mission in the Isle Bonaventure, 

1 The conspicuous mountain back of Isle Percée, now called Mount Saint- 
Anne. The name appears first as Zable de Roland in Sagard’s Histoire du 
Canada of 1636, page 144. He says it was so named by the sailors “ because 


of its height, and the various segments which are at its summit” (@ cause de sa 
hauteur, & les diuerses entre-coupures qui sont au sommet @icelle). 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 71 


which had also a similar fate after they had shattered the 
images and slashed all the ornaments with heavy sabre cuts. 
You can well judge, by the grief that you yourself feel at the 
simple recital I make to you of these disasters, how keenly I was 
grieved when I found, still lying in the very place where the 
high altar of our church had stood, the carcass of the sheep 
[14] which had served as the victim in the abominable sacrifice 
of these infidels. Outraged, and pierced with grief, to see all 
the crosses of this Mission thus hacked to pieces or overturned 
upon the ground, I formed at that very moment the resolution 
to replace the principal ones. In this I succeeded, with the 
charitable help of the residents, who set themselves at this sacred 
task with even more of piety and of devotion than these miserable 
heretics had exhibited of fury and of rage in overturning them. 
But alas! my dear Father, I have much reason to believe, and 
I fear indeed, that they felt once more the dire consequences of a 
second invasion of these sworn enemies of our holy religion, because, 
two days after the erection of these crosses, that is to say the 
tenth of September, [15] we were obliged to cut our cables quickly 
and to make sail, at sight of seven hostile ships, which gave 
us chase tn a strange manner, but from which we happily escaped 
at last by favour of the night, during which we saw with regret 
all the habitations of Petite Rivière? on fire. God knows the 


* These seven ships were, of course, a part of the New England expedition 
led by Sir William Phips, against Quebec. It had sailed from Boston, thirty- 
two vessels strong, on August 9, 1690, but proceeded so slowly that it was 
mid-September before it reached the mouth of the Saint Lawrence. The 
expedition seems to have intended Isle Percée as a rendezvous, for Major 
Walley writes in his journal of the expedition (in Hutchinson’s History of 
Massachusetts-Bay, 1795, 11.554): “Having passed the isle of Percey,and being 
put back by a contrary wind, it was designed there to have landed our souldiers, 
to have settled our companys, to have called a council of warr, to have made 
and declared such orders as was necessary for regulating our forces, but by 
several of our ships and vessels being drove out of the harbour by a storm, 
they came not in again seasonably, and soe what was intended was prevented.” 

* The settlement at Petite Riviére, now Barachois, at the head of Mal Bay, 
is described in the note to page 24 of our author’s book (page 78 of the 


present volume). 


72 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


embarrassment and uneasiness in which we then found ourselves, 
since we bad not the ballast necessary to enable us to crowd sail 
in order to escape more speedily from Isle Percée as we wished. 
And besides we lacked bread, fresh water and, in a word, every- 
thing which was needed for a navigation as long and as difficult 
as that from Canada to France. But in the end our Lord 
delivered us through His mercy from all these dangers, [16] and 
especially from the privateer of Flessingue, who, having made 
himself master of our vessel, robbed us completely, and then, 
having detained us only four to five hours on board bis ship, 
sent us again on our own after many threats and much bad 
treatment. Two days after, having been in the meantime 
chased by another vessel, we happily made sight of PIsle Dieu, 
where we have come to anchor in the harbour, and whence I write 
you this letter, looking forward to conversing with you more 
fully upon the misfortunes of our Mission of Isle Percée. Re- 
member me, meanwhile, when you say your Mass, and believe 
me, for eternity, wholly yours” 


We have reason to believe that, because, no doubt, of 
the many horrors [17] and sacrileges they committed, these 
infidels did not succeed in the vile project which they had 
formed of desolating completely the colony of New France, 
and that the Lord, who plays as he pleases with the intentions 
of the wicked, will protect his faithful subjects against the 
sworn enemies of his Holy Gospel, and will deliver his people 
from the oppression and the tyranny of these cruel Pharaohs 
by giving the victory to the Canadians under the leadership of 
Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac. This we have reason to hope, 
according to the latest news we have received from Canada. 

The Church of this Mission was dedicated to the 
Prince of the Apostles, and the ceremony that was per- 
formed for that purpose came near costing me my [18] 


1 This important letter is also translated in full, with comments, in Clarke’s 
Sketches of Gaspé, 51. 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 73 


life! For in order to render the ceremony more notable, 
more formal, and more magnificent, I had embarked in 
a canoe, with three of our Indians, for the purpose of 
taking to the church everything which I could find in 


* The date of the dedication of the Church of Saint Peter is somewhat 
uncertain, but it must have fallen in a year towards the close of our authors 
mission. The earliest mention that I find bearing upon the subject is in a 
document in the Clatrambault Collection (described in the note on page 77 of 
this volume), undated but shown by internal evidence to belong probably in 
1681, which refers to a chapel and lodging for two Recollects. It is, however, 
not likely that this chapelle was the Church of Saint Peter, but a temporary 
building. A document given by Réveillaud (in Le Tac, Histoire chronologique, 
216), states that Brother Didace was at that time at Isle Percée in orderi to 
build a church; but this document, though dated in 1682, belongs in or about 
1686, for it speaks as if Monseigneur de Saint Valier were then in Canada 
to which he came only in 1685. Another document in the same work (op. cit., 
232) dated 1685, but certainly belonging to 1687 (because written soon after 
its author’s return to France in 1687) also speaks of the presence of Brother 
Didace at Isle Percée for finishing the church. Hence the church could not 
have been built before 1685 and it may not have been finished until after 1687, 
in which latter year Father le Clercq returned to France. It must there- 
fore have been dedicated before it was wholly completed, and we may accept 
1686 as the most probable date of the dedication. Father le Tac, in his 
Histoire Chronologique of 1689 (page 38) speaks of it as “une fort belle église.” 

The site of the church is not known, and the traditions appear to be con- 
flicting. Professor J. M. Clarke, who knows this region so well both historically 
and scientifically, writes me: “There is a tradition at Percé that the old 
St. Pierre de Percé stood about where the fine new Saint Michael’s church now 
is.” But the late Father Lavoie, the parish priest at Percé, informed me that 
it is supposed to have stood on Mount Joli. ‘This location is confirmed inde- 
pendently by Father Hugolin, who writes me that the traditions at Percé 
concerning the Saint Michael’s Church site refer to modern predecessors of that 
church, but that he has found traces of a tradition of an older church “of the 
time of the Bretons,” which must have been on Mount Joli. Moreover, he 
adds, human bones have been found near the supposed Mount Joli site, leading 
to the belief that there was an ancient cemetery there, quite distinct from the 
neighbouring modern cemetery ; and in accordance with custom that older 
cemetery would have been in all probability not far from the church. The 
probable exact site of the church, as Father Hugolin believes, was on the 
north side of the Mount Joli ridge, somewhat down the slope at a place 
where the ground is fairly level. All probabilities seem to favour the correct- 
ness of Father Hugolin’s identification. The site of the Church of Sainte- 
Claire in Isle Bonaventure, mentioned on page 20 of our author’s book, is 
equally uncertain, though presumably it stood within the present principal 
settlement. 


74 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the way of ornaments, when bad weather surprised us.’ 
The sea changed almost in a moment, and there arose 
finally a storm and tempest so furious, that it shattered 
and carried away the two ends of our canoe, with the 
result that we found ourselves in the water up to the belt ; 
and we were in manifest danger of perishing and losing 
everything, had it not been for the charitable aid of our 
Indians. For these barbarians, who were then, by good 
fortune for us, encamped upon the borders of the sea, 
happily perceived our misfortune. They were thereby 
so deeply [19] affected that they promptly threw off their 
clothes, and, with a generosity which we cannot sufficiently 
acknowledge or admire, some betook themselves all naked to 
swimming, while others embarked in their canoes, to such 
good effect that they delivered us finally from the peril into 
which we had unhappily fallen. Our French captains were 
pleased to recognise by their feasts, and by the presents which 
they bestowed generously upon all of these Indians, the good 
services which the latter had just rendered to their mission- 
aries. Further, in a holy emulation, these gentlemen were 
pleased also to give all the emphasis, and to exhibit all the 
fervour which could be hoped for in a barbarous land [20] 
and under circumstances so disagreeable, in order to honour 
the ceremony of the dedication of the first Church which had 
ever been built to the glory of God in this place of the fishery 
since the establishment of the Faith and the birth of Christian- 
ity in New France, as you can see very fully discussed in the 
book that I have written, On the First Establishment of the 
Faith in New France, which is sold by the same bookseller.’ 


1 Possibly our author was on his way from Petite Riviere (Barachois), 
where, no doubt, there was a chapel for the use of the residents of that place, 
but it is probable that he was coming from Restigouche, which appears to have 
been the centre of his later missionary work. 

2 Yet there is, unfortunately, no reference to this matter in that book. The 
reasons therefor are discussed in the Introduction to the present volume 
(page 21). 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 75 


This Mission, together with that of Isle de Bonaventure, 
which has Sainte-Claire for titular saint and patron, and 
which is distant from Isle Percée only by about the extent 
of a short league, has been assigned to us with the consent 
of Monseigneur de Laval, at that time Bishop of Petraea and 
Vicar [21] Apostolic, but since then the first Bishop of Quebec, 
by Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac,’ Lieutenant-General of 
the armies of the King, Governor of all New France, who did 
this in order that nothing should be lacking in the unwearied 
zeal which he has always exhibited for the spiritual and temporal 
comfort of those subjects of His Majesty who come to trade, 
to fish, or to dwell in this new colony. The Recollects will 
always be indebted to him for the honour of having been the 
first resident missionaries of this fine mission,” which has been 
rendered notable and flourishing through the labours and the 
apostolic cares which they have taken for the salvation of the 
French and of the Indians who compose it to-day. It is [22] 
there that the Reverend Fathers Hilarion Guesnin and Exuper 
de Thunes* have signalised their zeal and their piety, to the 
singular edification of all these peoples. 


1 This statement, that the Recollects were assigned to this mission by 
Frontenac, is not only repeated even more strongly in our author’s other book 
(First Establishment of the Faith, 11. 80), but is fully substantiated by Letters 
Patent from the King, dated 1678, confirming the Recollects in the rights at 
Isle Percée granted them by Frontenac. The document is given by Réveillaud 
(in Le Tac, Histoire Chronologigue, 192), and is the one mentioned by our 
author in his Premier Etablissement (First Establishment of the Faith, 11. 98). 

* The Recollects, it is true, were the first resident missionaries at Isle 
Percée; but the Jesuits, and notably Father Richard, had laboured in other 
parts of the mission as transient missionaries much earlier. Compare the 
Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, XLV. 73; LII. 217; LX. 117, 263; also 
our author’s own statements on page 277 of his book. 

* Father Guesnin (or Guenin) was one of the first of the Recollects to come 
to Canada in 1670 (First Establishment of the Faith, 11. 71). It is not clear, 
however, when he was at Isle Percée, for our author speaks in the work just 
cited (II. 80) as if Dethunes were the first priest there, and he not before 1673, 
while Father le Clercq himself arrived in 1675. Probably Father Guesnin 
spent only a summer there with the fishermen. Father de Thunes, or 
Dethunes, was apparently one of those who came out in the autumn of 1671 


76 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


The very Reverend Father Potentien Ozon, Provincial of 
the Recollects of Saint Antoine de Pade in Artois, who went 
out in the capacity of Commissary and Superior of our 
missions in 1675, in order to continue there the good work 
in which these illustrious missionaries had already made a 
saintly beginning, assigned me to that place in the same year. 
Le Lion d'Or, commanded by Captain Coûturier, was the 
vessel upon which I embarked* in order to reach Isle Percée 
as soon as possible. We arrived there the 27th of October 
in the same year, after having [23] experienced a thousand 
dangers. Amongst others was a tempest, very close to the 
well-known Isle of Anticostie, so angry and so violent, that 
our captain, finding it impossible to resist the fury of the gale, 
decided to go straight to France without anchoring in the 
roadstead of the Isle of Bonaventure, thereby abandoning the 
men whom he, in going to Quebec, had left there to prosecute 
the cod fishery. But at length a calm suddenly succeeded the 
tempest at about six o’clock in the morning, and caused our 
captain to change his mind. He continued his route as 
before, and, after many troubles and hardships, we landed 
very happily, thanks be to God, [24] at about four o’clock in 


(op. cit., 11. 74, 76). He went to Isle Percée in May 1673, and served there 
until 1683, when he was recalled to Quebec to become Superior of the Recol- 
lects (of. cit., 11. 80). During the years from 1675 to 1683, therefore, he and 
Father le Clercq were the “two Recollects” mentioned in some of the docu- 
ments in the Clairambault Collection, described in the note on page 77 of this 
volume. We have independent evidence of the presence at Isle Percée during 
the summer of two Recollects, one of whom lived in winter with the Indians 
while the other remained at Isle Percée with the few French there (Document 
given by Réveillaud in Le Tac, Histoire Chronologigue, 216). It seems plain 
that Father Dethunes was the other Recollect at Isle Percée, and that he 
remained there while Father le Clercq was with the Indians. Father Dethunes 
was afterwards Superior of the Recollects in Canada, and died in France in 
1692, as Father Hugolin informs me. The successor of Father Dethunes was 
apparently Father Joseph Denys, concerning whom there is mention in some 
of the documents given by Réveillaud, and whose biography by Father Hugolin 
has already been mentioned (page 8, note 5). 

1 This embarkation was not from France, but from Quebec, as the next 
page shows. 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 77 


the afternoon, at the establishment of Monsieur Denys. He 
was very well established upon the border of a basin commonly 
called La Petite Rivière, separated from the sea by a beautiful 
tongue of land, which, by the wonderful charm it gives to this 
place, renders it a very agreeable abode.! 


* This Monsieur Denys was Pierre Denys, Sieur de la Ronde, son of 
Simon Denys, who was brother of N icolas, one-time proprietor and governor 
of all the coasts from Gaspé to Canso, and author of the well-known book 
Description geographique et historique . . . Histoire naturelle... de 
l'Amerique septentrionale. The biographical details concerning Pierre Denys 
are given by Tanguay in his Dictionnaire Généalogique, and by F orsyth de 
Fronsac in his A/emorial of his family, published at Boston in 1903, while 
Father Hugolin is publishing a full biography of him, in connection with the 
life of Father Joseph Denys (Denis), his son, in the Xevve du Tiers-Ordre, 
(beginning November, 1907). In brief, Pierre Denys was born at Tours in 
1631, and came, while yet very young, with his father to Quebec. His con- 
nection with Gaspé and Isle Percée, which began in 1671 or 1672 and extended 
over some eight or ten years, is in some features explained in great detail 
in a series of papers, still unpublished, in the Clairambault Collection (1016, 
folios 295-333) in the Bibliothéque Nationale in Paris. These documents, 
for copies of which I am indebted to the extensive knowledge and friendly 
co-operation of Mr. H. P. Biggar, are of such interest that I have been greatly 
tempted to include them in full in this work, and have only refrained because 
of their very local character. In one of these, a “Contract de la Seigneurie 
de VIsle percée,” it is shown that Pierre Denys, Escurier, Sieur de la 
Ronde, Maistre Charles Bazire, receveur general des droits du Roy, and 
Charles Aubert, Sr. de la Chesnaye, having formed a company to carry 
on a fishery, obtained from Monsieur Talon, the Intendant, in 1672, July 20, 
a grant, made out in the name of Pierre Denys, of the coasts a league in 
depth from a league south of Isle Percée to half a league within the Bay 
of Gaspé, with the right of trade with the Indians and of admiral over the 
fishing ships, which, however, were to have the privilege of using the beaches 
not needed by the company. The company having expended large sums 
in improvements, and having carried on the fishery as agreed, this grant 
was confirmed, as that of the Seigneurie of Isle Percée, with an apportionment 
of the respective shares of the proprietors, by the Intendant du Chesneau on 
November 2, 1676. The grant fell within the lands formerly ceded to Nicolas 
Denys, who protested against it (7he Champlain Society's Edition of Denys’ 
Work, page 222); but the protest was vain, since Denys’ own grant was 
already in fact, even if not in form, forfeit for non-fulfilment of its conditions, 
From the beginning Pierre Denys was the active manager of the enterprise. 
In 1672 he went to Isle Percée to live, and in 1673 was joined by his family, 
who were accompanied by the Recollect Father Exuper Dethunes (First Estab- 
lishment of the Faith, 11.80). No doubt their residence here was, however, only 
temporary, and for the summer season. Documents of the Clairambault Col- 


78 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


The solitude in which I then found myself, along with 
three to four persons who were in the service of Monsieur 
Denys, although unforeseen, was nothing other than agreeable 
and pleasing to me. I can even say with truth that it was the 
chief of all my consolations, because it gave me as much time 


lection, of date 1676, state that in September of that year a brother and son of 
Pierre Denys, with a Recollect father and three other persons, were at Isle 
Percée or Petite Riviére, and that at Isle Percée was a large storehouse of fifty 
feet by twenty-five, a lodging for the commandant, and another, not yet finished, 
for the Recollects, with 100 arpents of cleared land. At Petite Riviére, which 
other documents locate at the bottom of the Baye des Morues, two leagues from 
Isle Percée (thereby establishing its identity with the present Barachois), was 
the winter settlement and general head- 
quarters, that at Isle Percée being only 
a summer fishing station. Here was a 
dwelling for fifteen persons, storehouses, 
stables, cleared lands, gardens, farming 
utensils, boats, cattle, poultry, swine, 
and a host of articles and stores of 
which a full list is given. This was the 
settlement at which Father le Clercq 
found Monsieur Denys “very well 
lodged” in October 1675. His “basin, 
commonly called la Petite Riviére,” was 
obviously that now called Barachois. 
This is enclosed by a long beach which 
is now treeless, though it was perhaps 
wooded when our author described it as 
“a beautiful tongue of land.” It is not 
clear why this basin should have been 
named “ Little River,” but our author’s 
narrative shows that such was its name. 
Very probably the name was applied 
first to the Goulet or Tickle together with 
Riviére du Nord,and was extended thence 
tothe basin. The exact site of the settle- 
ment on the Barachois is not stated, but 
the full description of the place sent me by Rev. Father Sirois, formerly of the 
village of Barachois, shows that there is only one suitable site for settlement 
around the entire basin, and that is in the position of the present village 
of Barachois, which is admirably situated in all respects. Not only are the 
situation and the land of great excellence, but the part of the basin in front 
forms an admirable harbour for fishing boats, the very best place for this 
purpose anywhere in the basin. Here, accordingly, the establishment of 
Pierre Denys must have stood, though there is now no trace or tradition 





Scale miles t linth TT 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 79 


as I could reasonably desire in order to prepare myself sacredly 
for the arduous and laborious functions of my first [25] 
mission, which the merit of obedience had confided to my 
care. 

One man, who, though of lowly origin, exhibited an un- 
common virtue, rare enough among servants, even those most 
zealous for the service of God and of their masters, did much 
to soften the rigours of our winter.! It can be said that I 
was charmed by the pleasure that he took in the conversations 
which we often had together concerning the important affair 
of his salvation. He took a particular care to awaken me 


thereof in the village. The site of the buildings at Isle Percée is not known, 
but local tradition places them at North Beach, where now are extensive fishing 
establishments ; and the probabilities favour this site. The Recollect fathers 
received grants of land from the company on November 22, 1676, at both 
Petite Rivière and Isle Percée, a tract four arpents by forty at the former place, 
and one arpent square, with their house, at the latter (Document, abstract, by 
Réveillaud in Le Tac, Histoire Chronologigue, 190). But the enterprise of the 
company was not a success. Pierre Denys, afflicted with failing sight which 
later led to complete blindness, retired in favour of one of his brothers and 
died in 1708. Later the grant appears to have lapsed, for another document 
of the Clairambault Collection shows that in 1685 the residents of Isle Percée, 
who had been in the employ of Pierre Denys, petitioned Richard Denys for 
grants of their lands as if the rights thereto had reverted to their original 
owner, Nicolas Denys. There is some evidence that in 1687 Denys de 
Bonnaventure, the son of Pierre Denys, who had aided him at the settlement, 
received a new grant at Isle Percée; but the particulars are not known to me. 
In 1690 both settlements were destroyed by the English as Father Jumeau 
relates, and the history of those places in the period to which this book relates 
came to an end. 

1 It is possible, I think, to name this person who was thus a comfort to 
Father le Clercq during his first winter. In a document in the Clairambault 
Collection at Paris (described in the note to page 77) dated September 15, 
1676, Pierre Denys names these persons as then present at Isle Percée and 
Petite Rivière : his brother Saint Pierre, his son Bonnaventure du Tartre, his 
“ petit cadet” Jacque Boisel, a sailor named Pierre Filtoupier, and one Lespine 
with his wife. Obviously the first two were not there the preceding winter, 
or Father le Clercq would have mentioned them, and the next two seem 
wholly unlikely to fit our author’s designation. But Lepine, whose name was 
Vincent Chateigne, dit Lepine (or Lespine), is shown by other -documents 
in the same collection to have become a permanent, and the most prominent 
as well as the oldest, resident of Isle Percée. It seems likely, therefore, that 
this was the person to whom our author refers. 


80 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


regularly every day at four o'clock, in order that I might 
prepare to celebrate the Holy Mass, which I said as a rule at 
daybreak with the morning prayers. [26] And at evening, 
following the very praiseworthy custom generally observed 
among all the families of New France, we said our beads 
together, along with the usual prayers, which were followed 
by the reading of the most touching reflections upon the last 
judgment, composed by the Very Reverend Father Hyacinthe 
le Febvre.! Since this is a work replete with learning, and 
with the most solid truths of Christianity, it has for this reason 
always been of very great aid to me in all the different places 
to which obedience has assigned me in the service of our 
missions. I have been accustomed to call it my missionary 
excellent above all, since during my absence it has worked 
fruitfully at the conversion [27] of souls. The explanation 
thereof is this, that having on one occasion given it to a 
certain Catholic whose life was not of the best, the reading 
which he did in it during six weeks inspired him with senti- 
ments of contrition so sincere and so genuine, that in return- 
ing this book into my hands he made me a general confession 
of all his past life, after having been more than eighteen years 
without going to confession. 

I devoted myself assiduously throughout this winter to the 
study of certain writings in the Algomquinne tongue ; these 
had been given me in the belief that they would be necessary 
to me for the instruction of the Indians on their return from 
their hunting, which they pursued at fifteen or twenty [28] 
leagues from our establishment.? All my labour, nevertheless, 


3 Our author, in his Premier Etablissement, speaks again of Father le Febvre 
as “twice provincial of our province of St. Anthony in Artois,” and “ for the 
second time provincial of that of St. Denis in France” (Shea’s First Establish- 
ment of the Faith, 11. 204). He was the author of a book mentioned in an 
earlier note in this volume (page 3). 

2 The Indians always hunted in winter, and principally for moose, in the 
depths of the woods, while they spent the summers mostly along the sea 
coast. 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 81 


was useless, for our Gaspesians understood Algomquin only 
very imperfectly ; and it was necessary for me to begin all over 
again the study of the Gaspesian prayers which were sent me 
from Quebec by the first boat which set out for Isle Percée at 
the beginning of spring. I learned them in a very short time, 
with much greater ease than I had anticipated. I taught them 
also for the first time to our Indians, and with much success, 
by means of some instructive characters of which I shall speak 
in the continuation of this history.! But at length, since all 
the application that I could concentrate upon making myself 
learned in Gaspesian, [29] a knowledge of which, however 
difficult it may be, is absolutely necessary to the missionaries 
who wish to work effectively for the salvation of these peoples, 
was broken during the summer by the services I was obliged 
to render to the French, who came, sometimes even to the 
number of four or five hundred, to make the fishery for cod 
at Isle Percée, I made up my mind that after the departure of 
the ships I would follow the Indians into the woods during 
the winter, and live with them in their wigwams, in order to 
instruct myself completely in the Gaspesian tongue. With 
this language, after much trouble and labour, I have at length 
made myself pretty familiar. I have even made a dictionary 
thereof, [30] which I have left at Quebec in our Monastery of 
Notre Dame des Anges,” in order to render easier to our 
missionaries, as it did to myself, all the good that it has 
pleased our Lord to effect through my feeble ministry, and 
which he would wish to accomplish through their zeal, in the 
conversion of these pagans who inhabit more than two 
hundred leagues of this new world, and who bear several 
different names according to those of the rivers and of the 
most important places wherein they dwell. 

They are described in Chapter VII. 

* The books of this Convent de Notre-Dame des Anges are not known in 
Quebec, as I am told by M. Gagnon, and our author’s Dictionary of the 
Gaspesian tongue, which would indeed constitute a precious philological 


document, is probably no longer in existence. 
F 


82 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


As I have especially applied myself, in accord with the 
advice of my friends, to understanding exactly their maxims, 
their customs, and their religion, I have thought that I ought 
to give the public a picture [31] and a faithful and perfect 
idea of these through this new relation." I shall be only too 
happy, and too well satisfied for my trouble, if the book is read 
with the same pleasure with which I write the particulars of 
all the most curious and most interesting things I have noticed 
in the missions where I have had the honour to labour during 
the dozen years that I have lived in New France. 

There is one error which is only too common, and of 
which it is desirable to disabuse the public. It is necessary 
to admit that some persons in our Europe are persuaded too 
easily that the peoples of North America, because they have 
not been bred in the maxims of civil polity, preserve of the 
nature of man nothing but the [32] name of wild men, and 
that they have none of those finer qualities of body and of 
spirit which distinguish the human species from the beasts 
of the field. And they even believe these people to be all 
hairy, like the bears, and more inhuman than the tigers and 
the leopards. It is well, however, to correct an idea so stupid, 
so unjust, and so unreasonable, and one should know the 
difference which exists between our Indians and any number 
of other ferocious and cruel peoples, especially the inhabitants 
of the Isles of the Gorgades, from which, as history makes 
mention, a certain Hano, a Carthaginian captain, brought back 
two wholly hairy skins of women, which he caused to be 
placed in the temple of Juno as a prodigy and [3 3] a singular 
curiosity. For as a matter of fact our Gaspesians have less 
hair than the French. I have myself seen them pull out the 
hair of the beard clear to the roots, in order that they may 
have no more than the women. And, finally, nature inspires 


1 The significance of this phrase new relation (#ouvelle Relation), which 
occurs also in the title of our, author’s book, has been discussed on an earlier 
page (12) of this volume. 


ON GASPESIA IN GENERAL 83 


them with sufficient tenderness and charity towards their 
children, their fellow-countrymen, and even strangers, to pre- 
vent the belief that they are like the most ferocious and most 
violent animals. This will be easily understood from the 
continuation of this history, where I shall, by the sincerity of 
my diction, exhibit the Gaspesian Indian in whatever light 
one can view him. 


[34] CHAPTER II 
On the Origin of the Gaspestans 


HE origin of these peoples, and the manner in 
which this new world has become inhabited by 
an almost infinite multitude of peoples of many 

different nations, seems to us so obscure that, even after the 
most careful and most exact researches which have been made 
into the subject up to the present time, every one must admit 
and frankly confess it to be impossible to have any exact and 
trustworthy knowledge about it. 

It seems as if this secret must be reserved solely to the 
Indians, and that from them [35] alone one ought to learn all 
the truth about it, seeing that, indeed, there has been a time 
among ourselves when it was unknown that there was a North 
America, which even the most learned made no difficulty in 
assigning to the extramundane regions, since they were unable 
to locate it within the compass of their minds ; and it is not 
yet two hundred years since the first discovery of it was made. 
Our Gaspesians, however, can teach us nothing certain upon 
this subject, perhaps because they have no knowledge of letters, 
which could give them information as to their ancestors and 
their origin. They have, indeed, if you will, some dim and 
fabulous notion of the creation of the world, and of the deluge. 
They say that when [36] the sun, which they have always 
recognised and worshipped as their God, created all this great 
universe, he divided the earth immediately into several parts, 
wholly separated one from the other by great lakes: that in 
each part he caused to be born one man and one woman, and 

84 


THE ORIGIN OF THE GASPESIANS 85 


they multiplied and lived a very long time : but that having 
become wicked along with their children, who killed one 
another, the sun wept with grief thereat, and the rain fell from 
the heaven in such great abundance that the waters mounted 
even to the summit of the rocks, and of the highest and most 
lofty mountains. This flood, which, say they, was general 
over all the earth, compelled them to set sail in their bark 
canoes, [37] in order to save themselves from the raging 
depths of this general deluge. But it was in vain, for they 
all perished miserably through a violent wind which over- 
turned them, and overwhelmed them in this horrible abyss, 
with the exception, however, of certain old men and of certain 
women, who had been the most virtuous and the best of all 
the Indians. God came then to console them for the death 
of their relatives and their friends, after which he let them live 
upon the earth in a great and happy tranquillity, granting them 
therewith all the skill and ingenuity necessary for capturing 
beavers and moose in as great number as were needed for 
their subsistence. They add also [38] certain other wholly 
ridiculous circumstances, which I purposely omit, because they 
do not bear at all upon a secret which is unknown to men, 
and reserved to God alone. 

Others hold that this new world has been peopled by 
certain individuals who, having embarked upon the sea for the 
purpose of establishing a colony in foreign parts, were sur- 
prised by storm and tempest, which threw them upon the 
coasts of North America. Here they were unfortunately 
shipwrecked, and, with their ships, they lost everything which 
they must have had with them of property, and of the things 
which they valued most in the world. Affairs were such that 
this shipwreck having left them wholly without hope of ever 
returning [39] into their own country, they resolved to set 
to work in earnest at the preservation of their lives by apply- 
ing themselves to fishing and hunting, which have always been 
very good in those parts, while, in default of their clothes, 


86 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


necessity, which is the mother of inventions, gave them the 
ingenuity to clothe themselves with skins of beaver, of moose, 
and of other animals which they killed in hunting. They 
hold, further, that it could well have been a fact that these 
‘ndividuals were instructed in the sacred mysteries of our holy 
Religion, and that they had even a knowledge and the use of 
letters, since, in the establishment of colonies, it is customary 
to send there men who are alike learned and pious, in order 
that they may teach [40] to the peoples, along with purely 
human knowledge, the most solid maxims of Christian wisdom 
and piety. Nobody, however, having followed them in these 
glorious employments, the knowledge which they had of the 
true God, of letters, and of their origin, was thus gradually 
lost and effaced from the minds of their unfortunate posterity 
by the lapse of time. 

However this may be, the ancient worship and religious 
use of the Cross, which still in our own day is held in admira- 
tion among the Indians of the River of Mizamichis—a place 
we have honoured with the august title of the river of Sainte- 
Croix!—might well persuade us that, in some manner of 
other [41] these people had received in times past a know- 
ledge of the Gospel and of Christianity, which they have 
finally lost through the negligence and the licentiousness of 
their ancestors. It is very like something we read in the life 
of Saint François Xavier, who found in one of his missions 
a fine Cross, which the Apostle Saint Thomas had planted 
there, among a people who no longer had anything more than 
4 faint idea, or almost none, of the true religion which this 
illustrious disciple of JESUS had preached to them with so 
much of zeal at the expense of his life and his blood. I will 
give a particular discussion of this matter when I come to 
speak of the religion of the Gaspesians, of which the origin 
is altogether unknown to us. They observe, however, and 


1 This matter is mentioned at greater length by our author later in his 
book (at page 170). 


THE ORIGIN OF THE GASPESIANS 87 


( 


embody in [42] their conduct, a number of maxims of our 
first fathers, like whom they are clothed, lodged and fed. 
Nor have they even any other arms, whether for war or for 
hunting, than those which were first in use among our 
ancestors after the creation of the world. 


CHAPTERMAIT 


On the Birth of the Gaspesians 


receive more benefit in being born than in dying. 

It is for this reason that this question was formerly 
considered as a problem among certain peoples, who divided 
equally [43] their tears and their rejoicings at the birth and at 
the death of their children, in proportion to the good or the 
ill which they would receive in these two states, so contrary 
and wholly opposed. Such were the disputable and proble- 
matical opinions of those ancient philosophers in the shades of 
paganism, where they lacked the light to know that it is only 
virtue and sin which make life or death happy or miserable. 
Since our Indians have been deprived of those good instruc- 
tions which Christianity inspires in those who are born again 
in the Holy Spirit through baptism, and since they consider 
themselves all equal in life as in death, without distinction of 
the heads of the commonalty [44] of the nation, they rejoice 
all in common on the birth of their children, even to making 
feasts, public speeches, and all kinds of rejoicings. 

It is not with our Gaspesians as with the Cimbrians, who 
plunged their children into the snow in order to harden them 
to the cold and to accustom them to fatigue, nor as with some 
of our ancient Gauls, who threw them into the water as soon 
as they were born, in the belief that those which floated and 
came to the surface in their struggles were truly legitimate, 
while those which sank to the bottom were to be considered 
as bastards and illegitimate. The Indians wash their children 
in the river as soon [45] as they are born, and then they make 


Le has been doubted, and with justice, whether men 


ON THE BIRTH OF THE GASPESIANS 89 


them swallow some bear’s, or seal, oil. In place of a cradle, 
they make the children rest upon a little board, which they 
cover with skins of beaver, or with some other furs. The 
women adorn this little cradle carefully with certain bits of 
bead-work, with wampum, porcupine quills, and certain figures 
which they form with their pants.! This is in order to 
beautify it, and to render it just so much the finer in propor- 
tion as they love their children. For these they make little 
garments of skins, which are all painted and adorned with 
the prettiest and most curious things they possess. They are 
accouched with very great ease, and carry very heavy burdens 
[46] during their pregnancy. Some indeed, finding them- 
selves overtaken by this illness in going to fetch wood, retire 
a little apart in order to bring the child into the world ; and 
they carry the wood to the wigwam upon their backs, with 
the new born babe in their arms, as if nothing at all had 
happened. An Indian woman, when in a canoe one day, 
feeling herself pressed by the pains of childbirth, asked those 
of her company to put her on shore, and to wait for her a 
moment. She entered alone into the woods, where she was 
delivered of a boy ; she brought him to the canoe, which she 
helped to paddle all the rest of the journey. They never give 
birth to a child in the wigwam, for the men never give it up 

* This word in the original is matachias, and our author uses it again, with 
variations, at pages 58, 60, 61, 63, and 68. Lescarbot applies it, telling us that 
it is a Micmac word, to earrings and the like worn by the Indians (Histoire de 
la Nouvelle France, edition of 1612, 732), and Champlain uses it in the same 
sense (Voyages, Laverdiére’s edition, 40). Denys, however, like our author, 
applies it to paintings. The word does not appear, as far as I can find, in any 
of the three prominent works of the great scholar in Micmac, Dr. Silas Rand, 
viz., his Dictionary of the Language of the Micmac Indians, Halifax, 1888 ; 
his Micmac Dictionary, edited by J. S. Clark, Charlottetown, 1902 ; or his 
First Reading Book in the Micmac Language, Halifax, 1875. I am told, 
however, by Father Pacifique, now the missionary of the Micmacs of Resti- 
gouche, to whom I am indebted for much valued information concerning 
them, that the word is not now in use among them, although it appears, in 
part at least, in a certain compound, metasiamogol, which means “brightly 


or vari-coloured clothes.” The word, curiously enough, is said to persist 
among the Canadian French (Clapin, Dictionnaire Canadien-Français, 360). 


90 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


to them. The men remain therein [47] whilst the wife is 
delivered in the woods at the foot of a tree. If she suffers 
pains, her arms are attached above to some pole, her nose, 
ears, and mouth being stopped up. After this she is pressed 
strongly on the sides, in order to force the child to issue from 
the belly of its mother. If she feels it a little too severely, 
she calls on the jugglers, who come with joy, in order to 
extort some smoking tobacco, or other things of which they 
have need. They say that this is a present which they ask for 
their Ouahiche,! that is to say, their demon, in order that he 
may chase and remove the germ ® which hinders the accouche- 
ment. It is thus that these master frauds intermeddle every- 
where [48] as you will see at length in Chapter XIV.,* where 
I treat of the superstitions of the Gaspesians. 

Our Gaspesians are not so ridiculous as the Indians of 
South America, who at the same moment that their wives are 
accouched, betake themselves to bed, as if they had themselves 
suffered the pains and the cramps of childbirth,* whilst their 


1 This word appears several times, and with variations of spelling, in our 
author’s pages, viz., 331, 332; 336, 343-347. Although it has every appearance 
of a Micmac word I have not been able to find it in Rand’s Dictionaries. 
In his other book Father le Clercq speaks of the O//, or Jugglers, of a western 
tribe, which is enough like Ouahiche to suggest that he took the word from 
a source other than Micmac (First Establishment of the Faith, 1.106). Father 
Pacifique, however, tells me the Micmacs have a word Oaïfj (or Oaïfch) 
meaning “smart fellow,” and this is very probably the same word. 

2 This word in the original is ver, which means literally “worm,” and on 
a later page (338) our author gives the Micmac name confirmatory of this 
signification. But it seems to me very evident from the way in which the 
word is used that it does not mean a worm in any literal sense, but rather 
that kind of indefinite cause of a disease which we often designate to-day by 
the word “germ,” using it not, of course, in its narrower technical, but in its 
broader popular, sense. Accordingly I have so translated it throughout this 
book. 

8 In reality Chapter XIII., beginning at page 329, is the one in which 
he gives a full account of the jugglers or medicine-men. 

4 Our author correctly reports this custom which was prevalent among 
a number of Indian tribes, and is supposed to have originated as an acknow- 
ledgment of paternity. There is some evidence that it existed also among the 
Basques in Europe, as discussed by J. Reade in the Zvansactions of the Royal 
Society of Canada, V1., 1888, ii. 27. 


ON THE BIRTH OF THE GASPESIANS 91 


wives, with all their relatives and their friends, endeavour to 
console this imaginary invalid, to whom they give a thousand 
kindnesses and the best of everything that they have. The 
Indians have too much spirit to be willing to pass for women 
newly accouched, [49] although they comfort their consorts 
with much charity. They go hunting for the purpose of 
providing the wherewithal for supporting their wives, in order 
that these may suckle their babes. For it is a thing unheard 
of, that they should give them out to be nursed, since they 
cannot persuade themselves to yield to others the fruits of 
their own bowels. By this conduct they reproach the lack of 
feeling of those mothers who abandon these little innocents 
to the care of nurses, from whom very often they suck corrup- 
tion with the milk. That this is true has been illustrated by 
unhappy experience in the conduct of Alexander the Great, 
and of the Emperor Caligula. The first of these, according 
to Saint Clement of Alexandria, used to get drunk as a beast, 
because his mother was [50] subject to wine. The second, 
according to the testimony of history, breathed only blood and 
carnage, even to a point where he passionately wished that the 
Roman people had but a single head, in order that he might 
be able by a single blow to decapitate all the citizens of that 
powerful Republic ; and this was because his nurse, in order 
to accustom him to cruelty, and to inspire in him a savage 
disposition, reddened with her blood the ends of her nipples. 
Our poor Indian women have so much affection for their 
children that they do not rate the quality of nurse any lower 
than that of mother. They even suckle the children up to 
the age of four or five years, and, when these begin to eat, 
the mothers chew the meat in order [51] to induce the 
children to swallow it. One cannot express the tenderness 
and affection which the fathers and mothers have for their 
children. I have seen considerable presents offered to the 
parents in order that these might give the children to certain 
Frenchmen who would have taken them to France. But this 


92 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


would have torn their hearts, and millions would not induce 
them to abandon their children for a moment. These 
wretched children often repay their poor parents with 
ingratitude, for some have been seen who have killed and 
assassinated their fathers when these have reached a decrepit 
old age. There have been found, I affirm, monsters of 
nature, who have abandoned them in the midst of the woods 
and the snows, and who, as a climax to their cruelty, have 
broken their heads. 

[52] Their usual occupation consists in making bows and 
arrows for killing birds, and lines and hooks for the fishery. 
They are so expert at these exercises that they kill all kinds 
of birds on the wing." 

1 This paragraph is curiously isolated from its predecessors, and something 
which originally introduced it was evidently suppressed—probably in the 


interest of condensation. The paragraph probably refers to occupations of 
the children. 


CHAPTER IV 
On the Clothes and Finery of the Gaspesians 


LTHOUGH some of our Indians now make their 
garments from blankets, cloaks, coats, and from 
cloths that are brought from France, it is never- 

theless certain that before the settlement of the French in this 
new world [53] the Indians clothed themselves only in skins 
of moose, beaver, marten, and seal, in which indeed, many 
of these people are clothed even to the present day. The 
appearance and representation of Hercules, who wears upon 
his shoulders in the form of a mantle the skin of the lion 
which he had bravely overcome and slain, as history records, 
is somewhat like that of an Indian in his wigwam, clothed in 
the manner of his ancestors, These people, nevertheless, have 
always exhibited, as do the Gaspesians of to-day, much more 
modesty than does this false deity, as shown in the particular 
care which they take to cover and conceal that which nature 
and decency do not permit to be shown. The severe cold, 
further, which [54] prevails during the winter in Canada, 
obliges them to cover themselves much more modestly. But 
aside from this, however rigorous the winter in their country 
may be, and however excessive the heat in summer, they 
always make use of stirrup-like stockings without feet, while 
their moccasins, which are quite flat and without heels, really 
resemble leather socks. ‘They line these with moose skins in 
order always to preserve some warmth for the feet. As to 
their coats, these are large and broad. The sleeves are not 
attached to the body, but are separate therefrom, and tied 
together by two thongs, separated into equal parts by an 


94 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


opening which serves for the passing of the head. One of 
these sleeves [55] falls in front, and covers only half of the 
arm ; the other falls behind, and clothes the entire shoulders. 
The women’s coats are not different in any particular from 
those of the men. I will tell you only this, that the women 
dress and clothe themselves with so much reserve and modesty 
that they do not permit any nakedness to appear which could 
offend modesty and decency. For their clothes, they make 
use of a white or red blanket, which falls from the shoulders 
to the mid-leg in the form of a tunic; with this they enwrap 
all the body, and they belt it in by a girdle ornamented with 
beadwork and wampum.* 

It is to be noted that it is not possible to persuade them 
[56] to dress in the French fashion, and there is nothing so 
grotesque as to see one of our Indian women dressed either 
in the common fashion or as a lady.? They seem to have, 
with respect to this dress, the feeling and humour of David 
towards the arms which Saul wished to give him for the fight 
against Goliath. They say they cannot make themselves like 
this dress, and that it would be impossible for them to walk 
or to work freely with the clothes of our Frenchwomen. In 
a word, they are so enamoured with their own, that they 
are not willing even to hear ours mentioned. But, never- 
theless, there is one thing which seems to me rather ridiculous, 
both for the men and for the women, which is, that both 
of them as a rule wear [57] their shirts over their coats. | 


1 A somewhat, though not exactly, similar account of their dress is given 
by Denys, Vol. II. (384) of his well-known work, Description geographique et 
historique, Paris, 1672 (republished and translated by the Champlain Society, 
1908), while Lescarbot gives a fuller account of their winter dress in particular 
(Histoire de la Nouvelle France, edition of 1612, 702), Of course the other 
works upon our Indians, including the Jesuzt Relations, contain many references 
to their dress. 

2 The phrase in the original is ex Bourgeoise, ou en Damoïselle. At the 
time our author wrote, the word demoiselle was applied to married ladies not 
of the noblesse (according to a note by Shea, in F7rs¢ Establishment of the Faith, 
11327). 


_ CLOTHES AND FINERY 95 


The ornaments and jewels which are to them the most 
superb, the most magnificent, and at the same time the most 
usual, and with which they are adorned in the assemblies and 
the public feasts, consist in certain collars, belts and bracelets. 
These they make themselves, and they decorate them in a 
very simple manner with bead-work ! and with quills of porcu- 
pine, which they colour in red or in yellow, according to their 
taste and fancy. But aside from this, they are foes of luxury 
and of vanity ; and by their very modesty they condemn the 
ambition and the superfluous and quite criminal extravagance 
of those women who wear on their persons such quantities of 
riches and jewels, that Saint [58] Clement of Alexandria is 
astonished that they did not succumb under so heavy and 
burdensome a load. 

Quite unheard of among them are those criminal and 
voluntary exposures of the person, which are unworthy of 
those women who are really Christians, and who have so little 
of love for purity and of zeal for the honour and glory of 
their sex. The Indian women are content with what nature 
has given them of grace or beauty, which they even lessen 
frequently in their wish to conserve it by art through the aid 
of their painting, with a result which is wholly ridiculous. It 
is necessary to know that by the painting of the Indians, of 
which we speak often, there is understood as a rule a [59] 
mixture of different colours which they use in daubing the 
face, or for representing upon their garments certain figures of 
wild beasts, birds, or other animals such as are supplied by 
their imaginations. They know only four kinds of colours, 
that is to say, red, white, black and yellow. They have not 
in their language even a proper and particular name to express 

* This bead-work (vassade) includes, of course, wampum, which several 
times in his book our author calls pourcelaine. Wampum was made from 
parts of certain sea shells, and a full account of its origin is given in the 
Bulletin of the Natural History Society of New Brunswick, No. VIII, 


1889, 12, 91; compare also the references in Thwaites’ /esuzt Relations, 
WATT, 312; 


96 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the others of which we make use in Europe." The red which 
they employ is not vivid like our vermilion ; it is only a 
sombre red, much like that of dragon’s blood. But as to the 
Tissaouhianne,? which is a little red and slender root like the 
fruit of parsley [60], it is valued, say they, and much esteemed 
among them. In fact our Gaspesians, who preserve it with 
much care, make remarkably good use of it in staining their 
quills of porcupine a beautiful brilliant red ; and with these 
they ornament their canoes, their snowshoes, and their other 
works which are sent into France as curiosities. 

When, now, we say that the Indians paint themselves,” 


1 By his word couleurs our author here refers, of course, to pigments, and 
not to colours in general. Their red and yellow were derived, no doubt, from 
red and yellow ochre, and the former was the “sombre red” mentioned in the 
next sentence of his text. The white was probably powdered (and perhaps 
burnt) shells, while the black was probably bog manganese, or possibly only 
charcoal, or the black from their pots, suitably admixed with grease. 

2 The identity of this plant is made certain, partly by the description, and 
partly by the survival of the name among the Canadian French. M. Gagnon 
tells me that a hair-like red root, of which he sends me samples, is sold in 
the markets of Quebec, for medicinal purposes, under the name of Saouyanne, 
which is obviously our author’s word with the omission of the first syllable. 
But even more conclusive evidence is given by W. R. Gerard in the Bulletin of 
the Torrey Botanical Club, X11., 1885, 72. After pointing out an erroneous 
etymology of the word savoyanne, he states that in reality the word is from 
the Canadian-French ¢ésavoyanne (abbreviated to savoyanne), and that this 
“is of Indian origin and corresponds to Micmac (Algonkin) #ssawhianne, 
‘skin-dye,’” and adds that the word is a general Indian name for plants which 
yield a dye colour. He cites Kalm (the Swedish botanist who travelled in 
Canada), as saying that the leaves and stalks of Coptis (Gold-thread) were used 
by the Indians to dye’ yellow, and that this is called #ssavoyanne jaune by 
the Canadian French who apply #ssavoyanne rouge to the roots of Galium 
(bedstraw or cleavers), especially G. #nciorium, used for dyeing red. It is 
well known that the red dye used by the Indians was obtained from the 
roots of Galium tinctorium. tis mentioned in the Jesuit Relations (Thwaites’ 
edition, VII. 81, and XXXVIII. 251), and also by Denys (Champlain Society’s 
edition, 413; compare also the Otis-Slafter Champlain, III. 14, 15). Our 
authors mention of “a fruit like the parsley” is apparently a loose way of 
saying the plant has a fruit resembling that of the parsley, which is certainly 
not a happy comparison, but will pass. Returning to the Micmac name, 
I do not find it in Rand’s Dictionaries, but he gives the word esowed as meaning 
““T dye,” and this evidently involves the same root. 

3°In the original the words are se matachient (compare the note on 
page 89 of this volume). 


CLOTHES AND FINERY 97 


that is equivalent to Saying that they daub their faces, which 
is done sometimes with black and sometimes with red, just 
as it pleases them. The most capricious make a mixture of 
these two colours. Some paint themselves with a single 
colour, or with several ; others daub all the forehead with red, 
and the remainder of the face [61] with black. Others again, 
still more fanciful than the first, draw a line wholly of black 
from the middle of the forehead clear to the end of the nose, 
while the two cheeks will be all mottled and streaked with 
white, yellow, black and red. This painting is precisely that 
of which they make use on the days of their feasts, and of 
their leading diversions. They use it also even in mourning, 
for, in order to mark their sorrow and affliction when they 
hear of the death of some one of their kinsmen, they paint 
the whole face in black. But when they go to war, then they 
make use of red, in order, say they, that neither their enemies 
nor yet their own companions may be able [62] to detect the 
different expressions of countenance which fear very often 
Causes to appear in even the most intrepid and the bravest 
persons. 

Moreover, it seems to me that one ought not to be so 
much astonished that our Indians paint themselves in a 
manner seemingly so ridiculous, since it is certain, according 
to the report of Pliny, that the Romans formerly painted 
their bodies vermilion when they entered in triumph into 
the City of Rome, and that they even coloured their Jupiter 
therewith. Further, we see only too often in the present, 
without going to search antiquity, that the women, by their 
beauty-spots and their paints, borrow a charm which nature 
has [63] denied them. Consequently our Indians, who some- 
time ago came to France, have not been able to hear without 
breaking into laughter, the raillery of certain ladies who took 
them for masqueraders, because they made appearance at 

* Our author speaks of this matter again, and to the same effect, at 


page 460 of his book. 
G 


98 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Court painted in the Indian fashion. “They have no sense,” 
said these Indians to their interpreter, “and their reproach is 
unjust, because they themselves have their own faces all 
mottled with black, like our Indians, from which it appears 
that they are always in mourning, judging by their manner of 
painting themselves.” 

The Gaspesians, as a rule, all go bare-headed, a custom 
which is certainly very ancient. For we learn from Roman 
_ history that Julius Casar marched always [64] in this way 
at the head of his troops, as well in the sun as in the rain, 
and that he wore a laurel in form of a crown only after he had 
asked and obtained the permission of the Senate to do so. 
Our Indians also, very often, make for themselves a kind of 
crown from the two wings of the birds which they have killed 
in their hunting ; but they never made use of hats or caps 
until the French had given them the use thereof. They 
allow their hair to hang down. Sometimes they tie it up 
behind ; or else they make tresses of it, which they tie suit- 
ably, and which they ornament with little strings of beadwork 
or of wampum. Although children are born among them 
with hair of different colours, [65] as in Europe, nevertheless 
these barbarians are never light-haired when they are advanced 
in age, no matter what care they give their hair. For you 
will take note, that they think very much of it, and that they 
darken it by means only of oiling it, and by rubbing it con- 
stantly with a kind of grease which they keep especially for 
this use! The girls also, and the women, rub this grease on 
their faces as well as upon their hair, especially when it is a 
matter of appearing in public, persuading themselves that they 
are never more beautiful or more pleasing than when they 
have a face all shining with grease. They also pierce their 
ears, to which they attach certain [66] pieces of beadwork, with 
little bells, sols-marquez, deniers and other trifles of that sort, 


1 The treatment of the hair is also described, in a manner very similar, by 
Diéreville in his Voyage (173). 


CLOTHES AND FINERY 99 


which serve them as earrings. I have even seen, and with 
much surprise, other Indians, commonly called the Nez- 
percez, because in fact they pierce the cartilage of the nose ; 
to this they attach some bits of beads or of wampum, which 
fall upon the ends of the lips. 

Such are the garments and the finery of our Gaspesians, 
who esteem them beyond everything that could be imagined. 
They are so infatuated with their manner of dressing, and 
with their own way of living, that they disdain ours, and 
cannot at all accustom themselves thereto. [67] They have 
also no less repugnance to building houses and palaces like 
ours. They ridicule and laugh at the most sumptuous and 
magnificent of our buildings. Nevertheless, they admire the 
beauty of them, so far as they are capable, without, however, 
wishing to make use of them. 


CHAPTER V 


On the Wigwams and Dwellings of the Gaspesians 


commerce, they have neither cities, towns nor villages, 

unless, indeed, one is willing to call by these names 
certain [68] collections of wigwams having the form of tents, 
very badly kept, and just as badly arranged. 

Their wigwams are built of nothing but poles, which are 
covered with some pieces of bark of the birch, sewed one to 
another ; and they are ornamented, as a rule, with a thousand 
different pictures of birds, moose, otters and beavers, which 
the women sketch there themselves with their paints. These 
wigwams are of a circular form, and capable of lodging fifteen 
to twenty persons ; but they are, however, so made that with 
seven or eight barks a single one is constructed, in which 
from three to four fires are built. They are so light and 
portable, that our Indians roll them up [69] like a piece of 
paper, and carry them thus upon their backs wheresoever it 
pleases them, very much like the tortoises which carry their 
own houses. They follow the ancient custom of our first 
fathers, who remained encamped in a place only so long as 
they found there the means of subsistence for their families 
and their herds. In the same manner, also, our Gaspesians 
decamp when they no longer find the means to subsist in the 
places where they are living ; for, having neither animals to 
feed, nor lands or fields to cultivate, they are obliged to be 
almost always wanderers and vagabonds, in order to seek food 
and the other commodities necessary to life. [70] It is the 
business of the head of the family, exclusively over all others, 

100 


SE these people live without society and without 


WIGWAMS AND. DWELLINGS 101 


to give orders that camp be made where he pleases, and that 
it be broken when he wishes. This is why, on the eve of 
departure, he goes in person to trace the road which is to be 
taken, and to choose a place suitable and ample for the en- 
campment. From this place he removes all the useless wood, 
and cuts off the branches which could be in the way. He 
smooths and opens out a road to make it easy for the women 
to drag over the snow on their toboggans,! the trifle of furni- 
ture and of luggage which comprises their housekeeping outfit. 
He marks out, also all by himself, the plan of the wigwam, 
and throws out the snow with his snowshoes until he has 
reached the ground, which he flattens and chops out in pieces 
[71] until he has removed all the frozen part, so that all of 
the people who compose his family may lodge in the greatest 
possible comfort. This done, he then cuts as many poles as 
he considers suitable, and plants them in a circle around the 
border of the hollow which he has made in the earth and 
the snow—always in such a manner, however, that the upper 
ends come together in a point, as with tents or belfrys. When 
this is finished, he makes preparations for hunting, from which 
he does not return until the wigwam has been completely put 
in order by the women, to whom he commits the care thereof 
during his absence, after assigning to each one her particular 
duty. Thus some of the women go to collect branches of fir, 
[72] and then they place the barks upon the poles?: others 
fetch dry wood to make the fire: others carry water for 


1 The word is éabagannes in the original, and is used by our author as if 
a Micmac word. Rand gives, for sled, 744kin (English-Micmac Dictionary, 
239). Although similar forms occur in other Algonkian dialects, it is very 
likely that it was from the Micmac that the word was adopted vz@ French into 
English. Such is the opinion of A. F. Chamberlain, a leading authority 
upon such questions (Journal of American Folk-Lore, XV., 1902, 262). 

* There seems to be some confusion of wording here, as this clause by 
itself (des unes vont cieillir des branches de sapin, dont elles mettent les écorces 
sur des perches) hardly agrees with known facts. But if dont is a misprint for 
donc, then the meaning would be such as I give it, and in agreement with 
actual Indian usage. 


102 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


boiling in the kettle, in order to have the supper ready when 
the men return from the hunt. The wife of the head of the 
family, in the capacity of mistress, selects the most tender and 
most slender of the branches of fir for the purpose of covering 
all the margin inside the wigwam, leaving the middle free to 
serve as a common meeting-place. She then fits and adjusts 
the larger and rougher of the branches to the height of the 
snow, and these form a kind of little wall. The effect is such 
that this little building seems much more like a camp made 
in the spring than one made in winter, because [73] of the 
pleasing greenness which the fir keeps for a long time without 
withering.t It is also her duty to assign his place to each one, 
according to the age and quality of the respective persons and 
the custom of the nation. The place of the head of the family 
is on the right. He yields it sometimes, as an honour 
and courtesy to strangers, whom he even invites to stop with 
him, and to repose upon certain skins of bears, of moose, of 
seal, or upon some fine robes of beaver, which these Indians 
use as if they were Turkey carpets. The women occupy 
always the first places near the door, in order to be all ready 
to obey, and to serve promptly when they are ordered. [74] 
There are very great inconveniences in these kinds of wig- 
wams ; for, aside from the fact that they are so low that one 
cannot readily stand upright in them, and must of necessity 
remain always seated or lying down, they are moreover, of a 
coldness which cannot be described,? whilst the smoke which 
one is necessarily obliged to endure in the company of these 
barbarians is something insufferable. 

All these hardships, without doubt, are not the least of 
the mortifications which are endured by the missionaries, who, 


1 The high estimation in which the Indians held this greenness is well 
illustrated by a feature of one of their legends, as narrated by our author on 
page 322 of his book (page 212 of this volume). 

2 Yet Father Biard, on the contrary, describes them thus: “They are very 
warm in there around that little fire, even in the greatest rigours of the winter” 
( Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, ITI. 77). 


WIGWAMS AND DWELLINGS 103 


after the example of Saint Paul, in order to be all things to all 
men so that they may gain these people to JESUS-CHRIST, 
do not fail, despite so many discomforts, to work without 
ceasing at the [75] conversion of these poor pagans. 

I pass without mention several other methods of camping 
Which are in use among our Gaspesians,! because there is 
nothing about them more important than that they cause 
extreme suffering in those who follow the Indians in the 
woods, and that they are all equally mean and miserable. But 
however that may be, the Indians esteem their camps as 
much as, and even more than, they do the most superb and 
commodious of our houses. ‘To this they testified one day 
to some of our gentlemen of Isle Percée, who, having asked 
me to serve them as interpreter in a visit which they wished 
to make to these Indians in order-to make the latter under- 
stand that it would be [76] very much more advantageous 
for them to live and to build in our fashion, were extremely 
surprised when the leading Indian, who had listened with 
great patience to everything I had said to him on behalf of 
these gentlemen, answered me in these words : “I am greatly 
astonished that the French have so little cleverness, as they 
seem to exhibit in the matter of which thou hast just told me 
on their behalf, in the effort to persuade us to convert our 
poles, our barks, and our wigwams into those houses of stone 
and of wood which are tall and lofty, according to their account, 
as these trees. Very well! But why now,” continued he, 
“do men of five to six feet in height need houses which are 
sixty to eighty? [77] For, in fact, as thou knowest very well 
thyself, Patriarch—do we not find in our own all the con- 
veniences and the advantages that you have with yours, such 
as reposing, drinking, sleeping, eating, and amusing ourselves 
with our friends when we wish? This is not all,” said he, 
addressing himself to one of our captains, “‘ my brother, hast 


* One of these camping methods, that for a single night in the winter, our 
author describes on pages 208, 209 of his book. 


104 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


thou as much ingenuity and cleverness as the Indians, who 
carry their houses and their wigwams with them so that they 
may lodge wheresoever they please, independently of any 
seignior whatsoever ? Thou art not as bold nor as stout as 
we, because when thou goest on a voyage thou canst not carry 
upon thy shoulders thy buildings and thy edifices. There- 
fore it is necessary [78] that thou preparest as many lodgings 
as thou makest changes of residence, or else thou lodgest in a 
hired house which does not belong to thee. As for us, we 
find ourselves secure from all these inconveniences, and we 
can always say, more truly than thou, that we are at home 
everywhere, because we set up our wigwams with ease where- 
soever we go, and without asking permission of anybody. 
Thou reproachest us, very inappropriately, that our country is 
a little hell in contrast with France, which thou comparest to 
a terrestrial paradise, inasmuch as it yields thee, so thou 
sayest, every kind of provision in abundance. Thou sayest 
of us also that we are the most miserable [79] and most un- 
happy of all men, living without religion, without manners, 
without honour, without social order, and, in a word, without 
any rules, like the beasts in our woods and our forests, 
lacking bread, wine, and a thousand other comforts which 
thou hast in superfluity in Europe. Well, my brother, if 
thou dost not yet know the real feelings which our Indians 
have towards thy country and towards all thy nation, it is 
proper that I inform thee at once. I beg thee now to believe 
that, all miserable as we seem in thine eyes, we consider our- 
selves nevertheless much happier than thou in this, that we 
are very content with the little that we have; [80] and 
believe also once for all, I pray, that thou deceivest thyself 
greatly if thou thinkest to persuade us that thy country is 
better than ours. For if France, as thou sayest, is a little 
terrestrial paradise, art thou sensible to leave it? And why 
abandon wives, children, relatives, and friends? Why risk 
thy life and thy property every year, and why venture thy- 


WIGWAMS AND DWELLINGS 105 


self with such risk, in any season whatsoever, to the storms 
and tempests of the sea in order to come to a strange and 
barbarous country which thou considerest the poorest and 
least fortunate of the world ? Besides, since we are wholly 
convinced of the contrary, we scarcely take the trouble to go 
to France, because [81] we fear, with good reason, lest we 
find little satisfaction there, seeing, in our own experience, 
that those who are natives thereof leave it every year in order 
to enrich themselves on our shores. We believe, further, 
that you are also incomparably poorer than we, and that you 
are only simple journeymen, valets, servants, and slaves, all 
masters and grand captains though you may appear, seeing 
that you glory in our old rags and in our miserable suits of 
beaver which can no longer be of use to us, and that you find 
among us, in the fishery for cod which you make in these 
parts, the wherewithal to comfort your misery and the poverty 
[82] which oppresses you. As to us, we find all our riches 
and all our conveniences among ourselves, without trouble 
and without exposing our lives to the dangers in which you 
find yourselves constantly through your long voyages. And, 
whilst feeling compassion for you in the sweetness of our 
repose, we wonder at the anxieties and cares which you give 
yourselves night and day in order to load your ship.! We 
see also that all your people live, as a rule, only upon cod 
which you catch among us. It is everlastingly nothing but 
cod—cod in the morning, cod at midday, cod at evening, and 
always cod, until things come to such a pass that if you wish 
some good morsels, it is at [83] our expense ; and you are 
obliged to have recourse to the Indians, whom you despise 
so much, and to beg them to go a-hunting that you may be 
regaled. Now tell me this one little thing, if thou hast any 
sense: Which of these two is the wisest and happiest—he 


* That is, with cod. These anxieties and cares, as well indeed as everything 
connected with the summer fishery for cod, are vividly and fully described 
by Denys, in the second volume of his well-known Description. 


é 





106 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


who labours without ceasing and only obtains, and that with 
great trouble, enough to live on, or he who rests in comfort 
and finds all that he needs in the pleasure of hunting and 
fishing? It is true,” added he, “that we have not always 
had the use of bread and of wine which your France 
produces ; but, in fact, before the arrival of the French in 
these parts, did not the Gaspesians live much longer than 
now? And if we have not [84] any longer among us any of 
those old men of a hundred and thirty to forty years, it is 
only because we are gradually adopting your manner of 
living, for experience is making it very plain that those of us 
live longest who, despising your bread, your wine, and your 
brandy, are content with their natural food of beaver, of 
moose, of waterfowl, and fish, in accord with the custom of 
our ancestors and of all the Gaspesian nation. Learn now, 
my brother, once for all, because I must open to thee my 
heart: there is no Indian who does not consider himself 
infinitely more happy and more powerful than the French.” 
He finished his speech by the following last words, “saying 
that an Indian could find his living everywhere, and [85] 
that he could call himself the seigneur and the sovereign of 
his country, because he could reside there just as freely as it 
pleased him, with every kind of rights of hunting and fishing, 
without any anxiety, more content a thousand times in the 
woods and in his wigwam than if he were in palaces and at 
the tables of the greatest princes of the earth. 

No matter what can be said of this reasoning, I assert, for 
my part, that I should consider these Indians incomparably 
more fortunate than ourselves, and that the life of these 
barbarians would even be capable of inspiring envy, if they 
had the instructions, the understanding, and the same means 
for their salvation which God has given us that we may save 
ourselves by preference [86] over so many poor pagans, and 
as a result of His pity; for, after all, their lives are not 
vexed by a thousand annoyances as are ours. They have 


WIGWAMS AND DWELLINGS 107 


not among them those situations or offices, whether in the 
judiciary or in war, which are sought among us with so 
much ambition. Possessing nothing of their own, they are 
consequently free from trickery and legal proceedings in 
connection with inheritances from their relatives. The names 
of serjeant, of attorney, of clerk, of judge, of president are 
unknown to them. All their ambition centres in surprising 
and killing quantities of beavers, moose, seals, and other 
wild beasts in order to obtain their flesh for food and their 
skins for clothing. They live [87] in very great harmony, 
never quarrelling and never beating one another except in 
drunkenness. On the contrary, they mutually aid one 
another in their needs with much charity and without self- 
seeking. There is continual joy in their wigwams. The 
multitude of their children does not embarrass them, for, far 
from being annoyed by these, they consider themselves just 
that much the more fortunate and richer as their family is 
more numerous. Since they never expect that the fortunes 
of the children will be larger than those of their fathers, they 
are also free from all those anxieties which we give ourselves 
in connection with the accumulation of property for the 
purpose of elevating children in society and in importance. 
Hence it comes about that nature has always [88] preserved 
among them in all its integrity that conjugal love between 
husband and wife which ought never to suffer alteration 
through selfish fear of having too many children. This duty, 
which in Europe is considered too onerous, is viewed by our 
Indians as very honourable, very advantageous, and very 
useful, and he who has the largest number of children is 
the most highly esteemed of the entire nation. This js 
because he finds more support for his old age, and because, 
in their condition of life, the boys and girls contribute 
equally to the happiness and joy of those who have given 
them birth. They live, in fact, together—father and children 
—like the first kings of the earth, who subsisted [89] at the 


108 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


beginning of the world by their hunting and fishing, and on 
vegetables and sagamité,” or stew, which was, in my opinion, 
like the pottage which Jacob asked of Esau before giving 
him his benediction. 


1 A word of Indian (perhaps Ojibway), origin, adopted early by the French, 
and still in use in Canada. It was applied to a sort of porridge, made prin- 
cipally of boiled corn, but including also other ingredients. The origin of the 
word is discussed by A. F. Chamberlain in the Journal of American Folk- 
Lore, XV., 1902, 257. Compare also Dionnes Le Parler Populaire des 
Canadiens Francais, 587. 


CHAPTER VI 
On the Manner of Life of the Gaspesians, and on their Food. 


T is certainly true that our Gaspesians had so little 
knowledge of bread and wine when the French 
arrived for the first time in their country, that 

these barbarians mistook the bread which was given them 
for a piece of [90] birch tinder, and became convinced that 
the French were equally cruel and inhuman, since in their 
amusements, said the Indians, they drank blood without 
repugnance. It was thus they designated wine. Therefore 
they remained some time not only without tasting it, but 
even without wishing to become in any manner intimate, 
or to hold intercourse, with a nation which they believed 
to be accustomed to blood and carnage. Nevertheless, in 
the end, they became accustomed gradually to this drink, 
and it were to be wished that they had still to-day the 
same horror of wine and brandy, for they drink it even to 
drunkenness, to the prejudice of their salvation and of 
Christianity ; and it makes them commit [91] cruelties much 
greater than those which they had imagined in the conduct 
of the French. 

Many persons without doubt are surprised that, and have 
difficulty in understanding how, a missionary can live whole 
years together in the Indian manner. I admit frankly that he 
experiences very fully the vexations of this life, especially at first, 
when these are always very trying. But one soon overcomes 
all repugnance towards it when one has such good and succu- 
lent meats as those of moose, of beaver, of seal, of porcupine, 
of partridge, of wild goose, of teal, of ducks, of snipe, of cod 


110 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


[92] of. salmon, of bass, of trout, and of plenty of other fish 
and of waterfowl which serve as the usual food of the Indians. 

Thad months of January and February are for these 
barbarians, as a rule, a time of involuntary penitence and 
very rigorous fasting, which is also often very sad as well, 
in view of the cruel and horrible results which it causes 
among them. Nevertheless they could very easily prevent 
its unfortunate consequences if they would but follow the 
example of the ants, and of the little squirrels, which, by an 
instinct as admirable as it is natural, accumulate with care 
in summer the wherewithal to subsist in plenty during the 
Winter. But, after all, [93] our Gaspesians are of those people 
who take no thought for the morrow, though this is much 
more because of laziness in collecting good provisions than 
through zeal in obeying the counsel which God has given 
thereon in His Holy Gospel. ‘They are convinced that fifteen 
to twenty lumps of meat, or of fish dried or cured? in the 
smoke, are more than enough to support them for the space 
of five to six months. Since, however, they are a people of 
good appetite, they consume their provisions very much 
sooner than they expect. This exposes them often to the 
danger of dying from hunger, through lack of the provision 
which they could easily possess in abundance if they would 
only take the trouble to gather it. But these [94] barbarians, 
being wanderers and vagabonds, do not plough the ground, 
nor do they harvest Indian corn, or peas, or pumpkins, as do 
the Iroquois, the Hurons, the Algomquins, and several other 
nations of Canada. In consequence they are sometimes re- 
duced to so great need that they have neither the strength 
nor the spirit to leave their wigwams in order to go seek 
in the woods the wherewithal for living, It is then impos- 
sible to behold without compassion the innocent children, 
who, being nothing more than skin and bone, exhibit clearly 


1 This word in the original is doucannés, which Littré, Dictionnaire, gives 
as French, derived from a West Indian tongue, 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 111 


enough in their wholly emaciated faces and in their living 
skeletons, the cruel hunger which they are suffering through 
the negligence of their fathers and mothers, who find [95] 
themselves obliged, along with their unhappy children, to eat 
curdled blood, scrapings of skin, old moccasins, and a thousand 
other things incompatible with the life of man. All this 
would be little if they did not come sometimes to other 
extremes far more affecting and horrible. 

It is surprising to learn that they find themselves often 
reduced to extremities so great and so cruel that one cannot 
even hear of them without shuddering, and nature cannot 
endure them without horror. We have seen a sufficiently 
deplorable example thereof at the River of Sainte Croix, 
otherwise called Miramichis, in the month of January 1680,} 
when our Indians consumed all their meat [96] and their 
smoked fish much sooner than they had expected. Matters 
reached such a pass that, since the season was not yet suitable 
for hunting, nor the rivers in condition for fishing, they 
found themselves reduced to suffer all the worst that can be 
experienced in a famine, which resulted in their deaths to the 
number of forty or fifty. The French who were then at the 
Fort of Sainte Croix, aided them as much as they could at a 
juncture when the obligation to aid one’s neighbour, whom 
the Gospel commands us to love as ourselves, appeared too 
obvious not to be discharged with all the compassion and the 
charity possible. Madame Denis? [97] gave orders to her 


1 Our authors phraseology appears to imply that he was himself present 
at Miramichi at this time. But the autograph certificate, reproduced in the 
Introduction, shows that he was near Quebec on February 2nd, and therefore, 
pretty surely, was not at Miramichi in January. 

* Madame Denis I take to be not the wife of Richard Denys de Fronsac, 
but his mother, the wife of Nicolas Denys who was then in France. It is 
known that Richard’s first wife was an Indian woman, Anne Parabego, or 
Partarabego (Tanguay, Dictionnaire généalogique, 111. 342, and Collections of 
the New Brunswick Historical Society, III. 14) and that their eldest child 
was Marie Anne, baptized May 25, 1681, aged four months. This would imply 
that Richard was married the preceding year later than January. And even 


112 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


servants to distribute to the Indians, according to the needs 
of each wigwam, bread, flour, peas, meat, fish, and even also 
corn. This latter was boiled by the more patient of these 
poor famished creatures, but some others of them, unable to 
endure longer the cruel hunger which overwhelmed them, 
ate it quite raw, and with this result, that a poor woman 
having died immediately after this repast, which was the last 
of her life, there was surprise the following autumn when 
several fine heads of corn, which had come to complete 
maturity, were seen at the very place where this Indian 
woman had been buried. We could not give any [98] other 
explanation thereof than the following, which seemed to us 
the most exact and most probable, namely, that it resulted 
necessarily from the fact that this corn, which she had eaten 
wholly raw, had germinated in her body ; and her stomach 
not having had enough either of strength or of natural heat 
for digesting it, the corn had come to maturity. This seems 
very probable, since, in fact, no one had ever sown grain in 
this place. 

In a depression so great, and a desolation so general, 
which afflicted greatly both the French and the Indians, one 
of our Gaspesians was found, who, unable to endure any 
longer the hunger which was devouring him alive, was so 
barbarous and cruel as to resolve to kill and to eat [99] his 
wife. She, perceiving the sinister design of her husband, and 
in order to save her own life, put it into his mind to break 
the heads and cut the throats of two of their children, one aged 


if he were married in January 1680, it is quite unlikely that his Indian wife 
would have been allowed the authority which Madame Denis evidently 
possessed. Moreover, we know that the wife of Nicolas Denys had been in 
charge of his fort at Nepisiguit all one winter during his absence (Denys, 
Description, 1. 123), which shows her capacity for such a post. Furthermore, 
both Father le Clercq and his contemporary, Monseigneur de Saint Valier, refer 
to Richard Denys always by his title of Fronsac, and call Nicolas simply 
Monsieur Denis, which is another good reason for considering Madame Denis 
as the mother of Richard. 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 113 


five to six years, and the other seven to eight. “It is true,” 
said this cruel hard-hearted mother to her husband, her heart 
all pierced with grief, “that thou hast cause to complain, and 
that the need in which we are is extreme ; but in fact if thou 
Wilt kill some member of thy family, is it not much better 
that we put to death some of our children, and that we eat 
them together, in order that I may be able to rear and to 
Support the smaller ones who can no longer live if once they 
come to lose their mother?” She pleaded her cause in her 
own favour so well [100] that with common consent the man 
and his wife slew, by cutting their throats, these two poor 
innocents, paying no attention to the tears and the lamenta- 
tions of the little girl, who implored her father and mother not 
to murder her. She was not able to obtain this favour from 
these inhuman monsters, and both children received their 
death from those who had given them life. They then cut 
the bodies of these children into pieces, and placed them in a 
boiling kettle ; and finally, with unheard of cruelty, the simple 
recollection of which makes the Gaspesian nation shudder to 
this very day, these monsters of nature ate them, in company 
with one of their [101] brothers, who was obliged to flee with 
the others to the River of Saint Jean, for fear lest the leading 
men of our Indians, surprising them in this cruel feast, might 
break their heads. And in fact these leading men were as 
much exasperated as surprised at the news of a deed so black 
and so barbarous. It is true that these unhappy persons, 
on the return of Spring, which proved very favourable for 
hunting, were inconsolable for the miserable nature of the 
death of their children, whom they had inhumanly sacrificed 
for the preservation of their own lives. They deserved, 
through their cries, to touch with compassion the hardest 
hearts. The father reproached the mother with the excess 
of her cruelty ; the wife represented to her husband [102] 
how little endurance he had in suffering hunger, and how 


unnatural he had been in his willingness to preserve his own 
H 


114 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


life at the expense of that which they had both given to 
their children. This poor afflicted mother, with tears in her 
eyes and with sighs and groans sufficient to melt a heart of 
bronze, reproached him that he alone had forced her, despite 
herself, to consent to a deed so brutal and so barbarous. 
But, after having lamented mutually the misfortune they had 
brought on themselves, and for which there was no remedy, 
and the irreparable loss of their dear children, whose names 
they still repeated in the midst of their lamentations, they 
could not find tears enough, nor words to condemn and to 
express [103] on their own behalf the enormity of their 
crime. I have myself seen these unfortunate parents, who 
had still, like other Cains, the frightful image of their 
abominable crime so constantly present in their minds that 
every moment they believed themselves struck by the same 
curse which God inflicted upon that fratricide. Affrighted 
as they were without ceasing by a terror which never left 
them, they imagined that they saw as many executioners as 
they met Indians ; and, being unable to find safety in any 
place where they could escape the just anger of our Gaspesians, 
who could no longer look upon them except with horror and 
indignation, they travelled the woods day and night without 
ceasing, seeking [104] everywhere in vain for a rest which they 
could find in no place, and still less in the depths of their con- 
sciences. ‘These tormented and persecuted them. continually 
with so much cruelty at the sole recollection of the horror 
of the crime which they had just perpetrated, that they 
believed themselves wholly unworthy to receive the leaflets 
and the characters! which I gave to the other Indians, and of 
which I made use to good effect in teaching them the prayers, 
the catechism, and the principles of the faith I was preaching 
to them. When I perceived that they no longer dared to 
appear, and that they ceased to attend the instruction with 


1 These are mentioned in Chapter I. page 28, and are fully explained in 
Chapter VII. and in the Introduction to this volume, page 21. 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 115 


the others, I tried to reassure them and to persuade them 
[105] to come to our chapel to hear there the prayers. They 
answered me that this was useless ; for whatever efforts they 
were able to make, said they, to understand that which I 
taught them, they had no longer either the memory or the 
ability to remember it until this crime was entirely removed 
and pardoned by God through the ministry of the grand 
Patriarch. It is thus that they call Monseigneur the Bishop 
of Quebec ; and they wished, said they, to cast themselves at 
his feet, in order to obtain from him absolution for their 
crime. 

Such were the words and the feelings of these poor 
unhappy persons. I did all in my power to console them,’ 
promising them all the protection and the aid that I [106] 
could, and representing to them that while in truth their 
crime was monstrous, yet in fact God had more goodness and 
compassion for them than they had of wickedness and cruelty 
in thus putting to death those to whom they had given life. 
They believed in my words, and received my leaflets, well 
resolved to do and to practise exactly everything with which 
I could inspire them of good, in order to appease the justice 
of God and to invite His mercy. 

Such are the grievous accidents to which, without doubt, 
our Indians expose themselves every year by their laziness, 
and by the little care that they take to accumulate in 
Summer enough to enable them to avoid and prevent a 
thousand [107] ills which very often overwhelm them in 
winter, as they themselves know only too well through the 
sad experience which they have had thereof. These Gas- 
pesians quite agree with us, but it seems as if the abundance 
which they find in spring, summer, and autumn makes them 

* Father le Clercq’s personal knowledge of this case of cannibalism among 
the Micmacs places it beyond question. He describes another, and nearly as 
authentic a case, caused, however, by a very different motive, upon page 


341 of his book. A case is also reported, but upon hearsay, by Father le Jeune 
(Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, VIII. 29). 


116 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


forget the misfortunes which they have suffered during the 
winter. 

After all, I declare that one cannot sufficiently admire the 
fortitude with which they endure the hardships of hunger, 
and it can be said that they fast with perhaps as much, or 
even with more, patience and austerity than the most rigid 
and the most self-mortifying of the anchorites. It is some- 
what surprising to see that they [108] make an entire 
occupation of singing immoderately, and of dancing some- 
times like fools, when they have a consuming appetite, and 
when they have nothing with which to satisfy it. This they 
do in order to lose, say they, through this amusement, the 
desire which they would have for eating. It is not difficult 
for them to go three or four days without food, especially 
when they are hunting, and are chasing some wild beasts, 
such as the moose. They never take any meal before this 
exercise, however severe it may be for them. But in the 
evening, when they return to the wigwam, they regale them- 
selves with all the best that there is, boiling, frying or 
roasting, according to the taste of each, [109] all that they 
have, without any reserve, and without any apprehension lest 
any one count their pieces. On the contrary, these barbarians 
consider that it is a very praiseworthy and glorious thing to 
eat a great deal. This is why, not being able to submit to 
rules of temperance and of economy, which nevertheless would 
be very useful and invaluable to them, they make all their 
good to consist, and find their happiness, in eating to excess, 
in granting to their appetite beyond that which it desires, 
and in eating as they please, as well by day as by night, 
making a perfect pleasure and happiness of their bellies. 
Hence it is a proverb among us in Canada, that it needs 
only four or five good [110] meals to restore them from the 
fatigues and the weakness of several months of illness. 

They preserve inviolably among them the manner of 
living which was in vogue during the golden age, and those 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 117 


who imagine a Gaspesian Indian as a monster of nature will 
understand only with difficulty the charity with which they 
mutually comfort one another. The strong take pleasure in 
supporting the feeble; and those who by their hunting 
procure many furs, give some in charity to those who have 
none, either in order to pay the debts of these, or to clothe 
them, or to obtain for them the necessaries of life. Widows 
and orphans receive presents, and if there is any widow who 
[111] is unable to support her children, the old men take 
charge of them, and distribute and give them to the best 
hunters,! with whom they live, neither more nor less than 
as if they were the actual children of the wigwam. It would 
be a shame, and a kind of fault worthy of eternal reproach, 
if it was known that an Indian, when he had provisions in 
abundance, did not make gift thereof to those whom he knew 
to be in want and in need. This is why those who kill the 
first moose at the beginning of January or February, a time 
at which those people suffer greatly, since they have consumed 
all their provisions, make it a pleasure to carry some of it 
themselves very promptly to [112] those who have none, 
even if these are distant fifteen to twenty leagues. And, 
not content with this liberality, they invite these latter also, 
with all possible tenderness, to join their company and to 
remove closer to their wigwams, in order that they may be 
able to aid these people more conveniently in their necessity 
and in their most pressing need, giving a thousand promises 
to share with them the half of their hunting. This is good 
example, without doubt, for those pitiless rich, and those 
hearts of stone, who. have only bowels of iron for their like, 
and who never take any trouble whatever to relieve the 
extreme misery of so many poor persons who are in anguish, 
and who suffer hunger and [11 3] nakedness, whilst these 
wicked rich wallow in a superabundance of property and 
riches, of which Providence has made them only trustees, 


* This matter is mentioned by our author also on page 388 of his book. 


118 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


and which he has placed in their hands only in order that 
they may make a holy use of them as alms and charity to 
the needy members of the Saviour. 

The meat of moose is that which our Gaspesians esteem 
the most. They are fond of its grease, and consider a dish 
thereof so delicious that they drink it wholly pure, with as 
much gusto as if it were the most pleasing liquor in the world. 
They eat it also quite raw as something exquisite. Ina word, 
they have not among them any feast more magnificent than 
that in which he who entertains gives to his guests [114] a 
loaf of cacamos! of nine to ten pounds. Now this loaf is 
a kind of grease which is taken from the bones of the legs 
and thighs of the moose. After they have eaten all the 
marrow, they pound and crush these bones until they have 
reduced them almost to powder ; then the fragments are placed 
in a huge kettle of boiling water, so that every remaining trace 
of marrow or grease in these broken bones floats upon the 
water because drawn out by the heat of the fire. They then 
collect this grease, and preserve it carefully, as something very 
choice and delicate. As to the soup, it becomes as white as 
milk, and according to their idea, they believe it as good for 
the chest as a [115] large glass of brandy, or as the best of 
our meat broths. They value the female moose much higher 
than the male during the winter, but, on the other hand, 
they esteem the male much more than the female in summer. 
This is because these animals are alternately fat and lean, for 
it is not their nature or their disposition to be in the same 
condition at the same time, something which is also very 
common with several other kinds of animals in Canada.” 

If by good luck it happens that a hunter kills a female in 


1 This word is used also by Denys (Description, II. 412) in the form 
Cacamo ; and he tells us the French called it moose-butter (Zeurre @ Orignac). 
The word in modern Micmac is A700, which Rand gives as meaning “a 
cake of tallow” (English-Micmac Dictionary, 261), though our anthor’s word 
has evidently also a prefix, which I cannot identify. 

2 No such peculiarity appears to be recognised by our naturalists to-day. 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 119 


winter, or a male during the summer, there is then the greatest 
rejoicing in all the neighbouring wigwams, because of the 
expectation and hope that each one has of [116] eating 
delectably some fat of moose. But they redouble their joy, 
with cries and songs of gladness, when the hunter, all vic- 
torious from the chase, enters into the wigwam, and throws 
upon the ground, with a gravity and pride as though he had 
triumphed over a redoubtable enemy, the load he had carried 
upon his shoulders, in which are enwrapped the heart, the 
kidney, the tongue, the entrails, and the most delicate fat. 
On these parts his friends and all his family begin forthwith 
to regale themselves, whilst the girls and the women, with 
a thousand demonstrations of joy, and always singing and 
dancing, go to fetch upon their sledges the remainder of the 
meat of the moose, which this proud [117] hunter has left 
very neatly buried in the snow. 

It falls to the mistress of the wigwam to take charge of 
everything which is brought back from the hunting, if, indeed, 
it can be said that any system prevails among these people, 
who are eating nearly every moment. She selects from the 
mass of intestines of this animal those which are the fattest ; 
these she boils, after having washed them very lightly, and 
she makes them finally into rolls, much like puddings and 
sausages. From these they make asa rule their most delicious 
desserts. She then cuts all the leanest and thinnest parts into 
slices, and preserves them by drying in the smoke, placing 
them upon [118] poles which form a kind of little staging. 
This is in order to prevent the meat from spoiling and rotting. 
It is by this means that, without the use of salt, or any other 
spices, they preserve it very readily for some time, and it 
becomes to them later, as I have already said, of very great 
use in the extremities to which these poor wretches, in default 
of foresight, fall only too often. It can be said that the 
smoked nose and tongue of the moose are wonderfully good ; 
but it is still somewhat better, and markedly more delicate, 


120 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


not only to the taste of our Indians, but also to that of our 
French, and of all the other nations which are in Canada, when 
both are eaten [119] quite fresh, and without having been 
exposed to the smoke. These parts form therefore the feast 
excellent above all to our Gaspesians. They also sometimes 
roast, as a diversion, the entire head of a young elk, which 
they commonly call in their tongue Nigaiou." They do not 
remove therefrom either the nose or the tongue ; but simply, 
without other arrangement, they attach to some pole a cord 
by which this head is hung directly in front of the fire, so 
that by giving it from time to time a twist with a stick, it 
turns and re-turns to the right and the left without burning 
until it is cooked.2. There is, further, nothing so ludicrous as 
to see the fireplace besieged, so to speak, by as many [120] 
portions of meat, spitted upon as many sticks, as there are 
Indians in the wigwam. But, unable to possess themselves 
in patience until the meat is entirely roasted, the Indians 
snatch it half cooked from the spit, and eat it just as glutton- 
ously as do the dogs, and with a surprising greediness which 
would be capable of disgusting the hungriest persons. Such 
is all the outfit which these barbarians use in their usual 
repasts, nor do they desire either tablecloths, napkins, tables, 
dishes, plates or forks. 

Many find it difficult to understand the manner in which 
the Indians boiled their meat before they were given the use of 
our kettles, which they now find [121] extremely convenient. 
I have learned from themselves that before they obtained our 
kettles, they used little buckets or troughs of wood,” which 

1 This word is obviously the same as the modern Micmac Vegedjoo, to 
which Rand gives the meaning “a yearling moose” (English-Micmac Dic- 
tionary, 172). The resemblance is otherwise so close as to suggest that our 
authors word is misprinted from Vigajou. 

2 This method, used to prevent the burning of meat in cooking, is also 
described, and somewhat more fully, by Denys (Description, 11. 358). 

3 A full account of these wooden kettles, with some interesting statements 


about their use, is given by Denys (Description, II. 359, 372, 464). Lescarbot 
also mentions them (Æssoire, 805). 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 121 


they filled with water : into this they threw glowing stones, 
which they made red hot in the fire, and they did this so 
often, that little by little the water grew warm, and finally 
boiled by virtue of the warmth and the heat of these hot 
rocks, until the meat was amply cooked for eating in the 
Indian manner, that is to say, half raw, as they eat it still to 
this day, and in a manner also wholly disgusting. For it is 
true that these people are distinguished in their manner of 
living by an uncleanness which turns the stomach. I cannot 
believe [122] that there is any nation in the world so dis- 
gusting in its manners of drinking and eating as the Gaspesian, 
excepting, perhaps, some other peoples of this new world, 
Hence it is true that of all the troubles which the missionaries 
suffer at first in order to accustom themselves to the manner 
of life of the Indians for the sake of instructing them in the 
maxims of Christianity, this is without doubt one of the most 
dificult to endure, because it very often causes a rising of 
the stomach. Our Gaspesians never clean their kettles except 
the first time they use them, because, they say, they are afraid 
of the verdigris, which is in no danger of attaching itself to 
them, when they are well greased [123] and burnt. Nor do 
they ever skim it off, because it seems to them that this is 
removing grease from the pot, and just so much good 
material is lost. This causes the meat to be all stuffed with 
a black and thick scum, like little meat balls which have 
nearly the appearance of curdled milk. They content 
themselves with removing simply the largest moose _ hairs, 
although the meat may have been dragged around the 
wigwam for five or six days, and the dogs also may 
have tasted it beforehand. They have no other tables 
than the flat ground, nor other napkins for wiping their 
hands than their moccasins, or their hair, on which they 
sedulously rub their hands. In a word there js nothing 
that [124] is not rough, gross and repellent in the extra- 
ordinary manner of life of these: barbarians, who observe 


122 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


neither in drinking nor in eating any rules of politeness 
or of civility. 

The usual drink of our Gaspesians is pure water, which 
they drink with pleasure during the summer.’ As for the 
winter, they are very often obliged to melt snow in their 
kettles in order to have water to drink, and this nearly always 
tastes of smoke. As to the water of the maple, which is the 
sap of that same tree, it is equally delicious to French and 
Indians, who take their fill of it in spring. It is true also 
that it is very pleasing and abundant in Gaspesia, for, through 
a [125] very little opening which is made with an axe in a 
maple, ten to a dozen half-gallons may run out. A thing 
which has seemed to me very remarkable in the maple water 
is this, that if, by virtue of boiling, it is reduced to a third, 
it becomes a real syrup, which hardens to something like 
sugar, and takes on a reddish colour.2 It is formed into little 


1 But Denys says they drank little pure water (Description, I. 362). 

2 This is one of the earliest references to maple sugar in literature, and 
those which precede it are very few. Joutel, in his Journal of 1688, mentions 
it (Margry’s Découvertes et Etablissements des Français, III. 510, cited, with 
other references, by W. H. Henshaw in the American Anthropologist, I11., 
1890, 341). In 1685 a note on “A sort of Sugar made of the Juice of the 
Maple, in Canada” appeared in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, XV. 988. A year earlier, according to an article by A. F. Chamberlain 
in the American Anthropologist, 1V., 1891, 39 and 381, there appeared in the 
Philosophical Magazine, 1. 322, a letter, of date March 10, 1684, which speaks 
of “some sugar of the first boiling got from the juice of the wounded maple.” 
And this is the very earliest known reference to maple sugar. But, curiously 
enough, references to the use of maple sap go back far earlier. Thus Denys, 
in 1672, has a description of the tapping of trees and the use of the sap as 
a favourite drink of both Indians and French, but no mention of sugar 
(Description, 11. 317). Thereis a mention of maple water in the /eswif Relations 
of 1671-72 (Thwaites’ edition, LVI. tor). Sagard mentions it in 1636 as a 
supposed remedy for certain ills, including weakness of the stomach, though 
he makes the error of attributing the sap to the foutean, ze. the beech 
(Histoire du Canada, 227). It is this account of Sagard’s which is cited 
by our author in his other book (First Establishment of the Faith, 1. 208). 
Finally, the earliest reference I have found is given by Father le Jeune in the 
Relation of 1634, and it is of particular interest as showing the way in which 
the use of the sap probably first originated. “ When they are pressed by 
famine, they eat the shavings or bark of a certain tree, which they call Hichtan, 


MANNER OF LIFE AND THEIR FOOD 123 


loaves which are sent to France as a curiosity, and which in 
actual use serve very often as a substitute for French sugar. 
I have several times mixed it with brandy, cloves and cinna- 
mon, and this makes a kind of very agreeable rossolis. The 
observation is worthy of note that there must be snow at the 
foot of the tree in order that it shall let [126] its sweet water 
Tun; and it refuses to yield this liquid when the snow 
appears no more upon the ground. But, to conclude, all 
I can say of the water of Canada in general is this, that it 


which they split in the spring to get from it a juice, sweet as honey or as 
Sugar ; I have been much told of this by several, but they do not enjoy much 
of it, so scanty is the flow” (Thwaites’ edition, VI. 273). 

It is generally believed, from statements contained in the later literature, 
which is cited by Henshaw and by Chamberlain in their notes above mentioned, 
that the making of maple sugar originated in pre-historic times with the 
Indians, and was learned by the French from them. Thus the note in the 
Philosophical Transactions above cited states, “The Savages have practised 
this Art longer than any now living among them can remember”; while both 
Henshaw and Chamberlain give much evidence, drawn from the Indian 
terms applied to the sugar and its making, all tending to the same conclusion. 
Yet if maple sugar making was aboriginal and in existence long prior to the 
earliest mentions of it, it is very difficult to understand how it could have 
escaped mention in the many minute accounts of Indian life given not only 
in the Jesuzt Relations but in many other writings besides; and the omission 
becomes quite incomprehensible in the face of the fact that the maple sap 
is so often mentioned. It looks very much as if the making of the sugar 
were not pre-historic, but, though of Indian origin, was not commenced until 
about 1675. Indeed, its beginning maybe connected with the extensive 
introduction of metal kettles, for the boiling of the Sap to sugar in the 
aboriginal troughs heated with hot stones must have been not only a too-trying 
process for aboriginal industry, but one rather unlikely to have been hit 
upon by any of the known aboriginal housekeeping arrangements. It would 
seem most likely that the use of the sap was first discovered by some such 
incident as that mentioned by Father le Jeune, that is, the use for food in 
times of scarcity of the sweet young bark, cambium, and wood. ‘These are 
yielded by many trees, but it would soon have been found that the maple 
was superior to all others, both in abundance and richness of sap. From 
this to the splitting, and then the tapping, of the tree the steps would be 
easy and natural. Finally, the boiling of some sap caught in a kettle and 
accidentally mistaken for water would lead to the natural discovery of the 
sugar. 

* Our author’s observation on this point is not accurate as he gives it, 
though it embodies a germ of truth. 


124 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


is extremely healthful and beneficent, and much better than 
that in France. Never, or at least very rarely, is one incon- 
venienced by it, according to the experience which I have 
had with it myself during several years. Hence we say in 
Canada that the waters of New France are as good as the 
sour wine of Europe. 


[127] CHAPTER VII 
Ox the Ignorance of the Gaspesians 


HE Gaspesians do not know how to read nor 
how to write. They have, nevertheless, enough 
understanding and memory to learn how to do 

both if only they were willing to give the necessary application. 
But aside from the fickleness and instability of their minds, 
which they are willing to apply only in so far as it pleases 
them, they all have the false and ridiculous belief that they 
would not live long if they were as learned as the French. 
From this it comes that they are pleased to live and to die 
in their natural ignorance. [128] Some of these Indians, 
however, for whose instruction some trouble has been taken, 
have in a short time become philosophers and even pretty 
good theologians. But, after all, they have ever remained 
Savages, since they have not had the sense to profit by their 
considerable advantages, of which they have rendered them- 
selves wholly unworthy by leaving their studies in order to 
dwell with their fellow-countrymen in the woods, where they 
have lived like very bad philosophers, preferring, on the basis 
of a foolish reasoning, the savage to the French life. 

I have met, in my mission, two daughters of our Gaspesians 
who knew how to read and write, because they had lived with 
the Ursulines [129] of Quebec, who, sacredly animated by 
that all-fiery zeal which they exhibit for the glory of God and 
the salvation of souls, receive among them the little daughters 
of the Indians, whom they teach with piety and devotion not 
only how to read and write, but also how to perform other 


tasks suited to their condition of life. 
125 


126 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


The facility which I have found in a method for teaching 
the prayers to our Gaspesians by means of certain characters 
which I have formed,' fully persuades me that the majority 
would soon become educated ; for, in fact, I should find no 
more difficulty in teaching them to read than to pray to God 
by means of my papers, in which each arbitrary letter signifies 
a particular word [130] and sometimes even two together. 
They have so much readiness in understanding this kind of 
writing that they learn in a single day what they would never 
have been able to grasp in an entire week without the aid of 
these leaflets, which they call Kignamotinoer, ou Kateguenne.” 
They preserve these instructive papers with so much care, 
and they have for them so particular an esteem, that they 
keep them very neatly in little cases of birch-bark bedecked 
with wampum, with beadwork, and with porcupine quills. 
They hold them between their hands, as we do our prayer- 
books, during the Holy Mass, after which they shut them up 
again in their cases. The principal advantage and usefulness 
which results from this new [131] method is this, that the 
Indians instruct one another in whatsoever place they may 
happen to be. Thus the son teaches his father, the mother 
her children, the wife her husband, and the children the old 
men ; for advanced age gives them no reluctance to learn from 
their little nephews, and even from the girls, the principles of 
Christianity. Even some of the youngest Indians, those who 

1 These characters, called commonly hieroglyphics, are mentioned by our 
author earlier in his book at pages 28 and 104, and later at pages 139-151 and 
534. They are discussed in the Introduction to this volume, pages 21-32. 

2 These words occur also on pages 148, 151, and 534, with somewhat 
different spellings, but in all these cases with the ow an integral part of the 
Kateguenne, showing that it is here misprinted as a separate word and in 
Roman type. The Owkateguenne is obviously the same as the modern 
Micmac Weegddigiin, meaning “a book” (Rand, English-Micmac Dictionary, 
41). The Azgnamotinoer, which on page 151 is spelled Kignatimonoér, is no 
doubt a form, more or less misprinted, of the modern Micmac Kégenoodiimooa' 
which means “‘to teach” or “to instruct” (Rand, Exglish-Micmac Dictionary, 


146, 262), Our author himself speaks of these writings as “instructive papers,” 
seemingly in translation of the phrase. 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 127 


do not yet possess the entire use of speech, pronounce, never- 
theless, the best that they can, some words from these leaflets 
which they hear spoken in their wigwams when the Indians, 
by a holy emulation, read them and repeat them together. 
Admiration has often [1 32] and justly been expressed in our 
monastery at Quebec for a little child about seven years of age, 
who read distinctly in his book the prayers that I had taught 
him during my mission. + He deciphered the characters with 
so much ease and presence of mind that our religious, as well 
as the seculars, were extraordinarily surprised thereat. They 
were no less edified at seeing the father and mother assisting 
at the Holy Mass, having in their hands their Gaspesian 
Prayer-books in which were the instructions that a good 
Christian ought to know in order to assist with merit in 
this august sacrifice. These poor Indians, who had adopted 
me, with their usual ceremonies, as their child, had come 
from more [133] than a hundred and fifty leagues distance 
On purpose to beg me to return as quickly as possible with 
them. It was only two months since I had arrived at 
Quebec for the purpose of reporting to the Reverend Father 
Valentine le Roux, then our Commissary and Superior, and 
now Custodian of the Recollects of the Province of Saint 
Denis in France, upon the missions of Gaspesia, Isle Percée, 
Ristigouche, Nipisiquis and Mizamichis, which obedience 
had confided to my care. It is true that I had been obliged 
to remain in our Monastery of Notre-Dame des Anges a 
longer time than I had expected, because the Reverend Father 
Commissary was not there when I arrived. 

The same zeal which he has [1 34] always exhibited, with so 
much ardour and success, for the glory of God, the salvation 
of souls, the service of the King, and the honour of our holy 
reform during the six years in which he governed our missions 
of New France, had obliged him to embark in one of the 
canoes of Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac, whom he had the 
honour to accompany as far as the fort of the same name at 


128 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


a hundred and twenty leagues from Quebec. He went there 
in order to animate, by his words and by his example, the 
Reverend Fathers Gabriel de la Ribourd, Zenobe Membré, 
and Loüis Hennepin, whom he had assigned to make, along 
with Monsieur de la Salle, the famous discovery of the Gulf 
of Mexico by way of the rivers of Saint Lawrence and of 
Missipé, [135] or to go there himself, quite the first, if there 
had been need of that, to share with them the apostolic labours 
which had to be maintained in this glorious enterprise. 

He was, however, keenly disappointed not to find our 
missionaries still at Fort Frontenac, for they had already set 
out for the discovery of the Gulf of Mexico. So that, after 
having done in this mission everything of good to which his 
zeal inspired him, and having given the necessary directions 
to the Reverend Father Luc Buisset, Recollect, who had 
remained alone at the fort for the instruction of the French 
and the Indians, he descended with Monsieur le Comte de 
Frontenac to Quebec, and returned to our Monastery of 
Notre-Dame des Anges. 1 

[136] I then represented to him, with that affectionate 
confidence which his goodness and his natural sweetness 
inspired in all missionaries, that which I thought likely to 
advance the glory of God and the salvation of souls in all 
these missions. He heard with favour my proposals upon 
these matters, and I can say with truth that this voyage which 
I made to Quebec had all the success that I could hope from 
it. So that, after having made spiritual exercises under his 
direction, in order to receive therefrom the knowledge and 
the strength necessary to make me acquit myself worthily 
in my ministry, I had already made my arrangements to 
set out when our Indians appeared at Quebec. 

1 Apparently it should be very easy to fix the year of this visit of our author 
to Quebec and his return with his impatient Indians to Restigouche. The 
journey of Father le Roux, with which he links his visit chronologically, seems 


to have occurred late in the summer of 1670, for that is the statement in our 
authors other book (First Establishment of the Faith, 11. 112), and t accords 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 129 


Whatever inclination, however, I might have had to 
remain [137] some days longer in our retreat of Notre-Dame 
des Anges, it was necessary for me to yield to the persuasions 
of my Indians, to whom, when leaving them, I had promised 
that I would return in a moon and a half, that is to say, in 
six weeks. 

Keenly grieved as they were by my absence, and seeing 
that this period which I had stated to them was already 
expired, the leaders decided with one accord to send two 
canoes for me, with orders to the Indians, who were their 
deputies for the purpose, to testify to me the great desire they 
had that I should return as promptly as possible, and to ask 
of me whether the moons at Quebec were longer than those 
of Ristigouche. The latter was the place where I [1 38] then 
made my mission. I could not defend myself against the 
importunities which these deputies made to me in order to 


best with the known dates of the departure of La Salle’s expedition from Fort 
Frontenac. (Compare also a note on page 203 of this volume.) From these 
data Father le Clercq’s visit, and his return to Restigouche, would appear 
to have occurred late in the autumn of 1679. But, on the other hand, he seems 
to have spent the winter of 1679-80 at Quebec, for, as shown in the Introduction 
to this volume (page 7), on October 30th he was present at Saint Anne de 
Beaupré, and on February 2nd at Coste de Saint Ange, also near Quebec, 
It is wholly unlikely that he returned to Restigouche in the late autumn and 
then came back to Quebec for the winter. He had been specially invited, 
indeed, by Father le Roux to spend that winter in Quebec (letter on page 3or 
of the Nouvelle Relation, page 203 of this volume). It does not help matters 
to place the voyage of Father le Roux in 1680, because it was unquestionably 
in the summer of 1680 that our author returned to F rance, as shown in the 
note on page 321 of this volume. I believe, therefore, and Fathers Hugolin 
and Odoric are inclined also to this view, that our author’s memory played 
him false when it made him associate his own visit to Quebec with the 
voyage of Father le Roux to Fort Frontenac in 1679, and that this visit really 
occurred in another year when he found Father le Roux absent upon some 
other voyage. Possibly the visit was really one which he made in the pre- 
ceding year (1678), when, as Father le Roux’s letter appears to show (in the 
Nouvelle Relation, 281, and page 195 of this volume), he had also visited 
Quebec. But the proficiency of his Indians in the use of the characters, 
which our author had invented only in 1677, would seem to place the visit 
later, in which case it could only have occurred some time after his journey 
to France, and, therefore, in 1682 or later. 
z 


130 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


oblige me to hasten my return, and, following much more 
the claim of duty than my natural inclinations, which inspired 
me strongly to enjoy some time longer the company of my 
brothers, I embarked at length with pleasure in their canoes. 
After fifteen days of successful navigation we arrived at the 
wigwams of our Indians, who received me with so much 
cordiality, affection and tenderness, that they made both public 
and individual feasts, with the usual speeches and rejoicings, 
in order to testify to me, so far as they were able to do it, 
the joy which they had in my [139] return. How agreeably 
I was surprised, and what consolation I felt in my heart, 
when, wishing to present some of my papers to certain 
Indians who had come from a long distance on purpose to 
be instructed, I found they could already decipher the char- 
acters with as much ease as if they had always lived among 
us. This was because some whom I had formerly instructed 
had returned to their homes and had taught the others, thus 
performing, in regard to them, the office of missionary. 

It is easy then, from this, to judge the utility of these 
characters for a missionary who wishes to garner much fruit 
in a little time through all the extent of his district. For 
however little memory [140] these Indians may have, they 
can not only readily learn their prayers by aid of these 
characters, but it is also easy after they have forgotten the 
prayers to recall them by enumerating the characters one 
after another in the manner they have been shown. 

In fact, I have employed them so usefully for the space of 
ten years, that if the merit of obedience should appoint me 
to the numerous Missions of the Gulf of Mexico, newly 
discovered by our religious who have had the honour to 
accompany Monsieur de la Salle in that glorious enterprise 
(as I demonstrate in the First Establishment of the Faith in 
New France), 1 should present them to those barbarians as 
the [141] most effective means for instructing them in a very 
short time in the most holy truths of our Christianity. 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 131 


Our Lord inspired me with the idea of them the second 
year of my mission, When, being much embarrassed as to 
the method by which I should teach the Indians to pray to 
God, I noticed that some children were making marks with 
charcoal upon birch-bark, and were counting these with the 
finger very accurately at each word of prayers which they 
Pronounced. This made me believe that by giving them 
some formulary, which would aid their memory by definite 
characters, I should advance much more quickly than by 
teaching them through the method of making them repeat 
a number of times that [142] which I said to them. I was 
charmed to find that I was not mistaken, and that these 
characters which I had formed upon paper produced all the 
effect that I could wish, so that in a few days they learned 
without difficulty all of their prayers. I cannot express to you 
with what ardour these poor Indians competed against one 
another, with an emulation worthy of praise, as to which 
would be the most learned and most clever. It is true that 
it costs much time and trouble to form as many of them as 
they ask, and especially since I have enlarged the number 
in order to teach them all the prayers of the Church, with 
the sacred mysteries of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, [143] 
of the Baptism, of the Penitence and of the Eucharist. But 
indeed, what ought we not to do for God? And what 
matters it, I pray you, at what and in what manner we 
employ our time, provided that the Lord is glorified, and 
that one promotes with His glory the salvation of souls, by 
explaining with Christian simplicity the mysteries of our 
religion to sundry poor Indians who have spent sixty to 
eighty years without ever having once during their lives 
invoked the sacred name of the Lord? lt is by such means 
that these evangelical workers snatch away from the gates of 
Hell numbers of souls which would never have enjoyed a 
blissful eternity without the charitable aid of these generous 
missionaries. 


132 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


[144] As I have sought in this little formulary only the 
good of my Indians, and the readiest and easiest method for 
instructing them, I have used it always with so much the 
more pleasure because several persons of merit and virtue 
have been pleased, both orally and by letters, to exhort me to 
persevere. And they have even obliged me to send examples 
to them in France, in order to exhibit to the curious a new 
method of learning to read, and the way God makes use of 
the smallest things in order to manifest the glory of his holy 
name to these peoples of Gaspesia.! The approbation of 
Monseigneur de Saint Valier, at present Bishop of Quebec, 
has more than sufficiently authorised the use of them. And 
this worthy [145] prelate has acquired so much esteem for 
them, that after having recognised for himself their advantages 
and usefulness in the very arduous voyage which he made to 
la Cadie he was pleased to ask samples of them from the 
Reverend Father Moreau,® to whom I had communicated 
them several years before. His Grandeur received with 
pleasure, from this zealous missionary, our leaflets and our 
instructive characters, in order to give them to one of his 


* Other references to these characters, commonly called Micmac hiero- 
glyphics, occur on pages 28, 104, 129, 534 of our authors book, and their 
history is somewhat fully discussed in the Introduction to the present volume 
(pages 21-32). 

* This voyage was made in 1686, and is described in Monseigneur de Saint 
Valiers well-known book, Estat present de PE glise et de la Colonie Françoise 
dans la Nouvelle France, Paris, 1688. Some citations therefrom are given on 
later pages of the present volume (158, 180, 189). 

3 Father Moreau’s particular interest in this matter is explained by the 
fact that he also was a missionary to the Micmacs. He came to Canada, 
apparently, as one of the four priests who arrived in the autumn of 1671 
(first Establishment of the Faith, 11, 74); he served first at Three Rivers 
(cbid., 81, 96), and in 1675 went to Acadia where, with Beaubassin (Chignecto) 
as a centre, he ministered to Indians and French (zéid., 97). It was in 1680 
that he took our author’s place temporarily in the Percée mission, as this book 
shows (under page 553); and he was Father le Clercq s successor in the Baie des 
Chaleurs part of the mission at least, as records in the Palace of the Bishop 
of Quebec fully attest. He is also mentioned by our author on pages 182 and 
553 of his book. 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 133 


missionaries ; and I do not doubt that this good servant of 
God is receiving much aid from them in the instructions 
which he will give to the Indians of his mission. 

Our Gaspesians have so much veneration and respect for 
these characters that they scruple to throw them [146] into 
the fire. When these are torn or spoiled they bring the 
fragments to me. They are more religious, a hundred-fold, 
than the Iconoclasts who, through a sacrilegious impiety, 
broke the most sacred images. These people were even 
unable to view without scandal the madness of a young 
Indian woman who threw the characters into the fire, in 
vexation because I had excluded her from prayers on account 
of a considerable fault which she had committed, 

Her insult being too unusual and too scandalous to be 
overlooked among a people who were already commencing to 
have much veneration for the instructions of Christianity, I 
believed that I was bound to testify, through certain forms 
suitable to the genius [147] of the Indians, the resentment I 
had conceived against her act, in order that my silence might 
not give occasion to some other to do as much. 

I went then to her wigwam, where I: found her father, 
together with certain other Indians, who were much surprised 
to see me enter with a countenance which expressed the grief 
that I had in my heart. They begged me several times to 
tell them the subject thereof, which I pretended to conceal 
from them by my silence. They were astonished to see me 
rummaging in the cinders of their fire with as much diligence 
as if I had lost something of the utmost importance, and 
taking two or three pinches thereof into my handkerchief, 
whilst sighing in the Indian fashion and saying akahie, [148] 
akahié.* In leaving the wigwam, I said to him that they were 
not to be surprised at my silence, since my heart wept 


* This word, which our author writes A#£aia on page 538 of his book, 
is obviously the same as the modern Micmac Aaget’, which Rand gives as 
meaning “Alas” (English-Micmac Dictionary, 11). 


134 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


bitterly : that it shed tears of blood because his daughter 
had thrown into the fire the oukate guenne Kignamatinoër : 
that in truth I would appear little touched by the insult 
if this were only simple paper, but that I was inconsolable for 
the injury which she had done to the prayer of JESUS, who 
had been grievously offended by this scandalous action : and 
that, in fact, I would expose these ashes, which I believed to 
be those of my owkate guenne, at the door of the chapel, which 
his daughter should never enter more until she had washed 
them away with her tears, and until [149] with her grief she 
had blanched the handkerchief, which, by the blackness it had 
contracted, signalised evidently the enormity of an outrage 
which was capable of drawing the hatred and the anger of 
God upon the whole nation: and that, for my part, I had a 
mind to leave them, since I could not live if the prayer was 
not resuscitated which had been made to die in the fire. 

These words, pronounced in the manner in which it is 
necessary to speak to the Indians on such an occasion, had 
all the effect that I expected therefrom, for they all appeared 
as dismayed as if they believed that I had already permanently 
closed the door of the chapel, which they called the Wigwam 
of JESUS, and that I was absolutely resolved [150] to refuse 
Baptism to the Indians whom I had previously prepared to 
receive worthily the first of our Sacraments. They assembled 
all together and came in a crowd to implore me, in the name 
of the God whom I had announced to them, not to abandon 
them, saying to me that my annoyance in truth was justified, 
but that I knew very well this girl had no sense, and that 
in fact they would so arrange everything that she would make 
entire reparation for the fault she had committed. And, in 
fact, they compelled this Indian girl to come and find me 
very early the next day in order to testify to me in public, in 
the presence of all the Indians, the keen regret which she had 
in her soul for [151] having burned her Oukare guenne, in which 
was the prayer of JESUS, and her wish, as she told me, to 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 135 


make Him honourable amends and a reparation of honour, 
by a conduct entirely holy, and quite the opposite of the 
irregularities of her past life. She implored me, with all 
possible earnestness, to be willing to permit her to assist with 
the others at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, but I refused 
her this favour for some days in order thereby to make her 
better understand the scandal which she had brought upon 
all the nation. 

From this you will see the esteem in which the Indians 
hold my Oukate guenne Kignatimonoér, which we call, as I have 
already stated, papers or instructive characters. They have 
no less [152] admiration for our books, and especially for our 
letters, of which they are the carriers when we write to our 
friends. They suppose that there is some enchantment or 
jugglery in them, or that this letter has a mind, because, say 
they, it has the virtue of telling to him who receives it every- 
thing which is said and everything which is done, even the 
most hidden and most secret. 

Although our Indians exist in an ignorance so gross that, 
as we have said, they do not know either how to read or how 
to write, they have nevertheless some knowledge of the Great 
and the Little Bears, which they call, the first Mouhinne, and 
the second Mouhinchiche, which mean exactly in our language 
the [153] Great and the Little Bears! They say that the 


* These words are pure Micmac. Rand gives Aooin for “bear” (in his 
Dictionaries), while cAiche is the inseparable suffix, very commonly used, 
meaning “little.” Our author evidently believed that the Indians had inde- 
pendently named these constellations the Great and Little Bear, but one’s 
first thought must be that this were too remarkable a coincidence, and the 
Indians must have obtained the names from early fishermen or other 
Europeans. It appears, however, that the same idea and name for this 
constellation is very widespread among the American Indians, for which 
reason, and others, a modern student of the subject, Mr. Stansbury Hagar, 
who has examined the subject comparatively, is of opinion that the name is 
strictly aboriginal, and he gives a natural explanation of its origin (Journal of 
American Folk Lore, X111., 1900, 92). The three guards of the North Star are, 
of course, the stars @ and y of Ursa minor, still called the “ Guards of the Pole,” 
together with some smaller star of the same group. 


136 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


three guards of the North Star is a canoe in which three 
Indians are embarked to overtake this bear, but that un- 
fortunately they have not yet been able to catch it. 

They have much ingenuity in drawing upon bark a kind 
of map which marks exactly all the rivers and streams of a 
country of which they wish to make a representation. They 
mark all the places thereon exactly and so well that they make 
use of them successfully, and an Indian who possesses one 
makes long voyages without going astray. 

They know five kinds of winds ; that is to say, the North, 
the South, the North-east, the North-west, and the South- 
west! They have [154] so exact an idea that, provided they 
have the sun in view, they never wander from their route ; 
and they know all the rivers so exactly that, however slightly 
a certain wigwam may be indicated to them, though it be 
distant eighty to a hundred leagues, they find it at the place 
named, even though it is necessary to traverse very dense 
forests. But when night overtakes them, or when clouds 
hide the sun, then they would be really embarrassed were it 
not for some natural signs which they find upon certain trees 
—some moss or branches which incline to the north side and 
which serve them as guides on their voyages in default of 
the sun.” But so soon as darkness comes on they are at their 
wits’ end. [155] They reckon distances only by the points 
and capes which are found along the rivers or coasts. They 
count and measure them also by the length of time which they 
take in their voyages, and by the number of nights which they 
are obliged to sleep on the way, not counting either the day 
of their departure or that of their arrival. 


This sentence is evidently somewhat out of place, for the text before and 
after it belongs together. 

* These signs are more or less well known in our day, and are used to some 
extent by hunters. The tips of some evergreen trees are said to incline as 
a rule somewhat towards the east, while mosses and some other low growths 
tend to seek the damper and shadier, and therefore the north, side of a tree 
trunk on which they are growing. The subject is well discussed in H. Kephart’s 
Book of Camping and Woodcraft (New York, Outing Co., 1906, 20). 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 137 


They know how to count only up to the number of ten. 
Consequently when they wish to Say twenty, they say two 
times ten; to say thirty, they say three times ten, and so on 
for the rest. 

When they wish to express an extraordinary number they 
make use of the same expressions as our first [156] mission- 
aries—pointing to the leaves of the trees, the grains of sand, 
and the hairs of their heads—a mode of expression of which 
God himself has made use, when, in promising to Abraham 
a numerous posterity, he declared that he would raise up 
children unto him in number as great as the stars in the 
firmament and as the grains of sand upon the shores of the 
sea. David, also, found no better comparison, in order to 
indicate the number of his sins, than that of his hairs. It 
was also this manner of speech which certain of our Gaspesians 
who have visited France, have used on their return in order 
to indicate to their fellow-countrymen the great number of 
people [157] whom they had seen. 

They count the years by the winters, the months by the 
moons, the days by the nights, the hours of the morning in 
proportion as the sun advances into its meridian, and the 
hours of the afternoon according as it declines and approaches 
its setting. They give thirty days to all the moons, and 
regulate the year by certain natural observations which they 
make upon the course of the sun and the seasons. They 
say that the spring has come when the leaves begin to sprout, 
when the wild geese appear, when the fawns of moose attain 
to a certain size in the bellies of their mothers, and when 
the seals bear their young. They recognise that it is summer 
when the salmon [158] run up the rivers, and when the wild 
geese shed their plumage. They recognise that it is. the 
season of autumn when the waterfowl return from the north 
to the south. As for the winter, they mark its approach by 
the time when the cold becomes intense, when the snows are 
abundant upon the ground, and when the bears retire into 


138 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the hollows of the trees, from which they do not come forth 
until the spring, according to an account which we shall give 
thereof later.! 

Our Gaspesians, then, divide the year into four seasons, 
by four different periods. The Spring is called Paniah, the 
Summer Nibk, the Autumn Taoiiak, and the Winter Kesic.? 
They count only five moons of Summer and five of Winter 
for the entire year, as was [159] customary in old times 
among the Romans, before Julius Czsar, a year before his 
death, had divided it into twelve months. They confound 
one moon of the Spring with those of the Summer, and one 
of the Autumn with those of the Winter, since in fact it can 
truly be said, that there is little of Spring and of Autumn 
in Gaspesia, inasmuch as the passage is imperceptible there 
from cold to heat and from heat to cold, which is very 
rigorous. They have no regular weeks; if they make any such 
division it is by the first and the second quarter, the full and 
the wane of the moon. All their months have very expressive 
names. They begin the year with the Autumn, which they call 
Tkours ;° this expresses [160] that the rivers begin to freeze, 
and is properly the month of November. Bonodemeguiche,! 


* Yet he does not again mention the matter in his book. No doubt he 
intended to return to it in his chapter on the Hunting of the Gaspesians 
(Chapter XVIII.). 

? All of these words are still in use among the Micmacs, as shown by 
Rand’s English-Micmac Dictionary. Rand gives Spring (“Spring opens”) 
as Banedk' (page 249), implying that our authors word is misprinted from 
Paniak, Summer as Nip~k (page 258), Autumn as 7! ogwaak (page 27), implying 
that our authors word is misprinted from Tagiak, and Winter as Késik 
(page 283). 

* The modern Micmac equivalent for this word appears to be S£oo/s, which 
Rand gives (English-Micmac Dictionary, 181) for November. This seems the 
same word with the usual substitution of / for , and the 7'a misprint for S. 
Rand does not give its derivation, but the meaning assigned it by our author, 
which is no doubt correct, would connect it with kélche, “ to freeze,” while the 
prefixed S would stand for see, “a river.” 

* This word is given by Rand in the form Boondmooe-goos', with the same 
meaning, but applied to January (Firs¢ Reading Book in the Micmac Language, 
103). Since the Micmac name of the Tomcod, or Frost Fish, is Poondmoo 


IGNORANCE OF THE GASPESIANS 139 


which is that of December, signifies that the Tomcod ascends 
into the rivers ; they catch this fish with the line, making a 
hole in the ice. And it is the same way with the other 
months, each of which has its particular designation. 

(Rand, of. cit., 54), or, as our author writes it, onamon, the word Bonodeme- 
guiche is obviously misprinted—very likely for Bonoaemeguiche. 


A list of the Micmac names of all of the months is given by Rand, in the 
work cited, page 103. 


CHAPTER VIII 
On the Language of the Gaspesians 


HE Gaspesian language has nothing at all in 
common, in its expressions, any more than in the 
meaning of its words, with the languages of our 

Europe ; and it seems as if the confusion of tongues, which 
God of old originated [161] in order to destroy and utterly 
overthrow that famous and daring enterprise by which men 
planned nothing less than to unite Heaven to Earth by the 
building of the tower of Babel, did extend even to the 
numerous nations of Indians of New France, because, amidst 
an infinity of different tongues which prevail among all 
these peoples, our Gaspesians are distinguished from the 
Montagniez, Soquoqui, Abennaqui, Hurons, Algomquins, 
Iroquois, and other nations of this new world, by a language 
which is peculiar to them. 

In connection with its distinctive features we are able 
to say that the Gaspesian language is very [162] beautiful 
and very rich in its expressions.’ For it is not so sterile as 


1 This statement of our author is amply confirmed from other sources. 
Thus Abbé Manach, who knew Micmac well, is quoted as saying in 1760 that 
he “found so much excellence in it, that he was well persuaded that if the 
beauties of it were known in Europe, there would be seminaries erected for the 
propagation of it” (Murdoch, History of Nova Scotia, 11. 396). Dr. Silas 
Rand, in the Introduction to his Emglish-Micmac Dictionary, emphasises “ its 
copiousness, its regularity of declension and conjugation, its expressiveness, 
its simplicity of vocables, and its mellifluousness.” Compare also Rale’s very 
similar description of the closely allied Abnaki in the /eswit Relations (Thwaites’ 
edition, LXVII. 145). There is also much on the Micmac language in a work 
supposed to be by l’Abbé Maillard, Am Account of the Customs and Manners 
of the Micmacs, &c., London, 1758. ; 

Many there are, of whom the een ee this volume is one, who must regret 


LANGUAGE OF THE GASPESIANS 141 


the European languages, which have recourse to a frequent 
repetition of the same terms in order to express several 
different things. Each word of Gaspesian has its particular 
and specific significance ; this shows remarkably well in their 
speeches, which are always very elegant. 

This language has not a single bad accent. It is pro- 
nounced freely and very easily. It is not necessary to force 
it from the pit of the stomach, as are the languages of the 
Hurons, of the Swiss, or of the Germans. Our Indians 
agree with the Greeks and Latins in this, that they use always 
the singular, and almost never, [163] or at least very rarely, 
the plural, even when they speak to their missionaries, or to 
some other person of prominence. They express themselves 
by the word éir,‘ which means “thou,” whether it is the 
child speaking to its father, the wife to her husband, or the 
husband to his wife. 

They have much difficulty in pronouncing the letter 7, 
which as a rule they sound like /; thus, instead of saying 
“mon pere,” they say “mon pele.”? The sound of x is 
changed into ov; thus in order to say “vertu,” they will 
say “vertou.” 


that our authors chapter on the Gaspesian language is one of the shortest, 
instead of one of the longest, in the book. 

The various later works we possess upon the Gaspesian, that is, the 
Micmac language, by Maillard, Rand, and a few others, are described in full 
in J. C. Pilling’s admirable and exhaustive Bibliography of the Algonquian 
Languages (Washington, 1891). Of later students the most prominent is Rev. 
Father Pacifique, of the Micmac Mission of Sainte Anne de Restigouche, 
Quebec, who has published several small works in Micmac, and who edits a 
small monthly journal, 7he Mzcmac Messenger, printed chiefly in that tongue. 

1 In modern Micmac this word is Keeé, “‘thou” (Rand, English-Micmac 
Dictionary, 264), exactly the same word, with the usual substitution of 7 for Z. 
This use of the second person singular is well illustrated in various places in 
our author’s book, especially in the Indian speeches beginning respectively at 
pages 76, 179, 232, 317, 336, 345, 350, 382, 397, and 538. 

2 The Micmacs still have this difficulty with our letter 7, as I know from my 
own observation ; and they still solve it in the same way. The French, know- 
ing this peculiarity of theirs, usually represented their 7 sound by 7 and an 
instance thereof occurs in the preceding paragraph. 


142 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


The names that our Gaspesians give to one another, or 
that father and mother apply to their children, are all very 
full of significance. They imitate our first father Adam, who 
gave to all the [164] creatures names conformable to the 
qualities of their being. Those of our Indians express and 
indicate either the fine deeds, or the natural and predominant 
characteristics, of those who receive them, very much as 
among the Romans, whose names all had significance. Thus 
some were called Lucius, from having been born at the break 
of day ; others were called Cesar, because at the birth of the 
first of that name, the side of the mother was opened by an 
incision in order to give life to the child. Thus our Indians, 
if they are good hunters, are called Smagnis or Koucdedaoui,' 
which is equivalent to saying “Hawk,” and so on for the 
others. 


* An Indian of this name was our author’s companion on his laborious 
voyage from Nepisiguit to Miramichi in 1677, as shown at page 247 of his 
book. The word is evidently identical with the modern Micmac K: wedidowwe, 
name of the pigeon hawk (Rand, Exglish-Micmac Dictionary, 129). Com- 
parison of the words makes it seem likely that our author’s form is misprinted 
from Kouededaotii, and this view receives support from the fact that it is 
actually thus printed on page 265, though in other cases (pages 247, 264) it 
is spelled with the c as on this page. 

The other word Sywagnis 1 cannot find in modern Micmac in Rand’s works. 
It evidently means some kind of hawk, and the nearest approach thereto is 
Wiskiimagwadasoo-k, “the fish hawk” (Rand, First Reading Book in the Micmac 
Language, so). Turning now to the language of the Maliseets, many of whose 
words are very like those of the Micmacs, I find that the fish hawk is called 
2’-sé-me-kwes’ (Chamberlain, Maliseet Vocabulary, 35), which would be identical 
with smagnis if the ~ of the latter were misprinted from w, Accordingly, I 
believe this word was the Gaspesian name for the fish hawk, and should read 
smagwis ; it is apparently a form, dialectic or abbreviated, of the word above 
cited from Rand, 


[165] CHAPTER IX 


On the Religion of the Gaspesians 


HE Gaspesians, if we except those who have received 
the faith of JESUS CHRIST with their baptism, 
have never really known any deity, since they have 

lived down to our own day without temples, priests, sacrifices, 
and any indication of religion. Thus, if one may judge of 
the past by the present, it is easy to infer that if they have 
worshipped any deity at all, they have shown him so little 
veneration and respect that they have been in reality indifferent 
and unfaithful in the matter of religion. This, however 
[166], is not true with regard to the sun, which they have 
worshipped, and which has always been the constant object of 
their devotion, homage and adoration. They have believed 
that this luminous planet, which, by its wonderful power and 
its marvellous effects, constitutes the adornment and all the 
beauty of nature, was also the first author thereof, and that 
therefore they were obliged, out of gratitude, to hold all the 
sentiments of respect of which they were capable for a planet 
which did them so much good by its presence, and whose 
absence, during the darkness of the night, brought mourning 
to all nature. 

The worship which they offered to the sun was not like 
the sacrifice [167] of the Mexicans, who every year offered 
to their idols more than twenty thousand hearts of their little 
children ; nor was it like that of the Ethiopians, who blessed 
the sun on its rising, but who cursed it with a thousand 
imprecations upon its setting. 

More religious a hundred times than those foolish and 


144 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


cruel peoples, our Gaspesians used to come out regularly 
from their wigwams to salute the sun just when it began to 
dart its first morning rays, and they did the same also with- 
out fail at its setting; this latter time, in their opinion, 
was the most favourable in which these courtiers of the 
sun might hope to render it propitious to their vows, 
after having exhibited to it their necessities and their 
needs, 

[168] They performed no other ceremony than that of 
turning the face towards the sun. They commenced straight- 
way their worship by the ordinary greeting of the Gaspesians, 
which consists in saying three times, Ho, ho, ho, after which, 
while making profound obeisances with sundry movements 
of the hands above the head, they asked that it would grant 
their needs:* that it would guard their wives and their 
children : that it would give them the power to vanquish and 
overcome their enemies: that it would grant them a hunt 
rich in moose, beavers, martens, and otters, with a great catch 
of all kinds of fishes: finally they asked the preservation of 
their lives for a great number of years, [169] and a long line 
of posterity. 

Such is the custom I have seen observed by a certain aged 
man of that nation, who, in dying, took with him, as it seemed 
to me, all that was left of superstition and false worship in a 
religion badly enough observed ; for since him I have never 
seen nor heard of a Gaspesian who had performed that kind 
of ceremony. 

Such is the general idea I have formed of the religion of 
our Gaspesians. But so far as particulars are concerned, I 
have found among certain Indians, whom we call Cross- 


* Father Biard relates that a young juggler told him, “ When they were in 
great need he put on his sacred robe (for the Autmoins have a precious robe, 
expressly for their Orgies) and turning toward the East said, Niscaminou, 
hignemoty ninem marcodam, ‘Our sun, or our God, give us something to eat’; 
that after that they went hunting cheerfully and with good luck” (Jesuit 
Relations, Thwaites’ edition, III. 133). 


RELIGION OF THE GASPESIANS 145 


bearers,! sufficient evidence to make us conjecture, and even 
to believe, that these people have not been wholly deaf to 
the voice of the apostles, of which the [170] sound has 
reverberated through all the earth ; for among them, all 
pagans as they are, the Cross is held in singular veneration. 
They wear it pictured upon their clothes and upon their flesh : 
they hold it in their hands in all their voyages, whether by 
sea or by land: and finally they place it both outside and 
inside their wigwams, as a mark of honour which distinguishes 
them from the other nations of Canada. 

These Indians live at the River of Mizamichi,? which we 
have since honoured by the august title of Sainte-Croix, 
naming it amid the roar of cannon and a thousand acclama- 
tions of joy and of rejoicing as well from the French as the 
Indians. 

Since I consider that this [171] statement is one of 
the most important in my Relation, I have thought that, 
after the very exact investigation which I have made thereof 
during the dozen years that I have dwelt as a missionary 
among these peoples, I ought to satisfy the desire and request 
of sundry persons who have besought me to give this history 
to the world, and that I should make known to the public 
the origin of the worship of the Cross among these pagans, 
together with its interruption and its resumption. 

' The word in the original is Porte-Croix, which occurs also on the title- 
page of our author’s book. This subject of the origin of the worship of the 
Cross among the Indians of Miramichi is discussed fully in the Introduction 
to the present volume (pages 32-40). 

* Now called Miramichi. This name Sainte-Croix was of course suggested 
by our author. It appeared upon a few maps, but did not persist. The name 
was no doubt given at the time when Father le Clercq was there with Father 


Jumeau, as told in his book a few pages later, viz. 189-193. He mentions the 
matter again on page 246. 


[172] CHAPTER X 


On the Origin of the Worship of the Cross among those Gaspesians 
called Cross-bearers 


the manner in which our Indians say they have 

received the Cross, according to the tradition of 
their ancestors. They claim that, at a time when their 
country was afflicted with a very dangerous and deadly 
malady which had reduced them to an extreme destitution 
in every respect and had already sent many of them to their 
graves, certain old men of those whom they considered the 
best, the wisest, and the most influential, fell asleep, all 
overwhelmed [173] with weariness and despair at seeing 
a desolation so general and the impending ruin of the 
entire Gaspesian nation, unless it should promptly be 
rescued through the powerful aid of the sun, which they 
recognised, as we have already said, as their deity. It was, 
say they, in this sleep filled with bitterness that a man, 
beautiful as could be, appeared to them with a Cross in 
his hand. He told them to take heart, to go back to 
their homes, to make Crosses like that which were shown 
them, and to present these to the heads of families with the 
assurance that if they would receive the Crosses with respect 
they would find these without question the remedy for all 
their ills. [174] As the Indians believe in dreams, even 
to the extent of superstition, they did not neglect this one 
in their extreme need; consequently these good old men 
returned to the wigwams whence they had set out the 


previous day, and summoned a general assembly of all 
146 


Ï DO not know what judgment you will pass upon 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 147 


that remained of a dying nation, when all together resolved, 
by common consent, that all would receive with honour 
the sacred sign of the Cross, which was presented to them 
from heaven for making an end of their misery and a 
beginning of their happiness. And so it turned out in 
fact, for the sickness ended, and all the afflicted who used 
the Cross with respect were restored miraculously to health. 
In this they were more happy, a thousand- [175] fold, than 
the people of Bizance, whose city was almost wholly de- 
populated of its residents by the plague which had infected 
all Sicily and Calabria in the year seven hundred and forty- 
eight. History teaches us that certain blue and shining 
Crosses were to be seen on some people’s garments, and 
that all those who were thus marked died suddenly of the 
plague, to the great amazement of everybody. The Cross 
was not so fatal nor of so ill augury to our poor Gaspesians. 
It was much rather, in their country, like the rainbow, which 
God in old time displayed across the face of all the universe 
in order to comfort the human race with [176] the promise 
that He would not again inflict punishment by a second 
deluge. It was thus that the Cross stopped all at once 
this torrent of sickness and death which was desolating these 
people, and became to them a potent sign filled with a 
marvellous fertility of favours and benedictions. The 
miraculous advantages which they had received from it 
made them hope for others much more important in the 
future. This is why they all resolved not to settle any 
matter, nor to undertake any voyage, without the Cross. 
Accordingly, after the resolution taken in their council 
that they would always wear the Cross, without even except- 
ing the little children, not an Indian would ever dare to 
appear [177] before the others without having in his hand, 
on his skin, or on his garments this sacred sign of their 
salvation. And it came to pass that, if it became a question 
of deciding something of consequence concerning the nation, 


148 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


whether with regard to concluding peace or to declaring war 
against the enemies of the fatherland, the chief would call 
together all the elders, who came promptly td the council- 
place. When they were all assembled there, they would 
raise a Cross nine or ten feet high and would form a circle 
and take their places, each with his Cross in his hand, 
leaving that of the council in the midst of the assembly. 
Then the chief, beginning to speak, would introduce the 
subject for which he had summoned them to the council, 
and all [178] these Cross-bearers would express their opinions 
in order that suitable measures might be taken and a final 
decision reached upon the affair which was under consideration. 
Thus, if it was a question of sending a deputy to their 
neighbours, or to some other foreign nation, the chief would 
name, and would cause to enter the circle, that one of the 
young men whom he considered most suitable for the execu- 
tion of their project ; and after he had publicly told the 
young man the choice that had been made of his person for 
the matter that was communicated to him, the chief would 
draw from his bosom an especially fine Cross which he kept 
wrapped in the most precious material that he had at 
command. Showing it with reverence to all the assembly, 
he would make, by means of a [179] prepared speech, a 
recital of the favours and blessings which the whole Gas- 
pesian nation had derived from the assistance of the Cross. 
He would then order the deputy to approach and receive 
it with reverence, and, hanging it from his neck, would 
say to him: “Go ; take care of this Cross, which will pre- 
serve thee from all dangers among those to whom we 
send thee.” The elders, by their usual expressions of 
hoo, hoo, hoo, expressed approval of that which the chief 
had said, wishing all kinds of success to this deputy in the 
voyage he was about to undertake for the good of his 
nation. 

This ambassador, accordingly, would depart from the 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 149 


council with the Cross at his neck as the honourable symbol 
[180] and the mark of his ambassadorship. He would lay 
it aside only in the evening, and then in order to place it 
upon his head, in the thought that it would chase away all 
evil spirits during his repose. He guarded it always with 
care until the completion of his negotiation, after which he 
returned it into the hands of the chief with the same 
ceremonies with which he had received it in full council, 
where, before the whole assembly, he would make a report 
of the result of his voyage. 

In a word, they undertook nothing without the Cross. 
The chief himself carried it in his hand, as one carries a stick 
when he is walking upon snowshoes, and he stood it in the 
most honoured spot in his wigwam If they embarked upon 
the water [181] in their little bark canoes, they placed a Cross 
at each end thereof, believing sincerely that it would preserve 
them from shipwreck. 

Such were the feelings of esteem and veneration which 
our Gaspesians of old had for the Cross, and these feelings 
survive piously in the hearts of our Cross-bearers right down 
to our own day, since there is not a single one of them who 
does not wear it upon his clothes or upon his skin. The 
swaddling-clothes and the cradles of their infants are always 
adorned with it, while the barks of their wigwams, their 
canoes, and their snowshoes are all marked with it. The 
pregnant women work it in porcupine quills upon that part 
of their garment which is over the womb, in order [182] to 
place their offspring under the protection of the Cross. In 
fact, there is scarcely one of them who does not preserve 
very carefully in his privacy a little Cross made with wampum 
and beadwork, which he keeps and esteems much as we do 
the relics of the Saints, and even to such a degree that these 


* Our author relates, on page 328 of his book, that he actually found the 
Cross in this position of honour in the first wigwam of the Cross-bearers 
that he visited. 


150 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


people prefer it to all the richest and most precious things 
which they possess. 

An Indian woman, named Marie Joseph, whom Reverend 
Father Claude Moreau, the earliest ! of our missionaries, had 
baptized, affords a convincing proof thereof. Falsely alarmed, 
in common with the other Indians with whom she was en- 
camped, and believing that the Iroquois had invaded the [183] 
country in order to ravage for a third time the Gaspesian 
nation,” she embarked with very much haste in her birch 
canoe, in order to cross the river, and, having abandoned it to 
the will of the current, she lost herself purposely in the woods 
in order to escape the fury of her enemies. The hunger and 
need felt by this poor woman became so great that she con- 
sidered herself fortunate to find in these wastes some roots 
which served her for nourishment during the ten or twelve 
days of her wanderings. Overwhelmed with misfortune in 
this vast solitude, she had no other consolation than her 
Cross. She never parted with it, even when she was obliged 
to repass the river [184] by swimming, in order to reach the 
wigwams of the Indians, who believed she was dead. She 
preferred to forsake and leave the little she possessed rather 
than to abandon her Cross, which she held between her teeth. 


* That is, one of the earliest to come to Canada after the long exclusion of 
the Recollects. Compare the note under page 145 of our author’s book (page 
132 of the present volume). 

? Although there are many traditions as to the incursions of the Mohawks 
(Iroquois) into the country of the Micmacs, there is not, so far as I can find, 
any actual historical record thereof. Several of these Micmac traditions are 
given by Rand in his Legends of the Micmacs, (169, 200 and elsewhere). It 
is sometimes stated that the Restigouche (e.g. by Rand, of. cif., 200) or accord- 
ing to others, the Nepisiguit (e.g. by Cooney, in his’ History of Northern New 
Brunswick, 170) was at one time the boundary between Mohawks and 
Micmacs; and if Hale’s theory turns out to be true, that the tribe which Cartier 
found at Gaspé were not Micmacs but Huron-Iroquois, then there may be some 
historical basis for this statement. There isa legend that the l’Isle au Massacre 
near Bic took its name from a massacre there of Micmacs by Iroquois. The 
fear which the Micmacs had of the Mohawks is mentioned several times in the 
Jesuit Relations (Thwaites’ edition, XXVIII. 37, XLV. 73), and even persists 
to this day. 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 151 


She returned thus to the wigwams, saying that there was 
nothing more precious than the Cross, since it had preserved 
her from an infinity of dangers, had procured her all kinds of 
consolations in her misfortunes, and that, in a word, life would 
appear to her altogether without interest if she had to live 
without the Cross. 

The burial-places of these people are readily recognised by 
the Crosses which they place over their tombs! ; and their 
cemeteries, distinguished by this sign of salvation, appear 
more like those of [185] Christians than of Indians. This 
ceremony they observe as often as any one of the nation of 
the Cross-bearers dies, even if this happens at a distance of 
a hundred leagues from the place where their burial is usually 
made. 

The most important places. for fishing and hunting are 
marked by the crosses which they set up in the vicinity, and 
one is agreeably surprised, in voyaging through their country, 
to find from time to time upon the borders of the rivers, 
crosses with double and triple cross-pieces, like those of 
the Patriarchs. In a word, they value the Cross so highly 
that they order it to be interred with them in their coffins 
after death, in the belief that this Cross [186] will bear 
them company in the other world, and that they would not 
be recognised by their ancestors if they had not with them 
the symbol and honourable token which distinguishes the 
Cross-bearers from all the other Indians of New France.? 

Since this Gaspesian nation of the Cross-bearers has been 
almost wholly destroyed, as much by the war which they have 
waged with the Iroquois as by the maladies which have in- 
fected this land, and which, in three or four visitations, have 
caused the deaths of a very great number, these Indians have 

* This is reflected very clearly in Father Jumeau’s map, reproduced at 
page 11 of this volume. The many crosses on that map indicate, without 
doubt, the burial-places noticed by him in his wanderings with the Indians. 


* Additional and very important material upon this subject is given by our 
author in the next chapter, beginning at page 270. 


152 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


gradually relapsed from this first devotion of their ancestors. 
So true is it, that even the holiest and most religious practices, 
by a certain fatality attending human affairs, [187] suffer 
always much alteration if they are not animated and conserved 
by the same spirit which gave them birth. In brief, when I 
went into their country to commence my mission, I found 
some persons who had preserved only the shadow of the 
customs of their ancestors. They lacked respect for the 
Cross, and they had abolished the habit of meeting in Cross- 
Assemblies, those in which, with the Cross in the centre of 
the circle and of the Council as we have related, they decided, 
as a court of last resort, the affairs of the nation. Neverthe- 
less, we have laboured successfully to cause to be re-born in 
the hearts and minds of these Indians the love and esteem 
which they ought to preserve inviolably [188] for this sacred 
sign of their salvation. And Heaven has poured in abund- 
ance the plenitude of its blessings upon the zeal of Reverend 
Father Emanuel Jumeau,! our dear missionary colleague, who 


* Concerning Father Jumeau we know little more than our author tells us 
in this book. The date of his birth was unknown to Tanguay, who, however, 
places his death in December 1707 (Répertoire du Clergé Canadien). Tanguay 
States that Father Jumeau came to Canada in 1685, but he must have been 
there much earlier, as two pieces of evidence attest. First, Father Jumeau’s 
map, reproduced in this volume (page 11), is dated October 4, 1685, and there 
is no reason to question the correctness of this date. Now, although this 
map, with its wealth of new and accurate data which here appear for the first 
time, must for the most part have been simply compiled or copied by Father 
Jumeau from sources whose origin is still uncertain, it contains nevertheless 
material, especially as to the cross-bearer Indians, obviously added from his 
own observations, and such as implies a considerable previous knowledge of the 
country. The sources of Barnaby River (R. Chicudi), for example, are given 
with an accuracy which can hardly be derived from any source except personal 
observation during winter wanderings with the Indians; besides, there is the 
positive statement in the title of the map itself (given in the note on page 11 
of this volume). Second, as is well known and attested by documents (given 
in translation in the Codlections of the New Brunswick Historical Society, 111.21), 
in 1685 a grant for a mission at Miramichi was made by Richard Denys to the 
Seminary of Quebec, and, as Monseigneur de Saint Valier shows in his Æszat 
present de PE glise, 30, 46, Father Thury spent there the winter of 1685-86, if 
not the one preceding. Now it is very plain from various evidence that the 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 153 


has had the consolation of seeing our Gaspesians more devoted 
than ever to the worship of the Cross, after having occupied 
himself there devotedly with all the assiduity and the talent 
which God has given him for the conversion of these poor 
pagans. This good religious, whom I had previously inducted 
into the novitiate of our monastery of Arras, on the very day 
on which I had set out for Canada, had written me several 
times in order to testify to me the zeal which God had given 


mission which Fathers le Clercq and Jumeau made there together, as described 
in these pages, was earlier than that. Thus the contemporary Father le Tac, 
in his Æistoire Chronologigue, says that Fathers le Clercq and Jumeau were 
there “up to the time when M. Denys granted nine leagues of his lands to 
Messieurs of the Seminary of Quebec, who sent there M. Thury to continue the 
mission of the Recollects” (translation from page 39). Again, Richard Denys, 
in a recently published memoir of 1688 (Collections above cited, 36), says that he 
had maintained Recollects for nine years, but they had been removed by the 
Bishops of Quebec, and that another priest who had been there for two years 
had also been removed, as we know (from Monseigneur de Saint Valier’s Estaz 
present de l'Eglise, 108) Father Thury was in 1687. Father Jumeau therefore 
served on the Miramichi prior to 1685, and presumably for some years. Itis 
plain that he was not with Father le Clercq before the voyage to France in 
1680-81, nor was he with Father le Clercq on his return voyage in 1681. There- 
fore we may place the date of his arrival as probably in 1682. He may have 
revisited France, returning at the date mentioned by Tanguay. When removed 
from the Miramichi he evidently was assigned to I’Isle Dieu (Tanguay, of. 
cit.), and 1 am told by Fathers Hugolin and Odoric that in 1689-90 he was 
missionary at Rivière Ouelle and Saint-Anne-de-la-Grande-Anse, parishes 
below Quebec. His shipwreck in the autumn of 1689, and his presence at Isle 
Percée during the destruction of the settlement, are set forth by himself in his 
letter given earlier in our author’s book (6). 

To these scanty facts I may add certain others, trifling but not without 
interest. His name for a time was attached to the main entrance to Miramichi 
Bay, for itjappears as Passage Jumeau on his own map, and persisted at least 
until Bellin’s map of 1744, while upon Sayer’s English map of 1755 it is trans- 
lated as “Camel Passage”! A few years ago his name was applied to a 
prominent unnamed hill at the source of the Nepisiguit River, though it is yet 
too early to know whether it will come into use (Bulletin of the Natural History 
Society of New Brunswick, IV., 1899, 252). There isa facsimile of his autograph 
in PAbbé Casgrain’s Une Paroisse Canadienne au xvit S. zécle, page'87. Itisalso 
worth noting that Father Thury’s enthusiastic account of the good training of 
the Micmacs of Miramichi, as written to Monseigneur de Saint Valier (Estat 
present de PEglise, 46-50), is a great compliment to Fathers le Clercq and 
Jumeau, who had trained them. 


154 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


him for the salvation of souls, and that the greatest of all 
[189] consolations to him, as he told me, would be to die 
nobly in the midst of the woods and forests of Canada in 
preaching the gospel of JESUS CHRIST to the Indians. 
He revealed the desire which he had therefor to the Reverend 
Father Provincial, and after having obtained from him the 
approbation, which he asked with much fervour, he embarked 
at La Rochelle for Canada, and thus came to assist me in the 
toilsome and laborious work of the mission which I was 
making to our Cross-bearers. He learned the language in a 
short time, thanks to a dictionary thereof which I had com- 
posed, so that he was very soon in condition to instruct these 
pagans. 

However much inclination I had to remain longer* [190] 
with this amiable missionary, I was nevertheless obliged to 
deprive myself of this consolation, for I judged that it was 
more desirable for the glory of God that we separate. This 
was in order that I might render myself useful to sundry 
other Indians, who had supplicated me, through their ambas- 
sadors, to go among them to announce the gospel of JESUS 
CHRIST 

We therefore settled, by mutual consent, upon the day of 
our separation. The Cross-bearers, who had heard the news 
thereof, assembled at the chapel to take part in the prayers 
which we must make before our departure. They strove in 
emulation with one another to give me sincere evidences of 
their friendship, testifying to me their keen regret because I 
was leaving them. [191] Our Indians never left me, and 
whatever regret they had in their hearts, they concealed it 
nevertheless as well as they could, whether in order not to 
augment the distress that I myself felt in leaving them, or 

1 There is evidently a break in the narrative here, and something has been 
omitted, perhaps with the design of shortening the book. Our author is 
describing one of his visits to Miramichi, but there are no data, so far as I can 


discover, for fixing the date. It must, however, for reasons given in the 
preceding note, have been later than 1681 and earlier than 1685. 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 153 


because I promised that I should see them again as soon as 
I had completed the mission which I was just undertaking 
for the conversion of their brothers. 

Before we separated I made to them a prepared address, 
in which, after describing the trouble I had taken to instruct 
them in the maxims of Christianity, I testified to them that I 
did not wish any more agreeable acknowledgment thereof 
than the good use which they [192] would make of my 
instructions. I made them understand once more the bene- 
fit I had procured them in giving them a missionary as 
zealous for their salvation as Father Emanuel, and the strict 
obligation which they in particular were under to embrace 
and to preserve Christianity with more piety than the other 
Indians of this new world, because of that miraculous favour 
which they had received from heaven in preference to so 
many other nations, as the sign and the sacred pledge of 
their salvation. Finally, after having exhorted them with all 
my heart, by the merit of the Cross which I held in my hand, 
and which I embraced often with reverence, to be always 
faithful to God, and to have for their missionary [193] the 
Same consideration, respect, and friendship which they had 
held for myself, I implored Father Emanuel Jumeau, by all 
the most tender and touching things I could say to him, to 
persevere steadfastly in instructing them in the truths of our 
holy religion. It was necessary, at length, that we separate, 
after having implored the aid of heaven for the happy success 
of our missions. Accordingly I took leave of our French, 
and, accompanied by three Indians, I set out and slept at 
Mirmenaganne,' four leagues from the Fort of Monsieur 
Richard de Fronsac. 


* This is the Micmac name of the Northwest Miramichi. It is still in use 
by these Indians in the form J/elmenakun, which is evidently the same word 
with the usual substitution of 7 for 7. Ina deed of sale of land in this region 
made by Richard Denys in 1686 (printed in translation in the Collections of the 
New Brunswick Historical Society, 111., 1907, 25) it is spelled Muminagan, 
while the De Meulles’ map of the same year has Mimnagan, which later 


156 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


I heard with joy, fifteen days after my departure, through 
one of our Cross-bearers, that this dear missionary, having 
assembled as many of the Indians [194] as he could, 
had obliged them to make honourable amends to the Cross 
by rendering to it, through these people, a part of the honour 
of which the negligence of their ancestors had robbed it. 

The ceremony began at evening, at sunset, in the follow- 
ing manner. The father had a Cross erected like that which 
the forefathers of the Gaspesian nation were accustomed to 
plant in the midst of the place set aside for the holding of 
their council. He prostrated himself devoutly, with all the 
Indians, before this sacred sign of our salvation, and he 
intoned, in the Indian language, at the conclusion of the 
usual prayers, the Vexilla regis, which our Cross-bearers 
chanted alternately, [195] the men and the women, with 
a singular piety. After these exercises of devotion, everybody 
retired into the wigwam of the chief, where they could speak 
of nothing but the wonders of the Cross. I can even assert 
with truth that they were like the people of Israel who had 
lived long in the neglect and contempt of the commandments 
of the law, and who could not restrain their tears when the 
High Priest Helchias gave them a faithful recital of the 
blessings they had received from God, and of the just 
reproach of ingratitude in which they had lived so long 
without recognising His perfection and His greatness. 


became corrupted to Zinagua on French maps. It is without doubt the 
Manne of Monseigneur de Saint Valier’s description, reproduced on a later 
page (page 180). The name was applied to the entire Northwest Miramichi 
from Beaubears Island up to Portage River and beyond. Four leagues up its 
course from the Fort of Richard Denys de Fronsac would take one about to 
the abrupt turn which it makes to the north, and just in the angle an important 
old Indian camp ground is known. Here, accordingly, it is probable our 
author slept on the night he left the Fort. He was evidently on his way back 
to Nepisiguit by the usual portage route, which ran up this river and via 
Portage River and Gordon Brook (compare the map on page 175, and the 
note on page 166). In another place in his book (page 480) he refers to the 
beaver dams he met on this route. 


THE WORSHIP OF THE CROSS 197 


Likewise did all of our Cross-bearers melt into tears when 
the missionary father explained to them [1 96]the advantages 
and the blessings they had received from the Cross, the 
esteem and veneration with which it had been honoured by 
their ancestors, and the little care which they had them- 
selves so far taken to render it the worship which was 
legitimately its due. They all protested publicly, before 
they went to rest, that they were keenly touched with 
grief, and that the same sun which had been the witness 
of their ingratitude would be the witness also of the respect 
and the adoration which they would render publicly to the 
Cross. The night passed with these sentiments of devotion, 
and the next day, at daybreak, the father had his altar erected 
in a special wigwam, which the Indians [197] had arranged 
very suitably with branches of fir, and there he celebrated 
the Holy Mass, after which, all clothed as he was in his 
priestly robes, he distributed Crosses to all the Gaspesians 
present, even to the children. These Indians, by a holy 
emulation, which indicated visibly the approbation they 
gave to the zeal of their missionary, each and all prepared 
several fine Crosses, which they ornamented with beadwork, 
wampum, and their usual painting ; and they attached them 
at the two ends of their canoes in which they embarked, 
chanting devoutly the Vexilla regis. 

I leave the reader to judge of the elegance of this 
Gaspesian flotilla [198] which, by a pleasing variety of 
standards ornamented by these Crosses in different colours, 
exhibited in the movement of the water and the reflection of 
the sun a spectacle of the most ravishing description, which 
gave much pleasure to the French when they saw the Indians 
arriving with their missionary, all carrying in their hands this 
holy sign of their salvation. 

1 The coming of the Indians by water to the settlement of the French 


shows that mission and settlement were some distance apart, and perhaps 
across the river from one another. It fits, therefore, perfectly with the testimony 


158 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


It was in the year 1677, and the second after my arrival 
in Canada, that I began for the first time the mission of the 
Cross-bearers, under circumstances which you are going to 
learn in the relation of the arduous voyage which I made 
through the burnt woods, in order to preach to them the 
Gospel. This was in accord with the promise I had made to 
that effect to a [199] delegation which the chief of that nation 
had sent from the river of Sainte Croix to Nipisiquit, where 
I was, in order to petition me to go and instruct them. 


of Father Jumeau’s map of 1685, which marks a 2. de Mission on the south 
side of the Miramichi (near the modern site of Nelson, as shown on the maps 
at pages 11 and 179 of this volume), whereas it seems certain that the French 
settlement was on the north side, as shown by the same map. Still better on 
this point, and practically conclusive, is the testimony of a narrative of Father 
Thury, in the year 1685 or early 1686, as given in Bishop Saint Valier’s Estat 
present de l’Eglise of 1688, which reads thus in translation. “I had gone to 
the house of M. de Tronsac [z.e. Fronsac] over the ice to visit two sick persons. 
On my return, having found my route impracticable on account of a thaw 
which had intervened, it was necessary for me to make a great circuit, which 
did not allow me to arrive before dark near the wigwam to which I was 
returning. As it was necessary to cross the river, and as I had neither canoe 
nor means to float in the obscurity which prevailed, I bethought myself to call 
from the place where I was. My voice was recognised in the wigwam. Two 
children of the chief, without concerning themselves as to the danger, crossed 
to me upon the ice, and after having sounded the running water which was 
between us, one of them took to swimming in order to aid me, whilst I slid 
along a little tree which we had laid across, of which one end rested upon the 
ground and the other upon the ice. As soon as I had placed my feet on the 
earth, he and his brother took me under the armpits and;rather carried than 
led me to the other side between them, with a charity and a cheerfulness which 
I cannot express.” Father Thury’s narrative shows in other passages that he 
was residing where he made his mission. Taking all the evidence together, 
it seems reasonably certain that the old Miramichi mission at which Father 
le Clercq, Father Jumeau, and Father Thury all laboured, was on the south side 
of the Miramichi, near the modern village of Nelson. 


CHAPTER XI 


Account of the arduous Voyage of the Author on his way to 
announce the Faith to the Cross-bearer Gaspesians 


T is very true that it is only God alone who is able to 
alleviate, by the unction of His grace, the apostolic 
labours of the arduous missions of New France ; 

therefore, it must be frankly admitted, that all the forces of 
Nature would only serve to increase the difficulties of the 
missionaries, if the Cross of a [200] crucified God did not 
impart to them a part of that victorious power by which He 
triumphed gloriously over all which He suffered most harsh 
and most sorrowful in the shame of Calvary. It was also 
without doubt in this thought that the Apostle Saint Paul said 
that he could endure everything by the grace of Him who 
gave the power to attempt all things, and to accomplish all, 
for His glory and the salvation of souls. 

I have never had an experience more illustrative of this 
truth than in the voyage which I undertook in order to go 
to administer the sacraments to the French who lived with 
Monsieur Richard Denys de Fronsac? at Mizamichis, and to 

* Richard Denys, Sieur de Fronsac, looms large in the early history of this 
part of Canada. He was the son of Nicolas Denys, the long-time Governor 
and Proprietor of all the Coasts of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence from Gaspé to 
Canso, and author of the well-known Description geographique et historigue 

. et Histoire Naturelle . . . de l'Amerique septentrionale. A full biography 
of Richard Denys, based upon some nineteen documents, is contained in the 
Collections of the New Brunswick Historical Society, 111., 1907, 7-54, while a 
briefer account of him, especially in relation to his father’s work, is in the 
translation of Nicolas Denys’ book published in 1908 by the Champlain 


Society, pages 21-22. He was probably born at Saint Peters, Cape Breton, 
about 1655. On his father’s departure from Acadia to France in 1671 he was 
159 


160 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


preach the gospel to the Cross-bearer Indians [201] who had 
hardly ever heard anything at all concerning the mysteries of 
our holy religion. The charity which | ought to feel towards 
all the Indians of my mission urged me strongly to undertake 
the voyage, although it was in the winter, the most difficult 
and rigorous season ; and it seemed as if God had approved 
the plan when an Indian,” even when we expected it the least, 
arrived with his wife at Nipisiquit, and told me that in order 
to avoid certain discords which had arisen among the Gaspes- 
ians of Ristigouche, he had left that place with his wife and 
child to go to Mizamichis, in order to live there in peace with 
his acquaintances. Since this was [202] for me a sufficiently 
favourable opportunity, with a companionship which could be 
of very great aid in this journey, I requested him to put off 
his departure for a few days in order to allow me time and 
the satisfaction of baptizing some Indians, whom I had in- 
structed to receive the first and most necessary of our 
sacraments. Our Indian waited for me gladly. Monsieur 
Hainaut de Barbaucannes? wished also to join the party, 


made Lieutenant in his stead, and served in that capacity until his father’s 
death in 1688, after which he held the post upon his own account. He 
inherited the Seigniory of Miramichi from his father, and, about 1690, he 
bought from its grantee the great Seigniory of Nepisiguit, so that, as Father 
le Clercq states on page 205 of his book, he was in 1691 the Seignior-Proprietor 
thereof. He strove to promote the settlement of this region, and with some 
success. His principal establishment was at Miramichi at the Forks of that 
river, on a site which will be further discussed in a later note of this volume 
(page 178). But all of his activities were brought to a close with his death by 
shipwreck in 1691 at the age of about thirty-six. 

1 This Indian’s name was Koucdedaoiii, as our author tells us, with other 
facts about him, on page 247 of his book. 

2 This man, whose name is also spelled Enaud, Esnaud, Enault, and 
Esnault in various documents and local historical works, and whose full name 
was Philippe Enault, Sieur de Barbaucannes, was, next after the Denys, father 
and son, the most prominent early resident of this part of Canada. The informa- 
tion we possess about him is given in a biographical note in the Collections of 
the New Brunswick Historical Society, 111., 1907, 34. He was a physician, a 
native of Saumur, where he was born in 1651. He came out to Nepisiguit, 
apparently in the employ of Richard Denys, about 1676. He settled at the 
mouth of the river Nepisiguit, on the site of the present town of Bathurst, 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 161 


and offered in the most obliging manner to keep me company. 
We prepared for this purpose our provisions, which consisted 
of twenty-four small loaves of bread, five to six pounds of 
flour, three pounds of butter, and a little bark keg which 
held [203] two to three half gallons of brandy ; besides, I 
took as a precaution a box of hyacinth confection, which the 
Hospitalier nuns had given me before my departure from 
Quebec for Nipisiquit. 

Nipisiquit ! is one of the most charming places in all the 
great Bay of Saint Lawrence. It is distant only a dozen to 
fifteen leagues from Isle Percée. The land there js fertile 
and abounds in everything ; the air is pure and healthy. 
Three beautiful rivers which empty there form a very attrac- 
tive basin, whose waters lose themselves in the sea through 
a strait which makes and marks the entrance thereto. The 
Recollects of the Province of Aquitaine commenced there a 


where he had a grant of a league and a half square from Richard Denys, after- 
wards enlarged and confirmed by the Governor and Intendant at Quebec. He 
married an Indian woman and had several children, who, on his death, some 
time after 1690, appear to have scattered among the Indians. Thus both his 
family and his property rights lapsed and became extinct, though his name 
still lingers as that of a point in Nepisiguit 
Harbour. It is pleasing to find his character 
standing out so strongly and favourably 
in the pages which follow. 

* Now commonly written Nepisiguit. It 
was the name applied by the French to 
the fine basin which we now call Bathurst 
Harbour. It is a corrupted Micmac 
Indian name, from Winfekijawik, mean- 
ing “rough water,” their very appropriate 
name for the river, thence extended by 
the French to the Basin. It appears 
first in the Jesuit Relation of 1643 as 
Nepegigouit. Our authors description is 
accurate and none too laudatory. The 
place was also described appreciatively by 
Denys, who had an establishment there on 
Pointe au Père (Description, 1. 208, and the 
Champlain Society’s edition, page 213); and many a voyager and visitor 
since then has been charmed by its quiet and restful scenery. 





L 


162 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


mission [204] in 1620, and Father Bernardin,! one of those 
illustrious missionaries, died of hunger and fatigue in travers- 
ing the woods on the way from Miscou and Nipisiquit to the 
River Saint John in Acadia, where these Reverend Fathers 
had their principal establishment. The Reverend Capuchin 


1 A somewhat fuller account of the death of this missionary, with some 
difference of name and date, is given by our author in his other book, which 
reads thus: “The Reverend Father Sebastian had laboured there for three 
years when, in 1623, we learned at Quebec by two Indians the news of his 
death, This good religious had started from Miscou for St. John’s River, 
where the chief mission of the Recollects of his province had been established. 
He was overcome by misery and fatigue while traversing the woods and the 
great extent of country between Miscou and Port Royal, so that he perished of 
hunger after having holily exercised the apostolic ministry in the conversion of 
infidels. As he had visited our Fathers at Quebec and wintered there, our 
religious considered him in esteem and affection, as a member of our mission, 
and offered the usual suffrages for him at the Convent of our Lady of the 
Angels” (First Establishment of the Faith, Shea's translation, I. 200). An 
entirely independent account is given by Father le Tac, in his Æzs/0ire 
Chronologique (page 119), which, translated, states that in the winter of 1623 
“Father Bernardin, Recollect of the Province of Aquitaine, left Miscou in 
Acadia with the Indians who were going hunting, in order that he might 
instruct them ; the snows being found too deep and too soft, they could do no 
hunting, with the result that the Father and the majority of those who were 
conducting him, having nothing to eat, died of hunger. For three years this 
religious had made his mission among the Indians of Acadia, whose language 
he had well mastered, and whom he instructed with joy, as he had written the 
year previously to the Reverend Recollect Fathers at Quebec in complaining of 
certain Basques who came to trade without leave on the coast of Acadia, and 
who gave bad impressions of the French to the Indians of those coasts.” 

Unless the name is very badly misprinted in the /irst Establishment of 
the Faith, this missionary’s name was Father Sebastian Bernardin. Con- 
sidering how largely both Father le Tac and Father le Clercq drew from 
Father Sagard’s Histoire du Canada of 1636, one would expect to find some 
mention of Father Bernardin in that work. But I have not been able to 
find any such reference. It is a satisfaction to me, one not of his faith but 
an admirer of his spirit, thus to set forth all that we know of this devoted 
missionary as in some measure a tribute to his memory, But happily he has 
also a more striking monument, for his name, Bernardin, has been given to 
a prominent mountain at the source of the river Nepisiguit, near where he 
probably perished, and the name is coming into common use among the guides 
and others who visit that region (Budletin of the Natural History Society of 
New Brunswick, XV. 1899, 250). Nothing is known, however, of the site of 
the establishment he was attempting to reach on the River Saint John. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 163 


Fathers, and especially the Reverend Jesuit Fathers, have 
there employed their zeal and their charity for the conversion 
of the pagans. They have had a chapel built, dedicated to 
the Holy Virgin, and it is observed that one of the fathers, 
who had gone from that mission, left his hat upon the altar, 
saying that he would return to seek it when it pleased him ; 
this he did to make known that his order had the right of 
establishment [205] in this place! The Sieur Henaut de 
Barbaucannes cultivates the soil there with success, and 
harvests wheat more than sufficient for the support of his 
family. Monsieur Richard Denys de Fronsac is Seigneur- 
Proprietor of the place. 

It is well to know that it is needful to carry the necessaries 
of life when one departs in Canada from the French settle- 
ments, and when one undertakes any considerable voyage, 
since there are neither public-houses nor inns ; and since, in 
these vast forests, houses are never found in which to pass 
the night, one is obliged to sleep in the open air. Convinced 
as we were of this truth by our previous experience, [206] 
each one took his wrap, and shouldered his pack in which 
was a part of the provisions which we needed for the journey 
we had to make. 

All of our Gaspesians assisted devoutly at the prayers 
which we offered in the early morning to invoke the aid of 
the Guardian Angels of this country, and to ask of God the 
conversion of the Cross-bearer Indians to whom I was going, 
for the first time, to proclaim the truths of our holy religion. 
They did everything they could to induce me to spend the 
remainder of the winter with them, and to put off my 


* Nothing further is known of the mission of the Capuchin Fathers, but the 
Jesuits have given some account of their labours in their Re/ations. The sites 
of the various chapels (or of the chapel, if they were all one), are not known, 
though tradition, place nomenclature, and perhaps geographical probabilities, 
combine in pointing to Pointe au Pére, now Ferguson’s Point, on the west side 
of the harbour. The evidence is discussed in the Transactions of the Royal 
Soctety of Canada, V., 1899, ii. 299. 


164 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


departure to a more suitable and less rigorous season. But, 
in short, it was only right [207] to gratify the French and. 
the Indians of Mizamichis. The word of God is the spiritual 
food of souls ; it was essential, after four months of sojourn 
at Nipisiquit,! to distribute it to those who had so long awaited 
me in order to receive it. I made our Indians understand, 
therefore, that if they had so great a desire for the salvation 
of their brethren as they had testified to me, they ought to 
rejoice at the trouble I was going to take in order to give 
to those the same instructions which they themselves had 
received from my catechising, since I had no other purpose 
than to lead them, and to meet them all together, in heaven. 
These poor folk signified their approbation of my arguments 
and of my zeal by the expressions of approval usual [208] to 
that nation, and consented in the end to my departure under 
the promise that I gave to return among them at the opening 
of Spring. 

The wife of our Indian undertook the care of her little 
infant, whom I, before my departure from Nipisiquit, baptized 
and named Pierre, through a special design of Providence 
and the mercy of God, as will easily be understood at the end 
of the narrative of this arduous voyage.” 

We took each one his pack upon his shoulders, and set 

out upon our way, with snowshoes on our feet.? After four 
to five leagues of advance, the approach of evening obliged 


1 As the date of our author’s departure from Nepisiguit (as the note under 
page 184 of this volume will show), was on or about January 26, this mention 
of the length of his stay at Nepisiguit fixes the date of his arrival at that place 
as on or about September 26 (1676). 

? The allusion is explained on page 252 of his book. 

5 The day of their departure was January 26 (1677), or thereabouts, as 
shown by data given by our author on page 257 of his book (compare note on 
page 184 of this volume). 

The great local interest of this narrative of our author’s voyage has attracted 
the notice of New Brunswick students, and two annotated translations have 
been published—the first by Edward Jack (in condensed form), in a local 
newspaper, reprinted in Acadiensis, II. 107, and the second by myself in Hay’s 
Canadian History Readings (St. John, 1900), 271. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 165 


us to make a camp in which to pass the night. It was neces- 
sary, [209] in order to make this camp as comfortable as 
the country would permit, to dig a hollow four or five feet 
deep in the snow, which we had to throw out with our snow- 
shoes until we reached the ground; and this our Indian woman 
covered with branches of fir, all fresh and green, on which we 
lay during the night! Monsieur Henaut took the trouble, 
along with our Indian, to cut and collect the wood necessary 
to warm us ; and each one partook of his repast with as much 
content as if we had been in a good inn. The loss of our 
brandy which we suffered was the only thing to give us vexa- 
tion ; for, despite the [210] precaution we had taken to gum 
up well the little keg of bark, some small opening had been 
left through which the brandy had run out along the road 
without our knowing anything about it until we wished 
to take some after the meal. Only a very little remained, 
and that was divided immediately in order to console us for 
this discomfiture, and to put what was left beyond the reach 
of loss. It is a fact, nevertheless, that we were deprived of 
a great solace by the loss of this brandy ; for we found our- 
selves some time afterwards under conditions so trying that 
this liquor would have been without doubt of very great 
aid to us. But [211] we had to console ourselves for this 
vexatious adventure ; and we passed the first night, like all 
the others of our voyage, at the Sign of the Moon and of 
the Beautiful Star. 

The next morning, after having celebrated Holy Mass 
in a shelter which our party made for the purpose from poles 
covered with branches of fir, and after we had breakfasted 
and adjusted our packs, we continued our voyage, always 
ascending and following the shores of the River Nipisiquit, 
as far as the rapid commonly called Le Saut aux Loups 


* Of course, there was also a “lean-to” shelter, of poles and fir boughs, with 
the fire in front. Voyagers in the winter woods camp thus to this day, and in 
ample comfort. 


166 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Marins, which marks the separation of the two routes leading 
to Mizamichis—one shorter but more difficult through the 
burnt woods, and another, [212] longer but easier, by the 
river. The extreme desire I had to go without delay to 
our Cross-bearer Indians, in order there to commence the 
mission, made me decide so much the more easily to take 
the route by the burnt woods, which the Sieur Henaut and 
also the Indian had traversed a short time before ; and thus 
of one accord we left the river, which nevertheless would have 
spared us much trouble and fatigue had we followed it, as 
experience later made us know full well. 

In order that you may understand what these burnt woods 
are, I will tell you that the heavens, being one day all on fire, 
full of tempest and thunder which rumbled and made itself 
heard [213] in all parts, a thunderbolt fell at a time when the 


1 The name of the fall where they left the Nepisiguit means, translated, 
The Seal Falls. The name has vanished with no other record than this, and 
we have no data for determining its location except such as our narrative 
affords. There are several rapids and small falls along the lower Nepisiguit 
within a few leagues of the basin, but the most prominent by far is the Pabineau 
Falls, some twelve miles above our author’s probable starting point at Nepisi- 
guit. This distance would agree well with their four or five leagues of progress 
the first day, together with a short distance on the second. Moreover the 
vicinity of this fall, or a little above it, as the map on a later page (175) will 
show, would offer the most natural starting place for a direct land route to the 
Fort of Richard Denys de Fronsac, which stood at the main Forks of the 
Miramichi, a little above the present Newcastle. All geographical probability 
would indicate that this land route followed the watershed approximately along 
the course now taken by the Intercolonial Railway ; for not only would such a 
route be very direct, but it would avoid the many densely wooded small valleys, 
and would take advantage of many open and easily traversed barrens, which 
lie along that course. It is probable, therefore, almost to certainty, that the 
Saut aux Loups Marins was the Pabineau Falls, though it seems unlikely that 
the name could have been descriptive, since seals could hardly have ascended 
the many rapids and small falls below. 

The route from Nepisiguit to Miramichi by river, however, is perfectly well 
known, and has been fully described in local works (Zvamsactions of the Royal 
Society of Canada, V., 1899, ii. 255 and XII., 1906, ii. 99). It ascended the 
Nepisiguit to Gordon Brook, crossed by a portage from this stream to Portage 
River, and thence followed this stream and the easily navigable Northwest 
Miramichi down to the Fort de Fronsac, as shown by the map on page 175. 


+ 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 167 


dryness was extraordinary, and not merely set in flames all 
the woods and forests which lay between Mizamichis and 
Nipisiquit, but also burnt and consumed more than two 
hundred and fifty leagues of country in such a manner that 
nothing was to be seen except very tall and quite blackened 
trunks of trees, which showed in their frightful barrenness 
the evidence of a conflagration widespread and altogether 
astonishing. This great extent of country is always covered 
with snow during the winter, and nothing is to be seen there 
except young shoots and little bushes, which appear more like 
islands distant two or three leagues one from another than 
like the woods or forests of Canada. In a [214] word, this 
fire was so furious and so violent, that the flames darted and 
embraced, so to speak, from one bank of the river to the 
other. For this reason it results that the moose and beaver 
have reappeared there only a long time after this sinister 
accident. A matter which gives more trouble to the voyagers 
who traverse these burnt woods is that they cannot find places 
to camp under shelter from the wind, nor wood suitable for 
warming themselves.* It was, nevertheless, in these sad 
solitudes, and in these wastes, more awful a thousand times 
than those of stony Arabia, that we lost our way, because we 
undertook to follow the tracks of some Indians who were 
hunting beaver : for, wishing [215] to examine the windings 
and turnings of the Indians and of these animals, we took a 
wrong route, and departed from that which without doubt 


* This great woods’ fire, if correctly described, must have equalled or 
surpassed the great Miramichi fire, the greatest woods’ fire on record, which 
swept this region over a century and a half later (in 1825). A discussion of 
the limits of the latter fire is contained in the Bulletin of the Natural History 
Society of New Brunswick, V., 1906, 410, and there is mention of the former, 
in appropriate connection, in the same Au/letin, 1V., 1901, 435. Denys also 
mentions great woods’ fires, which he likewise attributes to lightning (Descrip- 
tion, II. 349). 

* Because, as I know from experience, the burnt and sapless trees, while 
still untouched by decay, are extremely hard to cut with the axe, and far 
inferior as camp fuel to the woodsman’s favourite green paper birch. 


168 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


was the most correct and certain. We marched three days 
continuously in the midst of these wastes, and with incredible 
trouble, to the extent that we were obliged to stop in order 
to rest from so much, so long, and so painful fatigue. 

The next day we continued our route with new difficulties, 
caused by a great abundance of snow which had fallen the 
preceding night, and which well nigh made us despair entirely ; 
for we were obliged to march from morning until evening in 
these snows, in which we [216] sank clear to the knees at 
every step we took. This march, extraordinarily painful and 
fatiguing, added to the dearth of provisions, there being no 
more than a small morsel of bread to eat each day, reduced 
us to extreme misery. Our Indian became tired out, and his 
wife with her little child aroused my compassion ; and I tell 
you frankly, for my part, that I was completely done out. 

The necessity, however, in which we were in every respect 
obliged us to continue our route, and it became necessarily 
march or die. Monsieur Henaut, Sieur de Barbaucannes, was 
the only one who had any more [217] courage left. He led 
the way ; our Indian followed him, with his wife next, and 
I remained the last of the company, as being the most wearied 
by the road, which, however, I found easier and less fatiguing 
than the others because it was beaten and opened out by 
those who preceded me, a fact which was without doubt of 
great aid to me, and gave me much comfort. 

Nevertheless, however hard this march was, I declare to 
you that it lost in my opinion a part of its rough and 
vexatious power through the hope and thought I had that 
we were approaching the River of Sainte-Croix! ; and there- 
fore it seemed to me frightful beyond [218] anything one 
can imagine, when the Sieur Henaut and the Indian told 
me that for three days we had been lost, that they no longer 
knew the route nor the way, and that it was necessary to 


1 That is, the Miramichi, to which our author himself gave the name of 
Sainte Croix. Consult the note under page 170 of his book. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 169 


abandon ourselves entirely to Providence and to go where- 
Soëver it might please God to conduct us. 

That news was the more dreadful to me since there was 
no chance of returning to Nipisiquit, because the snow which 
had fallen in great quantity since our departure had filled and 
covered all of our tracks. It was still snowing at the time, 
and we had, accordingly, to make a virtue of necessity and 
to march until night in order to find a place suitable [219] 
for camping. 

I do not know how to express to you here what our 
anxieties were at finding ourselves in the midst of these 
frightful wastes, lacking everything most necessary to life, 
overwhelmed with weakness and fatigue, in the most difficult 
and rigorous part of winter, without provisions, and what is 
most distressing, without a guide and without a road. As 
a climax to our misery, there were three days on which we 
had eaten nothing but a little piece of bread at evening, and 
this then failed us entirely ; so that, having been obliged 
to resort to the flour which our Indian had in his pack, we 
were reduced to throwing, morning and evening, two or 
[220] three handfuls into a pot of snow water, which we 
boiled; but this served rather to whiten the water than to 
nourish us. As my sole comfort, the Sieur Henaut told 
me that he had two pairs of Indian moccasins, with a fragment 
of dressed skin ; and that if it came to the worst we could 
broil or boil them, and eat them together. Judge from this 
whether we were not truly deserving of compassion. 

The night passed with new difficulties. A wind from the 
north-west, of an extraordinarily keen and penetrating coldness, 
well nigh froze us, because we had not been able to find wood 
enough to keep ourselves warm during the night ; so that, 
[221] in order not to die of cold in our camp, we left it 
before daylight, with suffering which cannot be imagined. 
I came near being swallowed up in a deep gulch which was 
covered with snow, from which they had much trouble and 


170 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


difficulty in drawing me out. I can even state that it would 
have been all up with me, if, by singular good luck, I had 
not struck against a large tree which was across the gulch ; 
and on this I remained awaiting the aid which they gave me 
in order that I might escape from this horrible danger, where 
I saw myself exposed within two fingers’ breadth of death. 

Scarcely was I a gun-shot from this precipice, when, wish- 
ing to cross a little river, one of my [222] snowshoes broke, 
and I fell into the water up to my waist. This obliged 
Monsieur Henaut and the Indian to seek promptly a place 
suitable for camping, and to make a fire to restore my warmth, 
because the cold commenced to grip me through my whole 
body. It was in this camp that the trifle of flour, which we 
had hitherto husbanded very carefully, was finished, as well 
as the bread ; and hunger drove us forth in the early morning 
to seek what Providence would give us. 

From that time I comprehended perfectly well our evident 
danger of dying in the woods from hunger, weakness, and 
misery, if the Lord did not soon give us the means to escape 
from them. [223] As I felt that my strength was com- 
mencing to leave me, and that I was nearly exhausted, I 
renewed the first resolutions with which I had undertaken 
this sad voyage, and I offered once more to our Lord from 
my heart the troubles and fatigues which I endured for His 
glory and for the atonement of my sins. The single thought 
of a JESUS-CHRIST, dying upon the cross abandoned 
by all the world, giving us an admirable example of that 
sacrifice of our lives which we ought to make for the salvation 
of souls, joined to the thoughts I had upon the death of Saint 
Francis Xavier, dying in his little cabin destitute of all human 
succour, filled me [224] with joy and consolation in the midst 
of my troubles. And it is true that I was then persuaded, 
better than ever, that God has a treasure of favours and 
benedictions which he reserves especially for the missionaries 
who trust and abandon themselves entirely to the loving care 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 171 


of His Providence amidst the most frightful dangers and 
perils of their missions and of their apostolic labours. 

We had marched the whole day, but had not advanced 
far, as much because of the extreme weakness to which I 
was reduced, as on account of the difficulties of the road, 
when, whilst I was entirely occupied by these agreeable and 
holy reflections, Monsieur Henaut and the Indian, who 
preceded us, gave a [225] cry of joy and of cheer for the 
happy discovery they had made of the very fresh track of 
an Indian who had passed that morning on his way a-hunting. 
They both came back to assure me that all our troubles would 
soon be ended by our happy arrival at the Fort of the River 
of Sainte-Croix, which they hoped we should reach very soon. 
I was not insensible, any more than the others, to the joy 
which this happy event brought me ; but, indeed, as there is 
no pleasure in the world so pure that there is not present 
some admixture of grief and anxiety, the satisfaction we had 
just received was impaired by the uncertainty [226] whether 
we ought to follow or to retrace the newly discovered tracks. 
For we were in doubt whether this Indian had merely gone 
hunting, or had commenced one of these considerable voyages 
over a long extent of country, which they often make during 
the winter in order to visit their friends. Uncertain of the 
route we ought to take, we resolved at all hazards to cross 
these tracks and to continue our former course, in the hope 
that God would be our guide and have pity on us. He 
heard our vows and our prayers ; our Lord, satisfied with our 
fatigues and troubles, condescended [227] to console us in 
a manner which made us admire the wonderful ways of His 
divine Providence. 

It is a custom usually observed among our Gaspesians 
never to return to camp at evening, or at least very rarely, by 
the same route by which they left it in the morning to go 
a-hunting. They take different routes in order to scour the 
country, and to explore a larger tract of land for evidences of 


172 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


moose and beavers. God allowed, however, this Indian, whose 
tracks we had seen, to return upon his route to the place 
where we had crossed his way. He was surprised at first, 
but, guessing from our manner of [228] marching that those 
who had just passed were extremely wearied, he resolved to 
follow us, and came after us to help as much as he could. A 
certain muffled noise, caused by the rattling of his snowshoes 
and the movement of the branches across which he had to 
walk, compelled me to turn my head to discover whence it 
proceeded. You can judge of the joy that I felt at seeing 
this charitable Gaspesian who was coming towards me, and 
who would show us our road, by what you should yourself 
feel in a similar situation ; mine was so great that I redoubled 
my pace, quite [229] exhausted as I was, to tell the news to 
those who preceded me. 

As the night was nearly upon us, and since, besides, we 
were weak and spiritless, he made us camp, and wished all by 
himself to undertake the trouble of cutting the wood necessary 
to warm us, and of putting the camp into condition for us to 
rest there. He made me a present of a partridge which he 
had killed in his hunting; and Providence sent him two 
others soon after, as a reward for the charity which he had 
bestowed upon us. They were perched in the branches of 
a fir, as is the usual habit of the partridges of Canada. He 
killed them both by one shot of his gun, and they were all 
three placed in the kettle [230] to serve as a supper for five 
persons, all wearied with travel and with hunger as we then were. 

Although the Indians are charitable beyond that which 
is supposed of them in Europe, nevertheless they look pretty 
often for entreaty when there is need of their aid, and especi- 
ally when they are convinced that one cannot do without their 
assistance. Ours was of this character ; knowing perfectly well 
of what value he was to us in the aiforttinate situation in 
which we found ourselves, he offered from time to time to act 
as our guide, but on condition, as he said, that we should give 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 173 


him two dozen blankets, a barrel of flour and three of Indian 
corn, [231] a dozen cloaks, ten guns, with some powder and 
lead, and a host of other things which he wished to possess, 
in return for replacing us upon the right road, and conducting 
us to his camp. It was much, I avow; but in fact it was very 
little to ask of men who would willingly have given everything 
in the world in order to get release from such a bad fix as that 
in which we found ourselves unfortunately immersed, and 
from which we should have had much trouble to escape with- 
out the aid of this Indian. 

The night passed a little more peacefully than those before 
it. It was necessary, however, to set out the next morning 
without taking any food. As our [232] little party was wait- 
ing until I had finished my Office, the Indian, who was acting 
as guide, becoming impatient because I remained so long a 
time kneeling in a place removed from the bustle of the camp, 
approached me, and, believing that I had some revelation, or 
had received the gift of prophecy, begged me in all seriousness 
to predict to him that which would happen to us during the 
day. “Thou speakest to God,” said he to me, “thou teachest 
the way of the sun, thou art a Patriarch, thou art clever, and 
it must be believed that he who has made everything will 
have granted thy prayer. Tell me then, whether to-day we 
shall kill many moose and beavers with which to feast thee 
after the many fatigues and miseries which thou [233] hast 
suffered up to this time.” 

I was surprised enough by this address, and having 
answered him that God had not vouchsafed me this favour, 
of which I considered myself wholly unworthy, I made him 
understand that God, being the one Father of all men, who 
refuses not even food to the ravens nor to the smallest beasts 
of the field, we must hope also that Providence would give us 
the wherewithal to subsist, since he never abandoned his ser- 
vants in their need, and that, if He made them suffer for a time 
in this world, it was in order to repay them eternally in Heaven. 


174 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Ejougouloumoüet, for that was the name of this Indian, 
who [234] was not yet baptized although he was fifty to sixty 
years old, could not understand these Christian truths. Pre- 
possessed solely by the thought which he had, that God spoke 
intimately to the Patriarchs, he expressed to me his dissatisfac- 
tion, especially after I had told him that I did not know any 
place where he could find beavers, bears, or moose and that in 
a word it was necessary to rely entirely upon the care of divine 
Providence. “I am then,” responded Ejougouloumotüet, 
“somewhat better than the Patriarchs, since God has spoken 
to me during my sleep, and has revealed to me that without 
fail, before it is midday, we shall kill moose and [235] beavers 
in abundance with which to feast ourselves. Let us start, and 
move on at once, and thou wilt see that the Indians have 
more cleverness than thou.” It was necessary to follow him, 
much more in the hope of finding something to eat in his 
cabin, whither we were going, than along the route which he 
obliged us to take in order to find his moose and his beavers, 
which a hunger-starved imagination made him expect to meet 
at any moment. Nevertheless, his hopes were vain and 
profitless, and he was in fact obliged to admit that he had 
been too credulous, and that for the future he would believe 
no more in visions or in dreams, to which all these Indians 
are attached, even to the verge of superstition. 

In order to confound his extravagant [236] credulity, and 
to convince him of the care which God takes of His servants, 
Providence permitted that when we expected it the least, 
about four o’clock in the afternoon, we found two large 
porcupines. These animals, which resemble rather closely the 
hedgehogs that are seen in France, were established in the 
hollow of a tree; from this they had eaten the bark, which 
served them as food. They have, as a rule, each its own 
den, and our Ejougouloumoüet was surprised, as we were, 
to see them thus living two together. One was taken 
straightway, and was loaded upon my shoulders to be taken 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 175 


to the Indian woman, who had already lighted a fire in order 
to [237] cook it in the kettle. We made a very good meal 
of it. The broth seemed to us as nutritious as a good 
consommé, and we experienced in real truth that the proverb 
is very true which says, there is no better sauce than a good 
appetite. We carried the other porcupine to the camp of our 


Indian, where we found eight persons, who showed plainly 


enough in their thin and wholly emaciated faces the paucity of 
nourishment they had taken, and the hunger that these poor 
wretches had endured for a month, whilst they had been 
encamped on the bank of a river where they caught trout in 
very small quantity. They had not more than five of these 


* Our author, unfortunately, does not supply data sufficient to permit his 
route to be followed in detail, though 
there are many of us, interested in 
local geography and history, who 
would gladly know it exactly. It 
seems wholly probable that his com- 
pany left the Nepisiguit at, or a little 
above, the Pabineau Falls, and took 
the watershed route as shown by 
the accompanying map. When Ejou- 
gouloumoiiet found them, they were 
two days’ journey from the Fort de x 


E K 
~ 
x 





RS Ss . 


. S{Pabinéau 
S | Feuis 
“on 
Q 4 
& \ 


‘ 
1 


Fronsac, which was at the Forks of at : 

Miramichi, and the second day’s ey Sy 

journey was, as the references to ae 

points and rocks sufficiently prove, À Fe 

along the main Miramichi itself. À HR 

Hence Ejougouloumoiiet’s camp must & ne “ins 
have been on the bank of that river gS oe 
or of some large branch thereof. Con- ae 








sidering that when lost they would 
very probably bear to the westward, 
where they knew the unmistakable 
river route lay, it is quite likely that 
this camp, a day’s journey from the 
Fort de Fronsac for their enfeebled 
state, was on thei Northwest Mir- | 
amichi not far up its north-and-south | 
part. On the other hand, if, totally 
lost, they had swung to the eastward, the river of the camp would have been 


& Le Fons 


a ee Miramichi RY 


4 =" Scale 
is Ke: 16 miles to Linch 


176 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


[328, ie. 238] as their entire provisions when we arrived 
among them. These were placed in the kettle with our 
porcupine, and we ate them all together. 

I was a good deal surprised to see a fine cross, embellished 
with beads, in the place of honour, and in the most important 
part of the camp, between the two wives which our Ejougou- 
loumotet possessed, one as his legitimate wife, and the other 
as his concubine, who had, said he, come miraculously from 
heaven to his aid at a time when he was abandoned by all the 
Indians, and cruelly afflicted with illness in the depths of the 
woods, he, his wife and his children, without any hope of 
human aid. [239] I took this cross respectfully between my 
hands in the presence of the entire company, and, finding in 
so beautiful a subject of piety a favourable opportunity to 
instruct these Indians, I made our Ejougouloumotet under- 
stand that it was the mark of the Christian, and the sacred 
sign of our salvation: that it condemned by its purity the 
criminal bigamy in which he had lived heretofore : and that 
in a word he must do one of two things, either leave his 
concubine or renounce his cross in good earnest. 

“If that is true,” answered this pagan, “I would prefer 
a thousand times to abandon not only the wife who comes 
from heaven, but also my true wife and even my children 
[240] rather than to abandon the Cross which I have received 
from my ancestors by title of inheritance and by birth- 
right. I wish ever to preserve it preciously as the honour- 
able symbol which distinguishes the Indians of Mizamichis 
from all the other nations of New France.” He promised 
me, accordingly, that he would leave this concubine, while 
at the same time the woman, perhaps secretly touched by 
the Bartibog, a famous river for trout, and the camp must have been near its 
mouth. But this seems to be as far as we can carry the identification. 

In my translation of the account of this voyage published in Hay’s Canadian 
History Readings, 1 suggested, and mapped, a different route, under the 


supposition, since found to be wrong, that the Fort de Fronsac was at Burnt 
Church. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 172 


the instructions which I had just given to those in the 
Camp, determined to return to her parents, and to have 
herself instructed in order to receive the Holy Baptism. 
This was indeed, without doubt, everything I could then 
hope from these poor barbarians. 

We left them in [241] this good resolution, and, gathering 
new strength from our weakness through the hope that we 
had of arriving that evening at Monsieur de Fronsac’s, we 
continued our journey. Scarcely had we made a half-league, 
when I was compelled to throw myself upon the snow because 
of a weakness of the heart and a dimness of vision which seized 
me, and from which I was able to recover only by aid of a 
dose of hyacinth confection, which was mixed with a little 
snow water in order that I might swallow it more easily. This 
remedy I was obliged to use for the rest of the journey, 
and it gave me the strength to follow, although with great 
difficulty, our little company which showed me the way. 

[242] The Sieur Henaut, whose strength and spirit I 
could never admire enough, encouraged me the best that he 
possibly could, assuring me, at each point of land or of rocks 
which we reached, that he saw the Habitation and the Fort of 
Monsieur de Fronsac, and that there remained but a little 
of our way to accomplish in order to be delivered wholly 
from our troubles and to be consoled for our hardships. But, 
in fact, if the belief I accorded his words forced me sometimes 
to redouble my pace in the hope with which I. flattered my- 
self of arriving very soon, my weariness was increased in 
proportion when, having turned several points, I beheld 
neither the Habitation nor [243] the Fort de Fronsac. As a 
result, I would not believe anything he told me later, even 
when he showed me the actual point we had been seeking 
since the morning. The hunger which I suffered kept me 
from yielding to any reason, and the weakness to which I 
was reduced left me no more strength than was required to 


drag myself under shelter from the wind in a rather pleasing 
M 


178 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


place, where I lay down upon the snow, begging the Sieur 
Henaut with all my heart to leave me alone, and to go on 
with his company to Monsieur de Fronsac’s. For, in fact,” 
I told him, “whether we are near or far matters not ; if we 
have as little of the route [244] to make as you say, then go 
quickly and reach the fort without any delay ; you will then 
send some of our Frenchmen in order to bring me pro- 
visions and to conduct me to Monsieur Denys de Fronsac’s. 
But if we are still a long way from it, as I believe, I declare 
to you that I cannot go farther.” Nothing that I could say 
to him had any effect in persuading him to go seek the rest 
of which he himself stood in very great need, and not 
for a single moment would he leave me. He encouraged me 
as well as he possibly could, and ordered the Indians to 
cut wood to warm us, [245] much preferring, as he told me, 
to remain in the camp where we were rather than to arrive a 
quarter of an hour before me at the dwelling. This little 
rest gave us new strength, and, deferring wholly through a 
reason of gratitude to the friendship and generosity of this 
faithful friend, I resolved to continue our route, so that 
finally, after having marched the space of a short half-league, 
we arrived in a storm of snow, which was falling in abundance, 
at the Fort and Habitation of Monsieur de Fronsac,’ who 


1 The journey, as can easily be computed from facts in the narrative, 
occupied about ten days (it is now made daily within two hours !); and the 
date of their arrival was February 5 (1677) or thereabouts, as our author 
incidentally indicates on page 257 of his book. 

The location of the Fort and Habitation of Fronsac, where Father le Clercq 
was so hospitably received, is not directly stated in any historical records, but 
it is settled practically beyond question by abundant circumstantial evidence, 
which is all discussed, in the biography of Richard Denys, in the Collections of 
the New Brunswick Historical Society, 111., 1907, 29. In brief, documents 
exist which locate it positively in the near vicinity of the Forks of the Mira- 
michi; Father Jumeau’s map, contemporary and accurate, places a flag, the 
conventional symbol for a settlement, on the point on the north side of the 
river opposite the passage at the west end of Beaubears Island, while all other 
historical facts we possess, and all probabilities connected with the situation 
as a good site for a trading post, are in perfect harmony with this location. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 179 


did everything he could to restore us and to console us for 
our hardships. We were soon visited there by our Cross- 
bearer Indians, who live usually at Mizamichiche [246] which 


The place is now an open field, sloping pleasantly to the water at a sandy and 
Stony point forming an ideal landing-place. No local tradition of a French 
establishment at this place exists, but that is completely explained by the 
prominence of the traditions con- 
nected with the presence of the 
French in this vicinity in the 
troubled days following the Expul- 
sion (1755-1759), and these have 
quite obliterated all earlier ones. oY Foti 
Any ruins or remains of the estab- = lewcastle 
lishment have long since been ey 
destroyed by the many build- 
ings and other works, including a 
ferry landing, which have since 
occupied the site, if indeed the 
actual ground on which the estab- 
lishment stood has not been 
washed away by the ever-encroach- 
ing sea. 

It is altogether likely that the 
establishment was demolished by 
the same privateers which de- 
stroyed the settlement at Isle 
Percée in 1690. This supposition 
derives support not only from 
general probabilities, but from the 
fact that Sieur Degré, who is known to have been commander there in absence 
of Richard Denys de Fronsac, is recorded to have “retired with the English 
of Boston” (Collections above cited, 36), and very likely he was one of the 
French renegades mentioned by our author on page 6 of his book. It is very 
probable, also, that the well-known tradition given by Cooney in his History 
of Northern New Brunswick and the District of Gaspé (35), the one in which 
a church was burnt by an English captain in reprisal for the murder of six of 
his men by Indians, really applied to this expedition and the destruction of 
this settlement, for it certainly and positively has no connection with the 
burning of Burnt Church in 1758 (Acadiensis, VIII., 1908, 274, and evidence 
still unpublished, but later to appear in the Co//ections above cited). 

Two other interesting contemporary references to this establishment exist. 
Richard Denys himself, in a memorial of 1688, writes that he “has built a fort 
of four bastions fortified with ten pieces of cannon of which four are of brass 
and six of iron, with the necessary balls, 16 hundredweight of powder, and 
in all 200 guns or muskets. He has built for himself a house of freestone, 


“4 a 
SJ 
ja 
a 
“3 WK 
JN Ë 
SE 





180 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


is a beautiful river,’ abounding in every kind of game and 
fish. It is distant about forty leagues from Isle Percée. The 
land there is rather fertile. We have since named it La 
Riviere de Sainte-Croix, in commemoration and to the 
honour of that sacred symbol of our redemption, which is 
held in remarkable veneration among these pagan people. 

The sorrowful accident which plunged us into the 
extremity of consternation, three or four days after our 
arrival, convinced us that we were in a land where the 
Cross, which, according to the tradition of their ancestors, 
had formerly overwhelmed the Indians with blessings, visited 
upon us instead much of its bitterness. [247] Our Indian 
woman, wife of Koucdedaoiui,’ with whom we had come from 
Nipisiquit, was encamped, in the absence of her husband, 
quite close to the Fort of Monsieur de Fronsac with an 


and he has also had another commenced for his men. . . . Four years ago he 
began to cultivate the land by hand, and it already produces a part of the 
grain, vegetables, fruits, grass, and other things which he requires. He 
expects this year to work it with oxen, and he has bought everything necessary 
for building a water-mill on his return” (Collections above cited, 38). Again 
Monseigneur de Saint Valier, afterwards Bishop of Quebec, who visited the 
establishment in 1686, thus writes of it in his book: “ Miramichy is a very 
pleasing place upon the Rivière de Manne, at a league from that of Sainte 
Croix. There is a fort of four bastions formed of stakes, and in this fort a 
house where M. de Tronsac [z.e. Fronsac] has his residence” (Estat present 
de l'Eglise, 1688, 85). The name Manne is no doubt an abbreviated form of 
that which our author calls /irmenaganne (page 193), the Indian name of 
the Northwest Miramichi. 

It is possible, finally, that this establishment was older than Richard Denys’ 
time, for his father appears to have had an establishment on the Miramichi 
before 1650, and it is quite probable that it was on the same advantageous 
site (Champlain Society's Denys, 11, 161, 200). 

1 The origin of this name, now written Miramichi, is uncertain. It is 
discussed in the Zransactions of the Royal Society of Canada, V11., 1899, ii. 54, 
and II., 1896, ii. 252. The current derivation from a Micmac name meaning 
“happy retreat” is certainly erroneous, and probably the word is not Indian 
at all. 

2 A somewhat more detailed mention of this re-naming is given by our 
author on page 170. 

5 In another place and connection, at page 164 of his book, our author 
explains the meaning of this name, viz. Pigeon-hawk. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 181 


Indian woman of her acquaintance, who had an infant at the 
breast. Through lack of birch bark they covered their camp 
with branches of fir, and they found it convenient to make 
use of straw to rest upon during the night. The cold was 
extreme, and its rigour was increased by a wind from the 
north-west which blew with all its force, so that these women 
were compelled to make a much larger fire than usual. They 
went quietly to sleep without any presentiment of the evil 
which [248] was coming upon them ; but scarcely had these 
two unfortunate Indian women closed their eyes when the 
fire caught in the straw, and, making its way to the branches 
of fir, it consumed and reduced to ashes the entire wigwam. 
I leave it to be imagined to what extremity these poor women 
were reduced when they saw themselves completely shut in 
and surrounded by flames. They uttered at once cries so 
piercing that these reached our ears almost as soon as they 
left their mouths. It is safe to say that they would never 
have escaped from this terrible conflagration if one of these 
two Indian women, preserving throughout a presence of mind 
admirable in so pressing a danger, [249] had not made an 
Opening in the wigwam, through which, all naked as she was, 
she threw herself, with her infant, into the midst of the snow. 
Her companion was not so prudent nor so fortunate. Almost 
immediately she lost her presence of mind, as well as her hope 
of saving herself, and, giving herself no further concern for 
her own life except for the sake of saving that of her dear 
infant which she held in her arms, she would not abandon it 
until her sight was obscured by a great burst of fire and flame, 
and she was compelled to let the child fall into the midst of 
the fire. It was a great piece of good fortune for her that she. 
found herself, although by chance, at the place through which 
her companion had saved herself with her little infant. A 
flickering light [250] which appeared at first before our eyes, 
together with the wailing and the groaning of these poor 
unfortunate wretches, made us understand and comprehend, 


182 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


almost at the same moment, the sorrowful accident which had 
happened. It was too piteous a sight for us to be content to 
remain only as simple spectators, as formerly was Nero at the 
burning of the city of Rome, or as was Alexander at that of 
Persepolis, which was reduced to ashes by the counsel of his 
concubines. We all rushed immediately to render such aid 
as we could. 

Never was the piety of Aineas, who carried Anchises from 
the conflagration of Troy, nor that of those three noble 
children who saved their father from the [251] fires of 
Vesuvius, better exemplified than in these poor mothers who 
had tried to save their children from these devouring flames. 
One was lying in the snow with her infant, the other was 
still at the door of the wigwam without power to come out 
therefrom, and she suffered a grief so keen that she did not 
heed the sparks and coals falling continually upon her flesh. 
Everybody knows that the fir is a tree full of resin, which 
some call turpentine ; and since, through the violence of the 
fire, this gum fell all in flame upon the body of this Indian 
woman, it is probable that she would have expired along with 
her son in this horrible torment, if Monsieur Henaut [252] 
had not, by strength of arm, rescued her from this sinister 
conflagration. 

[I entered the wigwam, which was still all on fire, in order to 
try to save her child ; but it was too late, for this little innocent 
was smothered in the flames and half roasted. He died, in 
fact, a moment later in my arms, leaving me no other comfort, 
among so many matters for grief, than that of having baptized 
him before my departure from Nipisiquit. Then, falling 
upon my knees with this precious burden, I adored, with 
feelings of profound submission, the loving conduct of 
Providence in saving the souls of His predestined, since it 
would have been absolutely [253] impossible for me to 
baptize this infant, who was the first victim which heaven 
received from the mission which I made to our Cross-bearers. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 183 


I myself laid out the body of this little angel, and it was 
solemnly rendered the usual honours in our chapel, in order to 
make the Indians see the respect and the veneration which 
the Holy Church preserves sacredly for all the children which 
die in innocence after their baptism. 

One cannot express the acute sorrow of this afflicted 
mother when she reflected upon the loss and the manner 
of death of an only son whom she dearly loved. Over- 
whelmed by grief and bitterness for the death of this dear 
[254] child, she closed her ears to everything that could be 
said to give her consolation in her misfortunes. She had a 
heart only for sighing, a tongue only for lamenting, eyes only 
for shedding tears, feet and hands only for stirring the coals 
and fumbling in the ashes in the effort to find there the one 
who was the principal cause of her grief. In a word, seized 
by a cruel despair, she would have strangled herself in our 
presence if she had not been prevented from executing her 
dastardly intention. 

The first transports are pardonable, because they remove 
us from, and deprive us of, the free use of reason. Also it 
must be admitted that our Indian woman appeared in some 
[255] manner excusable, since all her actions were much more 
those of a woman distracted and transported by the violence 
of her grief than of a reasonable person, and it can be said 
that she only came out of her transports at the time when she 
was in condition to reflect that her misfortune was without 
remedy. 

The Sieur Henaut, with his usual charity, took the care of 
dressing her wounds, and he would have cured them entirely 
if the ointments had not been lacking. In default of our 
remedies the Indians wished to apply some of theirs, which 
only served to reduce this poor woman to the point of death, 


1 Sieur Enault was a physician, as a valuable document printed in the 
Collections of the New Brunswick Historical Society (111., 1907, 34) informs us ; 
which fact, no doubt, explains our author’s evident confidence in his skill. 


184 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


whether because these Indian remedies were incompatible 
with our ointments [256] or because they delayed a little too 
long in making the first application. But the fact was that, 
after twenty-two days of suffering, the gangrene appeared in 
her wounds, and this produced a stench so horrible that no 
one could any longer approach her at all. 

Monsieur de Fronsac used every effort to prevent me 
from seeing her again. But, after all, it was more just to 
defer to the rules of charity than to human reasoning of 
expediency and policy, and I willed to continue my services 
to her, being unable to make up my mind to abandon her 
until her death. She had been baptized and named Marie 
by one of our missionaries. I had [257] prepared her for 
confession, so that, having always performed the duties of a 
good Christian, especially towards the end of her illness, she 
made a general confession of her sins the morning of Ash 
Wednesday, and died at evening, leaving me great hopes of 
her salvation. 

The body remained all night in the wigwam, and 
Monsieur de Fronsac would by no means permit me to 
watch, as I desired. Two Frenchmen and two Indians were 
assigned to remain near the deceased during the night. 
Ejougouloumotiet was one of the number. He, imagin- 
ing that the blessed taper was composed of moose’s grease, 
ate it all up. [258] We might readily have been amused 


* This mention of Ash Wednesday enables us to use certain data ‘of the 
earlier pages to fix the approximate date of our author’s voyage from Nepisi- 
guit to Miramichi. The unfortunate woman apparently died, for such is the 
implication of the text, very soon after the gangrene appeared in her wounds, 
and this was twenty-two days after the fire (as our author relates on the 
preceding page); the fire, in turn, occurred three or four days after their 
arrival from Nepisiguit (page 246). Hence they arrived at Miramichi some 
twenty-six days before Ash Wednesday. Now Ash Wednesday in 1677, as 
my friend Rev. Father Gallen of Florence, Mass., has ascertained for me, fell 
on March 3rd, which fixes the date of the arrival as on or about February 5th. 
Since the journey occupied about ten days (as shown by the note on page 178 
of this volume) they left Nepisiguit on or about January 26th. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 185 


thereby had we not been obliged to yield to the grief and 
the sadness which afflicted us as much as can be imagined. 

Although we endeavoured to transport the body to the 
usual cemetery, it was nevertheless necessary to make the 
grave in the wigwam itself, because it was impossible to 
approach the body on account of the infection and the 
stench which issued from it. This was even such that the 
Sieur Henaut, wishing to wipe his face with his handker- 
chief, was extremely surprised to see it soaked with a very 
blue and livid sweat, which indicated sufficiently the evident 
danger of catching there some contagious malady. She was 
buried in her wigwam [2 59] after I had blessed her tomb, and 
then we said the Holy Mass for the repose of her soul in our 
chapel, where all the French and Indians assisted with much 
devotion. 

Her husband, however, who knew nothing of all that had 
happened in his absence, returned from hunting two hours 
after we had buried this Indian woman. He lamented 
bitterly the death of his wife, and since he tenderly loved his 
child, he was much like another David, who asked every 
moment where was his dear Absalom. He often visited 
their tomb, and there one day, when on his knees, with 
hands and eyes raised towards [260] heaven, and his heart 
all rent with grief, he was heard to pronounce these words 
in the form of a prayer: “O great God, who governs 
the sun and the moon, who has created the moose, the 
otters, and the beavers, be appeased: be no more angry 
against me: and be satisfied with the misfortunes which 
overwhelm me. I had a wife; Thou hast taken her from 
me. I had a child that I loved even as myself ; but I have 
none any more, because Thou hast willed it. Is that not 
enough ? Grant me then for the future as much of good 
as now I endure of ill. Or, if Thou art not yet satisfied 
with that which I suffer in my heart, make me die as soon 
as possible, for it is impossible for me to live thus any 


186 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


longer.” [261] But, at length, as time is a wise physician 
who administers effective remedies to the keenest griefs, and 
as, besides, these people do not hold in high regard a man 
who grieves and is not consolable in even the most grievous 
accidents of human life, our Indian wished to give unmistak- 
able evidence of the control which he had over his feelings. 
Hence he assembled the Cross-bearers to the feast of the 
dead, which he gave them in accordance with the usual 
custom of the country. He commenced it by a speech which 
explained succinctly the reason for which he had assembled 
them. Then he added a kind of funeral oration, in which he 
described the fine qualities of his wife and everything that her 
[262] ancestors had done of most importance for the interests 
of the nation. At length he finished his discourse by pro- 
nouncing a eulogy on his son, claiming that he would have 
become some day a good hunter, a great warrior, and the 
worthy heir of the valour and the bravery of his father. 

A profound silence followed at once on this speech, and 
he stopped abruptly with his eyes fixed upon the earth as if 
he were plunged in the lowest of all the melancholies. This 
he did in order better to express the bitterness which he had 
in his heart because of the death of his wife and child. Then 
suddenly carrying his hand to his eyes, in order to wipe away 
some tears which he had shed before this assembly, he gave a 
cry of joy, and said, at the same [263] time, that if he had 
shed tears which he was unable to refuse to the dead persons 
whom he had loved so tenderly, he wished, nevertheless, to 
stop their flow in accord with the esteem which all the Indians 
had conceived for the greatness of his courage. He added 
that we were all mortal; that too much sadness and grief 
made Indians lose their spirit; and that, in fact, it was 
needful to console ourselves for all the grievous accidents 
which come to us in life, because He who has made all and 
who governs all things, has permitted it thus. 

All those assembled answered this speech by three or four 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 187 


whoops which they forced from the depths of their stomachs, 
saying, as usual [264] hé, hé, hé. It is thus that they express 
approval, as a rule, of the reasoning of the one who makes 
the speech. Our Koucdedaoti had no sooner received these 
public approvals, than he set himself to dancing his very best, 
and to chanting some songs of war and the chase, in order to 
testify to the assembly that he had banished from his heart 
all the regret, grief, and sadness he had previously felt. After 
this he drank a good dram of brandy and gave the rest of the 
bottle to the oldest men, to be distributed to the assembly 
with the sagamite! of the feast. 

It is a custom, generally observed by our Gaspesians, to 
reserve none at all of the things which have been in use 
by the sick when these [26 5] come to die, in order, say they, 
to remove so far as possible from before their eyes all objects 
which, as remembrances or memorials of their relatives and 
friends, could recall their troubles. They burn all the clothes 
which have been used by the deceased during life, or rather, 
they bury these with them, in order, say they, that the spirits 
of these things shall accompany their owners into the other 
world ; or else they present the things to strangers in grati- 
tude for the services which these may have rendered to the 
deceased. Koucdedaotii gave everything which his wife had 
possessed to the Indians who had aided her during her 
illness. He remained some days longer with us; but, at 
length, either because he grew weary of staying with [266] 
the French, or because he did not wish to remain longer in a 
place which was for him so sad, he decided to leave us and 
to abandon the River of Sainte-Croix. I remained there 
until spring in order to carry on the mission and to prepare 
the Cross-bearers to receive the principles and the elements of 
Christianity. 

It was not very difficult for me to find the subject for the 


* On the meaning of this word consult the note to page 89 (page 108 of this 
volume). 


188 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


first address which I was to make to these poor pagans. It 
was nearly the same as that of Saint Paul when he preached 
the Faith of JESUS-CHRIST for the first time in Athens to 
the Areopagites. 

This great Apostle, having viewed that famous inscription 
[267] which the Athenians had caused to be graven in letters 
of gold on the front of the temple which they had dedicated 
to the Unknown God, Ignoto Deo, took advantage of this 
opportunity to make them understand that this Unknown 
God to whom they rendered their homage and worship was 
the very same who had made Heaven and Earth ; who was 
made man in the womb of a Virgin, and who, by a supreme 
act of love, had been willing to die upon the Cross for 
the salvation of all the human race. He made them 
understand also that nature had given tokens of its resent- 
ment during the mortal agonies of His Calvary, and that 
even the sun, from grief thereat, had suffered an eclipse so 
extraordinary that one of the chief men of the Areopagus, at 
[268] sight of it, cried out that either the God of Nature must 
be in suffering, or that the mechanism of the world was going 
to dissolve. 

The usage of the Cross, and the honour which our 
Gaspesian pagans rendered to this sacred sign of our salva- 
tion, provided me with the same material for explaining to 
them the sacred mysteries, of which they were ignorant in 
the shades of their errors and their blindness. Accordingly, 
I made them understand that this Cross, which, by a special 
favour of heaven, they had been given to share, ought to 
lead them to the adoration and the worship of Him who had 
embraced it for love of us: that they had obligations even 
more strict than those of the other nations of New [269] 
France, to profess the faith of JESUS-CHRIST : and that 
to this end it was necessary for them to abandon their errors 
and to receive Baptism, without which they could not be 


saved. They appeared very well pleased and satisfied by this 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 189 


discourse, and promised me to follow exactly the charitable 
advice which I had given them; and they all protested 
openly that they were indeed sorry their ancestors had 
neglected for so long a time the worship of the God of the 
Cross. They offered me their little children, and begged me 
to baptize them in the interval while they themselves were 
being instructed sufficiently to receive it. 

I accorded this favour to five or six of these children, 
of which the eldest [270] of all was not over two years ; 
and I have this consolation, that four of these little innocents 
are happy at present in glory, having died in happiness some 
time after their Baptism. 

I leave to the reader the liberty of judging as he pleases 
as to the origin of the worship of the Cross among this pagan 
nation,” since I have no more solid foundation for persuading 
him of this truth than the testimony of the older Indians and 
of the French, which is confirmed by the Relation made of 
it by Monseigneur de Saint Vallier, now Bishop of Quebec. 


* The material which follows belongs logically with the preceding chapter, 
which is devoted to this subject of the worship of the cross among these Indians. 
It could well have been interpolated at page 186. 

* This Relation, which differs in some details from that of our author, is 
contained in Monseigneur de Saint Valier’s well-known book, Estat present 
de l'Eglise, of 1688, beginning at page 35. It reads thus in translation :— 

“It would be difficult to believe that this river, which is called Rivière 
de la Croix, had not been thus named by Christians. It is nevertheless true 
that it is not they who have given it this name. It derives it from certain 
Indians, who from time immemorial are called Cruciantaux, because they 
preserve among them a particular respect for the Cross, although there appears 
to be not a vestige of evidence from which it can be conjectured that they 
have ever known the mystery of it. It would be very curious to be able to 
go to the first origin of this worship, which they render without thinking of 
it, to the salvation sign of the redemption of men. But as excess in the 
drinking of brandy, of which they are as enamoured as are all the other 
Indians, has during some time past caused the death of all the old men and 
a great number of the young people, it is very difficult to find among them 
persons capable of informing us, with any kind of certainty, as to the truth 
of this. 

“If one trusts in the matter to one of the oldest men who was still living 
a few years ago, one will find without doubt something most remarkable 


190 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


This I wish the more to do since I proposed in this history 
to describe matters solely as I have known them during [271] 
all the time that I have made the mission among our Cross- 
bearer Gaspesians. 

Here, however, although in abstract, are some of the chief 
reasons which have compelled me to believe that the Cross 


in that which it has been possible to learn from him. This man, aged a 
hundred or a hundred and twenty years, questioned one day by M. de 
Fronsac, son of M. Denis, said that he had seen the first ship from Europe 
which had landed in their country; that before its arrival they had already 
among them the usage of the Cross; that this usage had not been brought 
to them by strangers ; and that everything he knew about it he had learned 
by tradition from his ancestors, This is then approximately how he explained 
himself. 

“¢A long time ago,’ said he, ‘our fathers were afflicted by a cruel famine 
which depopulated the nation. After having in vain invoked the demon 
through their juggleries, that is to say through their superstitious ceremonies, 
one of the oldest of them saw in a dream a young man who, in assuring him 
of their approaching deliverance through the virtue of the Cross, showed 
him three of these, of which he declared that one should serve them in public 
calamities, the other in deliberations and councils, and the third in voyages 
and perils. 

“On awakening he found nothing in his hands, but the image of these 
crosses remained so vividly impressed on his imagination that he immediately 
made some like those which he thought he had seen; and, relating to his 
children that which had occurred in his sleep, his family commenced from 
this time to place in the Cross that trust which communicated itself later to 
all the nation. 

“They all placed a cross of wood in one of the ends of their canoes, and 
wore upon their persons another of wampum which rested comfortably upon 
their breasts. Many wore one around the neck, and the pregnant women 
sewed one, made from red and blue stuff, upon that part of their garment 
which covered the womb, so as to place their progeny under the protection 
of the Cross. Finally, these poor folk, after having worn the Cross upon 
their bodies during their life, had it buried with them after death, or erected 
upon their tombs. The chief was distinguished from the commonalty in 
this, that he had a special one upon his shoulders adjoining that on his 
breast, and both had a border of porcupine quills dyed in red of the most 
vivid flame colour. Besides that, the three crosses of wood, each of two feet 
and a half in height, of which he used one in the front of his canoe for voyages, 
and the two others of which he set in the midst of his wigwam and at the 
door against perils and for councils, bore each as a mark of distinction three 
cross bars which were an ever present token of the vision of the three 
crosses,’” 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 191 


had been held in veneration among these barbarians before 
the first arrival of the French in their country. For, wishing 
one day to make these pagans admit that the missionaries who 
had preceded me had taught them the manner in which they 
ought to worship the Cross, the leading person said to me, 
Well now thou’ art 4 Patriarch, Thou wishest. that. we 
believe everything that thou tellest us, but thou art not 
willing to believe that which we tell thee. Thou art not 
yet forty years old,’ and for only two hast thou dwelt with 
the Indians; and yet thou [272] pretendest to know our 
maxims, our traditions, and our customs better than our 
ancestors who have taught them to us. Dost thou not still 
see every day the old man Quioudo, who is more than a 
hundred and twenty years old? He saw the first ship which 
landed in our country.” He has repeated to thee often that 
the Indians of Mizamichis have not received from strangers 
the use of the Cross, and that his own knowledge of it has 
been derived through tradition from his fathers, who lived 
for at least as long a time as he. Accordingly, thou canst 
judge whether we received it before the French came to our 
coasts. But if thou hast still any difficulty in yielding to 
this argument, here is another which ought to [273] convince 
thee entirely of the truth which thou holdest in doubt. Thou 
hast sense, since thou art a Patriarch and since thou speakest 

* The information about his age must have been given to the Indians by 
Father le Clercq himself, and must be accurate. This incident evidently 
occurred in 1677, on our author's first visit to Miramichi, as shown by the 
mention of two years’ residence among the Indians. It therefore fixes the 
date of our authors birth as after 1637. But as the “forty years” is evidently 
a round number, such as appears always to have been used by the Indians 
in connection with expression of the ages of people, it does not necessarily 
mean that Father le Clercq was just under forty. As a whole, therefore, the 
present statement is consistent with the testimony of the census of 1681, which, 
as shown in the Introduction to this volume (page 3), fixes the date of our 
author’s birth as 1640. 

* Even if Quioudo’s age is not exaggerated, he did not see the first ship, 
for this was in 1677, and Cartier was on this coast over one hundred and forty 
years earlier. 


192 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


with God. Thou knowest that the nation of the Gaspesians 
extends from the Cape des Rosiers as far as Cape Breton : 
thou art not ignorant of the fact that the Indians of Risti- 
gouche are our brothers and our compatriots, who speak the 
same language as ourselves : thou hast left them to come 
to see us!: thou hast instructed them: thou hast seen the 
old men who have been baptized by missionaries other than 
thee, although, nevertheless, we have been unfortunately 
deprived of this good fortune up to the present? If, 
then, the Cross is the sacred symbol which distinguishes 
the Christians from the pagans, as thou hast taught us, 
tell us why the [274] Patriarchs should have given the 
usage of the Cross to us in preference to our brothers of 
Ristigouche, whom they have baptized but who never- 
theless have not had the symbol of the Christian in 
veneration always, as have our ancestors who have never 
received Baptism? Thou seest then plainly that it is not 
from the missionaries that we have obtained the mystery 
of the Cross.” 

It will be said that this reasoning is savage. That is true, 
I admit, but it is not for that reason less persuasive nor less 
convincing. For it is a fact that the Indians of Ristigouche 
are baptized, and that nevertheless they do not wear the 
Cross, but the figure of a salmon, which in old times they 
hung from the neck as [275] the mark of honour of their 
country. For it is to be noted that it has always been the 
custom of all our Gaspesians to wear some particular figures, 
which are somewhat like coats of arms, to distinguish them 


1 This shows that our author had been at Restigouche in the summer of 
1676, since the remainder of his time in his mission is otherwise accounted 
for. 

? This statement is incorrect, at least in so far as it implies that mission- 
aries had not laboured among the Indians of Miramichi. Aside from less 
definite information, we have the positive statement that in 1646 Father Martin 
Lyonnes held a mission in the Bay of Miramichi (/esuz¢ Relations, Thwaites’ 
edition, XXX. 143). 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 193 


from the other Indians, in accordance with the different places 
where they ordinarily live.! 

That is everything which I have been able to learn as to 
the origin of the worship of the Cross, and all that we have 
done to procure its re-establishment among these peoples, who 
have never had a perfect knowledge of any divinity, but have 
always been in the past, like the majority of them are to-day, 
indifferent in the matter of religion. 

It is true that a number of our Gaspesians wish at present 
to be instructed, asking [276] Baptism ; and they even seem 
on the surface to be pretty good Christians after having been 
baptized. They are zealous for the usual morning and even- 
ing prayers, modest in the churches, and given to confessing 
their sins in order to approach worthily the Holy Communion. 
But it can be said that the number is very small of those who 
live according to the rules of Christianity, and who do not 
fall back into the irregularities of a brutal and wild life, which 
they do either because of the natural insensibility of these 
people to matters concerning their salvation, or by reason 
of drunkenness, of their delusions, of their superstitions, and 
other considerable defects to which they are greatly addicted. 
Hence it comes about that although several [2 77] missionaries 
have laboured greatly for the conversion of these pagans, 
nevertheless one never observes there, any more than amon 
the other Indian nations of New France, any solidly estab- 
lished Christianity. And that is perhaps the reason why the 
Reverend Jesuit Fathers, who have cultivated with so much 
fervour and charity the missions which they had formerly at 
Cape Breton, Miscou, and Nipisiguit,? where our Gaspesians 

* Our author refers here to the totem marks worn by the different Indian 
tribes ; and the fact that he thus makes the cross the totem of the Miramichi 


division of the Micmacs may explain the origin of their respect for the sign. 
Compare the discussion of the subject in the Introduction to this volume 
(pages 32-40). 

* The full narratives of these missions have happily been preserved in the 
Relations of the Jesuit Fathers, and the reader may very easily follow them 
through the superb edition of Thwaites. 

N 


194 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


still reside to-day, have found it best to abandon them in 
order to establish others among more distant nations situated 
on the head of the river of Saint Lawrence, in the hope of 
making more considerable progress there, and this, further- 
more, despite the fact that according to the testimony of these 
Reverend [278] Fathers, the Gaspesians were the most docile 
of all the Indians of New France, and the most susceptible 
to the instructions of Christianity. 

It is true that the slight progress which I had made in 
the four years that I had laboured for the conversion of 
these peoples with as much application as was possible to 
me, added to a keen regret in not finding all the disposition 
that I desired on the part of my Gaspesians, of whom the 
majority, notwithstanding the indefatigable labours of so many 
illustrious and zealous missionaries who had preceded me, 
were Christians only in appearance, made me hesitate whether 
to abandon the work. For I had no reason to hope from it 
any more fortunate [279] success. However, in order not 
to be precipitate in an affair of such great consequence, I 
asked the Holy Spirit for the knowledge which was necessary 
in order that I might know what was the will of God, to 
which I might wholly yield myself. 

I consulted the most enlightened persons, and especially 
the Reverend Father Valentin le Roux, our Superior, as well 
as God himself; and I can say with truth that the resolution 
which he communicated to me in my mission, served me as a 
guide, and induced me to remain there for the space of eight 
years ‘longer in order to cultivate this vineyard of the Lord. 
Here are the exact words of his letter : '— 


I have received a very keen joy in learning through your 


two letters, [280] one of the fifteenth of April, the other of the 


1 Its date is not given, but incidental evidence shows that it was written 
in 1679 after 6th July; consult the notes to page 303 of our authors book 
(page 204 of this volume). 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 195 


eighth of May, of the continuance of your health in the midst 
of the apostolic labours in which you employ your zeal with so 
much success and edification. It is true that in this extreme 
pleasure which I have had in receiving your letters, caused by 
that preference of esteem which I have for you personally and 
by the singular affection which I have for you, I do not know 
that I have ever received a keener grief since I have been in 
Canada than when I saw in one place in your last the intention 
which you have to leave your post, and even to return to France. 

I confess to you, my very dear Father, that amidst a thousand 
mortifications which I receive daily, and which seem inseparable 
from my ministry, you are [281] the person upon whom I had 
placed the most reliance. The resolution which I had observed 
in you last year, to make a perpetual sacrifice of your labours 
to our ancient missions, which to-day are finding a new birth 
through a special direction of Providence, and that unction of 
grace which seemed to me to be in you, consoled me infinitely, 
I have thanked God for it a thousand times since your departure, 
imploring him daily at the foot of his altars to cover you with 
his blessings. I saw also that our other fathers had the same 
intention, and I founded thereon my plans and my hopes for 
the glory of the Lord. I believed these intentions more sure 
and more certain on your part than on that of all the others. 
But I understand that my sins render me unworthy of this 
[282] consolation. To them I attribute this change which appears 
in you. I do not deserve to see our missions flourish in my 
time—missions of which the success depends solely upon the 
Jirmness and the perseverance of our religious. In that, my 
very dear Father, you will be always the master of your own 
fate. I reserve to myself only the right to explain, to exhort, 

* This phrase, which is repeated on pages 298 and 301, would imply that 
Father le Clercq and his Superior had met the previous year (1678), which in 
turn would imply that our author had then visited Quebec. It might equally 
be inferred, from these words alone, that his Superior had visited our author 


in his mission, but an expression a few lines later, viz. “since your departure” 
shows that the former interpretation is correct. 


196 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA | 


to pray, and to implore on behalf of God, leaving after that an 
entire liberty to the religious, when, notwithstanding the in- 
sistent prayers of their Superior and friend, which represents 
the command of God, and despite the necessity 1n which our 
missions now are, they may desire to leave the work. For the 
sacrifice must be free and voluntary. 

But nevertheless, my dear Father, consider, I beg you, the 
example of Jusus-Curist, that first missionary [283] of the 
world, of whom we ought to be the imitators, and to whom we 
ought to make return, through the persons of our brothers, for 
all which he has done for us and for them in coming to enlighten 
us as to the ways of salvation, through labours and continual 
obstacles. His mission has been permanent, and when once he 
had commenced it, he persevered therein all the rest of his life, 
and he consummated it by the sacrifice of his own blood. Et 
nos debemus pro fratribus nostris animas ponere. This is 
the height to which we ought to rise in order to render ourselves 
praiseworthy before him through our ministry ; and although 
through his death he has entered into glory, this missionary 
does not cease to exercise still the same offices. He continues 
every day a kind of mission, in descending upon our altars, to 
which he is attached with an inviolable constancy. [284] He 
fills the functions thereof every moment through his tnward 
grace and through the cares of a father’s providence over his 
church. Ecce ego vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem 
sæculi. Such 1s the zeal of perseverance by which the Apostles 
and all apostolic men are controlled, and which will bear before 
God the evidence of the inviolable love that we will have for 
him. If the Apostles had been limited to a certain number of 
years, if they had been elevated into missionaries for thirty- 
six months, the Evangelical truth would not have had so much 


1 This expression would appear to mean that this was the length of time 
our author had then served as missionary. Since his labours among the 
Indians really began in the spring of 1676, it would not exceed a liberal thirty- 
six months to the time when this letter was written. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 197 


success in the conversion of the world. They made of their work a 
vow and an inviolable necessity, and they never gave it up whilst 
they had a breath of life. Their exile from their native land 
never caused them regret, and in this they followed the example 
[285] of the Son of God who had left bis native land in order 
to come into the world. Exivi à patre, & veni in mundum. 
Those inaccomplishable labours, hunger, poverty, persecutions, 
scorn, gibbets, wheels, ingratitude, and even the smallness of 
success for their troubles, have not rebuffed them. On the 
contrary, all these served only to inflame their zeal that they 
might acquit themselves in their mission with more diligence, 
in order to complete their course and the ministry of the apostolic 
word which they had received from God. What devotion would 
they not have given to the conversion of this new world which 
was then unknown, and of which God has destined us to be the 
Apostles?  Posuit tanquam morti destinatos. And what 
reproach will God not make of you some day, for having with- 
drawn the sickle [286] from the harvest, almost as soon as you 
had placed it there? What account would you miss rendering 
to God for so many souls which would have perished through 
lack of your having persevered to announce to them the word 
of God, or for having sown the seed and afterward not having 
cultivated it? What ingratitude on your part to leave souls to 
perish for which Jesus-Curist has died, for want of giving the 
same devotion which Jrsus-Curist has given for us even to his 
death? Perit in tua scientia frater pro quo Christus mortuus 
est. You are not ignorant, my very dear Father, that because 
of the diversity of tongues our missions are no more than bare 
amusements if one does not fix himself for some years in the 
principal ones. Two or three years are necessary to a religious 
before he is [287] really prepared to make himself understood ; 
and if it 1s necessary to transfer him after that we shall have 
expended much labour uselessly, and we should be missionaries 
in name but not in fact. The heretics of New England, who are 
at your doors, would confound you on this point ; and I do not 


198 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


know what we could answer to God when he would reproach us 
for the little concern we should have for bis glory. It 1s in 
fact a question, my dear Father, of establishing, or rather of 
re-establishing our missions, since they are as yet only com- 
mencing to move after an interval of forty years. It 1s a ques- 
tion of setting an example to those who will come after us; and 
if we place these affairs upon a basis of coming here only 1n 
passing, shall we not be responsible for the paucity of zeal of 
the others who act in [288] imitation of us? If we had the 
gift of tongues, as formerly the Apostles had, we would have some 
excuse in saying that another would serve as well as ourselves 
in carrying on a mission; but since God does not give us thts 
favour, he desires from us that our zeal shall supply it through 
an habitual perseverance and application. Aside from this need 
for the language, the grace that God gives you for conveying 
much edification through your conversation: that charm and 
that unction which I have noted in you for the conversion of 
these poor blind ones: the knowledge that you have of their 
natures, and of the method of dealing with them: the influence 
that God has given you over these barbarians: these are advan- 
tages which another could acquire only through long labour, and 
which [289] indicate also a vocation, and a particular choice 
which God makes of you, for this mission. I have a thousand 
reasons which make me understand the necessity that we are 
under of remaining fixed in our missions. I shall try to give 
an example of them to my brothers through the perpetual sacrifice 
I have made of my repose, talent, honour, and life, to the apostolic 
ministry in this country. And I could believe that God would 
never pardon me if I were to weaken in my resolution, because 
of the bad example I would set to others, who, in imitation of 
me, would do the same. I see them all firm and resolute enough, 
but in truth I can tell you, that if you were to give way, since 
the others are very much decided by [290] the example of your 
fervour, to which I have often called their attention in order to 
inspirit them, you would destroy the order and the method of 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 199 


the plans of God, and all that we are trying to advance through 
his holy grace in order to make the missions permanent. You 
would have an eternal grief in seeing the missions fall into de- 
cadence at the moment when they were beginning to gather that 
spirit of religion and virtue which ought to animate us in order to 
correspond to that which the Lord asks of us in our ministry. 
You are perhaps discouraged by the paucity of result you have 
noticed in the conversion of the Indians. But indeed, my dear 
Father, could you some day justify this excuse before God, being 
learned as you are in the truths of our faith ? Consider, I pray 
you, that it is for us to [291] plant and to water, but that it is 
for God to grant the growth and to produce the fruits. We have 
sufficiently performed our duty when we have proclaimed the 
truth. It 1s not for us to render it fertile, but to recognise our 
nothingness and to adore the judgments of God, Saying to him— 
Quod debuimus facere fecimus, servi inutiles sumus. Re- 
member that when the Son of God gives the mission to his apostles, 
he orders them to preach the Gospel to all the nations—not only 
to those who will believe their word, but also to those who will 
never give it credence. Qui crediderit salvus erit, qui non 
crediderit condemnabitur. God draws his glory equally from 
the loss of some and from the salvation and sanctification of 
others ; [292] but he will not fully derive bis glory from those 
who do not believe except in so far as he will have had care to 
have the truth proclaimed to them. We have the advantage 
of making justification to God at the judgment, in the condemna- 
tion of the infidels who will not be converted by our words ; and 
if we seek only the glory of God, a missionary should be much 
more content in the paucity of success and of fruits from the 
missions of this country than if he effected conversions as numerous 
as in the early church, and even in the last centuries in the East 
and West Indies, where one man baptized in one day as many 
as four to five thousand souls. For God is glorified in the 
stubbornness of our Indians and in their reprobation, after the 
faith has been announced to them, equally as in the conversion 


200 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


[293] of others. You have still this advantage, that in great 
conversions one can find personal pleasure, glory, and keen satis- 
faction, in place of which in your lot you look only upon the glory 
of God, hidden 1n the shades of our faith. This sterility of your 
labours is not flattering to your pride, and you will find in them 
glory for eternity only when you will see God justified in the 
loss of these souls, and glorified by the care that you will have 
taken, and the diligence that you will have devoted, to their con- 
version. But will you be in position to do this if, after having 
outlined the work, you abandon it to another who will do the same 
afier your example? Did the Son of God, who,came chiefly to 
teach the [294] Fews, Ad oves, quae perierunt domus Israél, 
convert many of them, excepting a dozen vacillating Apostles 
and a few Disciples? What did he find in all the rest of the 
people except blindness and hardness of heart, reproaches, in- 
gratitude, and at length an infamous death? But his whole 
idea was to justify God in their loss ; and the purity and holiness 
of his intentions sustained him in the sterility of his labours. 
He persevered even unto death in bis mission ; be came to be 
the Saviour of all men, and he died for all. He died for those 
who damned themselves, as well as for the greatest of saints, in 
order that his blood might plead for justice, and might magnify the 
mercy of his Father in the judgment of the condemned. He 
believed that [295] his blood was not lavished to be shed in ruinam, 
& in resurrectionem multorum, provided that he could say, 
quid ultra potui facere vineae meae? expectavi ut faceret 
uvas, & fecit labruscas. Does he not wish that the seed of his 
word be sown upon callous hearts as well as upon those that are 
docile? And if discouragement were necessarily to follow from 
a paucity of fruit of our labours, where is the preacher who could 
ascend a second time into the pulpit even in the most catholic 
countries ? So many voices are raised in France for the reforma- 
tion of morals ; but how many does one see effecting conversions ? 
And for a million of sermons, of catechisms, of familiar instruc- 
tions, how many persons are there who abate by a single point 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 2oi 


their [296] vanity, their spirit of selfishness, their lewdness, 
slander, or resentment? These preachers have then no other 
resource than to say that they have performed that which God 
asks of their ministry, leaving him to effect the conversion or 
the sanctification through his inward grace, and finally to justify 
him some day in his judgment. Ut justificeris in sermonibus 
tuis, & vincas cum judicaris. Iz seems that the time and the 
hour of Providence has not yet come for the nations of this new 
world ; the harvests are not yet white, it is true; but how do 
you know that God has not planned to grant it some day to our 
tears, our sighs, and our works, and that we shall not be blamable 
Sor the delays which [297] God may place in the way if we lack 
in firmness and constancy in our calling? At least, my dear 
Father, you can hope to save children, or dying old men, and 
even some adults, but particularly children, who are instructed 
little by little. And should you save but a single soul, it is worth 
more than the conquests of all the world after God bas given bis 
blood for it. The labours of your entire life would thus be very 
well employed, according to the principles of our faith ; for 
Saint Ignace, Patriarch of the Fathers who are our colleagues in 
the conversion of this new world, would have considered himself 
happy if, as reward of his labours and the sacrifice of his life, 
he had been able to hope to convert a single one of the prostitutes 
of Rome. It cannot be [298] believed that the attraction of your 
native land could be the occasion or the object of your dissatis- 
faction, and perhaps of your vexation. We have made by our 
profession so broad a renunciation of father, mother, country, 
and friends, that all these ought to have no more charm for you. 
Your very calling in this new world, which is not different from 
that of the Apostles, ought to have caused the death of all such 
Jeelings of nature. Those holy men had no more a native country ; 
or rather, the places to which they were sent took its place to 
them. I found you last year in a state of feeling conformable 
enough to those of grace upon this matter. You told me then that 
tt was this exile from your country and relatives which pleased 


202 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


you most, that you would never regret your calling in Canada on 
account of [299] this consideration, and that you even saw indeed 
that it would be the source of your salvation. Now it would 
mean, my very dear Father, that you have very soon changed 
your ideas on that matter, or else that you have misunderstood the 
grace that God would have done you—if you were to get wearied 
in the midst of your course and to form plans so opposed to those 
of God for your person, and to the attributes of his holy grace. 
This 1s especially true at the present juncture when certain 
persons, who make much of us outwardly, would not perhaps be 
sorry to see you recalled by superior orders. Do you know that, 
since two years past, His Grace’ 1s urging me not to allow our 
missionaries to remain longer than three years attached to the 
same mission? TI see clearly that he is misled by the devices of 
[300] demons, in the integrity of his intentions, to wreck by this 
means the enterprises of his zeal and our own ; and you do not 
perceive that you only favour these plans of the spirit of darkness 

1 The Bishop of Quebec. This statement concerning the Bishop’s views 
as to the three year limit receives ample and practical confirmation in the 
document which follows, and which I owe to the kind interest of M. Philéas 


Gagnon. The translation has been made by Professor W. T. Raymond of the 
University of New Brunswick, and revised by l'Abbé Lindsay of Quebec. 


“Francis, to Brother Christian le Clerc, a priest of the Recollect Order, 
our beloved in Christ, greeting in the Lord: in order that, in and about Isle 
Percée, whither we are sending you, you may have the power of hearing the 
penitents in secret confession, and also of granting them absolution, we grant 
you that privilege for three years only, to be reckoned from the giving of these 
presents, and we also bestow upon you the further power of discharging 
there all the functions of a parish priest. Given, etc., on the eleventh day of 
October in the sixteen hundred and seventy-fifth year. 

“FRANCIS, Bishop of Quebec.’ 


“ Franciscus, ete. Dilecto nobis in xsto Fratri Christiano le Clerc, Presbytero 
Recollecto, Salutem in Dmno, ut in regione Insulae perforatae qud te mittimus 
Doenifentes a secretis confessions audire, eosdemque absolvere possis, tibi licentiam 
concedimus ad tres annos dumtaxat a daté pnim computandos et ibidem oia 
parochialia munia exercere valeas, tibt tenore pntium facultatem impertimur. 
Datum etc., die undecima octobris, anni sexcentesimi septuagesimi guint. 

“Franciscus Quebecensis episcopus.” 


(From Volume A of Registre de 7 Evéque de Québec, 1660-1705 in Archives of the Roman 
Catholic Bishop of Quebec). 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 203 


to the prejudice of the French and the Indians, who have entire 
confidence in you, as Monsieur Richard Denys de Fronsac writes 
me 1s the case. I should never come to an end, my dear Father, 
if I followed the flow of my pen upon this matter, and upon the 
mortification that your plan causes me. It is the demon who 
thwarts me in the person that I believed the most intrepid ; but 
L shall pray to God with so much ardour to grant you perseverance 
that I hope still for a change, and that at least you will think 
no more of leaving the missions. 

[301] Besides, if it is only a question of coming to winter 
with us, you know well that I shall find therein a very great joy. 
Vou could return next summer, if you resume, as I hope you will, 
your first tntention—that which I saw you had last year. Other- 
wise you will remain in our home here as long as you please ; 
you will be always the master of this after having heard my 
arguments, and that which the unction of grace will inspire in 
you. If you come to winter with us I pray you to prepare 
Monsieur Richard Denys so that he will not expect any one until 
next spring, since we have at present only four priests im our 
home, out of sixteen, of whom twelve of you are scattered among 
the missions. The dear Father Exuper, whose zeal and virtue 
you know, arrived [302] a short time since to our aid. It ts 
necessary also that I go up to the Fort of Frontenac next summer, 
with Monsieur le comte de Frontenac our Governor, to arrange 
for the discovery of Mexico by virtue of the orders of the court, 
and to visit our missions. My presence is also necessary at 
Mont-Roial, where the people ask, with more insistence than 
ever, an establishment of our Order, and Messieurs of the 


* It seems plain, however, that it was later in the same summer that he 
made this journey. This letter was written after July 6, 1679, but our author’s 
other book (Lérst Establishment of the Faith, Shea’s translation, II. 1 12) seems 
to show beyond doubt that the journey was made in 1679. Moreover, this 
date fits more naturally with the known facts as to the presence of the mis- 
sionaries at Fort Frontenac, as noted later in the same paragraph. 

* The petition to Frontenac, dated 1678, is printed by Réveillaud, in Le 
Tac, Æistoire chronologique, 193. 


204 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Seminary, who are its Seigniors, have consented to this. The 
dear Father Zenobbe Membré has been at the Fort since last 
Spring, with Fathers Gabriél de la Ribourd, Lottis Hennepin, 
and Luc Buisset, and they are to go on the mission in the dis- 
coveries that are to be made*  Itis, as you see, a large community 
for this country. Friar Leonard 1s extremely [303] 1ll and it 
is not yet known what will be the outcome. The Venerable 
Father Luc Filliasire 1s also unwell, but he is in no danger. 
We have two lay brothers, novices, who are pretty well ; one 1s 
a cousin of the late Monsieur Bazire, and the other is the son 
of Master George of the Coste de Beaupré.” All of our dear 
and venerable Fathers and Friar Leonard salute you with 
affection. Nothing new has happened here that 1s worth writing, 
except the death of Monsieur Filion, Priest, who was drowned 
in the river He 1s un.versally regretted as a perfectly accom- 
plished missionary. Pray God for me; make your offerings 
every day for the interests of our poor mission ; and be assured 
that I am [304] with affection, Your very humble and very 
obedient Servant in Jesus-Curist, Friar Valentin le Roux, 
unworthy Superior of the Recollects of New France. 


It cannot be believed how much consolation the reading 
of this letter gave me. Moved keenly by the will of God, 
and recognising it visibly in that of my Superior, I conceived 


1 The expedition for which preparation was thus in progress was. that of 
La Salle, which resulted in the exploration of the Mississippi to its mouth. It 
is fully described by our author in the second volume of his other book, the 
Premier Etablissement de la Foy. 

2 These two novices are mentioned by our author in his First Establishment 
of the Faith (11. 96) ; their names were Charles Bazire and Didacus Pelletier. 
The “late Monsieur” was Charles Bazire, one of the Seigniors of Isle Percée. 
(Consult the note to page 77 of this volume). Fathers Hugolin and Odoric 
write me that they entered into the novitiate in the spring of 1679, which shows 
that this letter was written after that date. 

* Father Filion was drowned, as Fathers Hugolin and Odoric inform me 
(citing Tanguay’s Repertoire du Clergé Canadien), on July 6, 1679; and this 
date helps to fix the time of the writing of this letter. 


VOYAGE TO THE CROSS-BEARERS 205 


new hopes for the conversion of these peoples. I resolved to 
fix myself in this mission, and to await with so much the more 
patience the fruits which it might please the Lord to produce 
there through his grace and his pity, because among the great 
number of our Indians who seemed [30 5] insensible and 
impenetrable to the commonest verities of Christianity, I saw 
some Gaspesian families who laboured with diligence for their 
salvation, took pleasure in having themselves instructed, 
assisted with devotion at the Holy Mass, and lived as toler- 
ably good Christians. 

The wandering and vagabond life of these peoples being 
unquestionably one of the chief obstacles to their conversion, 
I solicited Monsieur Denys de Fronsac to grant us a tract of 
land at Nipisiguit suitable for the cultivation of the soil, in 
order that we might render the Indians sedentary, settle them 
down, and civilise them among us. This Seignior, who 
desired passionately to see [306] Christianity established in 
that vast extent of country which he possessed, favoured the 
idea with pleasure. He had made the principal persons of 
our Indians accept the proposal, and form the resolution to do 
it ; but the considerable loss which he suffered when his vessel 
perished at Isle Percée in the most violent tempest that had 
ever been seen in those parts, added to the delay of two ships 
which failed two consecutive years to bring him, in accordance 
with their obligation, all the things which were necessary for 
the support of his establishments, broke off all the measures 
we had taken not only to establish a sedentary mission at 
Nipisiguit, but also at Cape Breton, where the [307] Reverend 
Father Valentin le Roux, our Superior, according to the plan 
which we had formed, was to send two of our missionaries.! 

* This plan probably originated that of 1685 whereby Richard Denys 
de Fronsac granted to the Priests of the Seminary at Quebec three tracts of 
land, each three leagues square, at Restigouche, Miramichi, and Cape Breton, 
for sedentary missions. The plan proved abortive, though an attempt was 


made to establish one at Miramichi. Its history, and all the documents in 
the case (in translation) have been printed in the biography of Richard Denys 


206 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


These grievous accidents, however, did not discourage me 
from continuing my mission in order to preserve in piety the 
little group of Christians who formed all my consolation amidst 
an infinity of annoyances which overwhelmed me. For I saw 
among the old men, on the one hand, nothing but a surprising 
insensibility towards receiving Christianity, and on the other, 
an eagerness and an invincible obstinacy in these same Indians 
to follow and to believe the errors, the superstitions, and the 
fabulous traditions of their ancestors, the most extravagant of 
which is, in my opinion, that [308] which concerns the im- 
mortality of the soul. 


de Fronsac in the Collections of the New Brunswick Historical Society, VI, 
1906, 21. 

Our author’s belief in the desirability of rendering the Indians sedentary 
is further attested in the only reference to him which occurs in the Jesuit 
Relations. Father Jacques Bigot, in 1683-84, wrote thus in connection with 
the Sillery Mission: “The Reverend Father Chrestien, a Recollet,—who 
during most of the time, is as you know, in the countries of the Gaspessiens, 
Instructing them with very fervent zeal,—told me some Days ago that he desired 
only one favor for these Gaspessiens. That is, to see them come into our 
mission, to which he was urging them as much as he could. Those who are 
here from that nation are doing well” (Thwaites’ edition, LXIII. 71). 


CHAPTER.XII 


On the Belief of the Gaspesians concerning the Immortality 
of the Soul 


HOSE who, through erroneous belief, like an Epicurus 
and a Sardanapalus, have made the soul die with the 
body, were indeed worthy of compassion, since they 

themselves wished to cease to be men, in order to become like 
the beasts. And it must be confessed that Pythagoras, all 
learned as he was, hardly really knew the excellence of a 
reasonable soul when he lodged it after death [309] through 
his metempsychosis, in the bodies of the vilest and the most 
unclean beasts of the earth. Our Gaspesians have never 
followed either the one or the other of these two opinions, 
although the idea which they formerly held, and which some 
hold still to-day, as to the immortality of the soul, is no less 
ridiculous than the reason itself which has convinced them 
that our souls are immortal. This is why, all immersed and 
buried as they have been during several centuries in a pro- 
found ignorance of our divine mysteries, they have never 
known what dignity, grandeur, and sanctity the reasonable soul 
possesses, whether with respect to its nature, or with respect 
to its end, [310] which is no other than God himself. Conse- 
quently one ought not to be astonished if error and imposture 
have been the sole foundations of their belief in this matter, 
which is based on the tradition of their ancestors. This is to 
the effect that one of the most prominent men of the nation 
fell dangerously ill, and after having lost the use of all his 


faculties in the strange convulsions of his disease, came to. 
207 


208 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


himself, and said to the Indians, who asked him where he had 
been so long, that he came from the Land of Souls, where all 
the souls of the Gaspesians who died betook themselves after 
their death. He added that by an extraordinary favour, 
which had never before been accorded to anyone whatsoever, 
Papkootparout,* [311] governor and ruler of this country, had 
given him permission to return to the world, in order to give 
the Gaspesians news of the Land of Souls, which had been up 
to that time unknown to them, and to present to them on his 
behalf certain fruits, which he gave assurance were the food of 
those souls, which he was going to rejoin for ever. He died 
in fact in ending these words ; and this imposture, which they 
took for an indubitable truth, was more than enough to 
persuade them that souls, after departure from their bodies, 
had a place to which they went to remain. It did not require 
anything more to make some of the more hardy of our 
Indians determine to make a voyage thereto in body and in 
spirit [312] during their lives, since this land was distant and 
separated from them only by a passage of forty to fifty leagues 
over a pond that could be crossed with ease by fording. 

A favourable opportunity to carry out their curious resolu- 
tion very soon presented itself through a chance to render 
service to one of their friends who, unable to console himself 
for the death of his only son, whom he loved tenderly, 
implored them all, and engaged them by the usual presents, 
to keep him company in the voyage which he had resolved to 
make to the Land of Souls in order thence to bring back his 
son. He had not much trouble to persuade to this voyage 
men who asked nothing better than to undertake it. They 
were [313] very soon all ready to start and to begin this 
perilous venture, which still to this day causes astonishment 

* Nowhere have I been able to find any other reference to Papkootparout 
by name. Yet the individual very clearly represents the same who is the 
hero of the Nanibozhu legend widely spread among the Algonquian tribes. 


The subject is fully discussed by A. F. Chamberlain in the Journal of American 
fotk-Lore, \V., 1891, 193, and V., 1892, 291. 


BELIEF CONCERNING IMMORTALITY 209 


in all the Gaspesian nation, for it had then never heard tell 
of an enterprise so extraordinary. However, these voyagers, 
furnished with all the provisions they needed, and armed with 
their bows, arrows, quivers, clubs, and with a number of poles 
of nine to ten feet in height, took to the water, and, with 
much trouble and fatigue, travelled by forced marches. The 
evening having arrived, they stuck some of their poles into 
the sand in order to form a kind of arbour or camp, in 
which they might rest during the night, something which they 
[314] did every night in the continuation of this arduous 
voyage, which lasted until several among them were dead of 
fatigue. The five or six others who remained still alive, 
arrived happily at length in the Land of Souls, which they 
had sought so eagerly. 

Our Gaspesians, in common with all the other Indians of 
New France, have believed up to the present that there is 
in every thing, even in such as are inanimate, a particular 
Spirit which follows deceased persons into the other world, in 
order to render them as much service after death as these had 
received therefrom during life. Consequently, they say that 
our voyagers were equally surprised and comforted to see [315] 
on their arrival an infinity of spirits of moose, beavers, dogs, 
canoes, and snowshoes, which hovered pleasingly before their 
eyes, and which, by I know not what unknown language, 
made them understand that these things were all in the service 
of their fathers. But a moment later they thought they should 
die of fear and terror when, approaching a wigwam like those 
which they had in their own country, they saw a man, or 
rather a giant, armed with a mighty club, and with bow, 
arrows, and quiver, who, with his eyes gleaming with anger, 
and a tone of voice which indicated the completeness of his | 
wrath, spoke to them in these words; “ Whoever you are, 
prepare [316] yourselves to die, since you have had the 
temerity to make this journey, and to come all alive into the 


Land of the Dead. For I am Papkootparout the guardian, 
O 


210 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the master, the governor, and the ruler of all souls.” In fact, 
distracted to fury as he was at the outrage our Indians had 
committed, he was about to slay them with great blows of 
that horrible club which he had in his hand, when this poor 
father, keenly penetrated by grief for the death of his only 
son, implored him, more by tears and sighs than by words, to 
excuse the temerity of this enterprise, which in truth deserved 
all punishment from a just anger, if he was not willing to 
soften the rigour of it [317] out of consideration for a father 
who considered himself blamable only because he had too 
much tenderness and affection for his child. ‘ Discharge 
against us if thou wilt, all the arrows of thy quiver ; crush me 
by the weight of thy club,” continued this afflicted father, 
presenting to him his stomach and his head to receive the 
blows of the one and of the other, “since thou art the absolute 
master of my life and my death; but indeed, if there still 
remain in thee any sentiments of humanity, of tenderness, 
and of compassion for mortals, I beg thee to accept the 
presents which we have brought from the Land of the Living, 
and to receive us among the number of thy friends.” These 
words, so submissive and so [318] respectful, touched the heart 
of this little Pluto with compassion, and he, becoming alive 
to the grief of this afflicted father, told him to be of good 
courage : that he would pardon him this time for the outrage 
he had committed: and that finally, to overwhelm him with 
favours and with consolation, he would give him before his 
departure the soul of his son ; but that in awaiting this extra- 
ordinary favour, he wished to amuse himself with him, and 
to play a hand of Ledelstaganne,' which is the usual game of 
our Gaspesians, 

This friendly discourse dissipated entirely all the uneasiness 

? This game is again mentioned by our author at page 508 of his book, 
and in a note thereto in this volume (page 294) it is briefly described. It was, 
and is, the great gambling game of the Micmacs, and always aroused the 


most intense interest among them. The word is somewhat differently spelled 
on page 324. 


BELIEF CONCERNING IMMORTALITY 211 


and apprehension of our voyagers, who staked at the play 
everything of importance which they had brought [319] from 
Gaspesia. Papkootparout staked, for his part, Indian corn, 
tobacco, and some fruits, which he assured them were the food 
of these souls. They played with close application from 
morning until evening. Our voyagers, however, remained 
the victors. They won the Indian corn and the tobacco of 
Papkootparout, who gave both to them with so much the 
more pleasure, since he believed these men deserved to live 
who had had the good fortune to win all the most precious 
and rarest things which the dead possessed in the Land of 
Souls. He commanded them to plant these in Gaspesia, 
assuring them that all the nation would receive therefrom an 
inconceivable advantage. [320] This, say our Indians of 
to-day, is the manner in which the Indian corn and the 
tobacco have come into their country, according to the tradi- 
tion of their ancestors. 

Whilst the father was rejoicing in his good fortune, it 
happened that the son arrived invisibly in the wigwam. The 
chant of a number of spirits, and the rejoicing that was made 
among these souls was, in fact, heard very distinctly. But 
this was not that which the father had asked. He hoped, in 
accord with the promise which had been made him, to obtain 
the soul of his son, which remained always invisible, but 
which became in an instant the size of a nut by the command 
of Papkootparout, who took it in [321] his hands, wrapped it 
very closely in a little bag, and gave it to our Indian. There- 
with he gave him orders to return at once to his own country : 
to lay out, immediately after his arrival, the body of his son in 
a wigwam made for the purpose: to replace this soul in the 
body : and above all to take care that there be no opening, 
for fear, said he to the father, lest the soul come out through 
that and return to this country which it was leaving only with 
extreme repugnance. 

The father received with joy this animated bag, and took 


212 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


leave of this Indian Pluto, after having seen and examined 
attentively everything which there was of much importance in 
the principality of Papkootparout. [322] That is to say, he 
saw the place of shades where lay the wicked souls ; this was 
overlaid with nothing but dried up and badly arranged 
branches of fir. But the place of the good Indians had 
nothing except that which was charming and agreeable, with 
an infinity of fine barks adorning the outside and the inside 
of their wigwams, into which the sun came to comfort them 
twice each day, renewing the branches of fir and of cedar, 
which never lost their natural verdure. Finally, there was 
an infinity of spirits of dogs, canoes, snowshoes, bows, and 
arrows, of which the souls were making use for their pleasure. 

Note, if you please, that ever since this imaginary voyage 
the Indians have not only believed [323] that souls were 
immortal, but they have also been persuaded, by a strange 
fancy, that in everything of which they made use, such as 
canoes, snowshoes, bows, arrows, and other things, there is a 
particular spirit which would always accompany after death 
the one who made use thereof during life ; and it is actually 
for this reason, and in this foolish fancy, that they bury with 
deceased persons everything which these possessed while 
on the earth, in the belief that each article in particular 
renders them the same service in the Land of Souls that 
it did to its owner when alive. 

Our voyagers, however, returned joyously into their own 
country, and having arrived there [324] they gave to all the 
Gaspesian nation a full account of the marvels which they had 
seen in the Land of Souls, and commanded all the Indians, on 
behalf of Papkootparout, to plant forthwith the Indian corn 
and the tobacco which they had won in playing with him at 
Leldestaganne. The orders which were given them on behalf 
of the governor of souls were faithfully executed, and they 
cultivated with success the Indian corn and the tobacco for 
the space of several years. But the negligence of their 


BELIEF CONCERNING IMMORTALITY 213 


ancestors, say they, deprives them to-day of all these con- 
veniences so useful and so essential to the nation as a whole. 

One knows not how to express the astonishment and the 
[325] joy of these people when they heard of all these 
marvellous fancies, and that the father had brought back in 
a bag his son’s soul, which would instruct them in everythin 
from the moment when it was seated again in the body, The 
extreme impatience which these Gaspesians felt to learn news 
of the other world induced them to build promptly a wigwam 
in the very manner Papkootparout had directed. Their 
hopes, however, were vain and useless, for the father, having 
entrusted the bag to the care of an Indian woman, in order 
to assist and to dance more freely at the public festivals which 
were made for his happy return, this woman had the curiosity 
to open it, and the soul escaped immediately [326] and 
returned whence it had come.! The father, on hearing the 
news thereof, died of chagrin, and followed his son to the Land 
of Souls, to the great regret of all the Gaspesian nation. 
This it is, and this only, which makes our Indians believe in 
the immortality of souls. 

From these false premises, based upon a tradition so 
fabulous, they have drawn these extravagant conclusions,—that 
everything is animated and that souls are nothing other than 
the ghost of that which had been animated : that the rational 
soul is a sombre and black image of the man himself : that it 
had feet, hands, a mouth, a head, and all other parts of the 
[327] human body: that it had still the same needs for 
drinking, for eating, for clothing, for hunting and fishing, as 


* In Father le Jeune’s Relation of 1634 is a legend which is identical with 
this in motive, if, indeed, they are not different versions of the same story. 
It reads: “A certain Savage had received from Messou the gift of immortality 
in a little package, with a strict injunction not to open it; while he kept it 
closed he was immortal, but his wife, being curious and incredulous, wished 
to see what was inside this present ; and having opened it, it all flew away, 
and since then the Savages have been subject to death” (Jesuzt Relations, 
Thwaites’ edition, VI. 159). 


214 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


when it was in the body, whence it comes that in their revels 
and feasts they always serve a portion to these souls which 
are walking, say they, in the vicinity of the wigwams of their 
relatives and of their friends : that they went hunting the souls 
of beavers and of moose with the souls of their snowshoes, 
bows, and arrows: that the wicked, on their arrival at the Land 
of Souls, danced and leaped with great violence, eating only 
the bark of rotten trees, in punishment for their crimes, for 
a certain number of years indicated by Papkootparou (sic) : 
[228, z.e. 328] that the good, on the contrary, lived in great 
repose at a place removed from the noise of the wicked, 
eating when it pleased them and amusing themselves with the 
hunting of beavers and of moose, whose spirits allowed them- 
selves to be taken with ease. Such is the reason why our 
Gaspesians have always observed inviolably the custom of 
burying with the deceased everything which was in their use 


during life. 


[329] CHAPTER XIII 
On the Superstitions of the Gaspesians? 


T seems that the peoples who have been the most 
addicted to idolatry have been also the most super- 
stitious. Hence it comes that the Romans, in order 

to distinguish themselves from all the nations of the world 
by religion, as well as by their victorious and triumphant 
arms, did wish to retain among them the idols of all the 
peoples whom they had conquered ; and to these they ren- 
dered their homage and their adoration. Their blindness had 
even reached to such a point of superstition that the [330] 
frivolous remarks of their diviners upon the flight and the 
food of birds, or upon the entrails of animals, held entire 
sway over the Roman Empire; nor were they permitted to 
undertake or to abandon any enterprise of importance without 
consulting these kinds of oracles, augurs, and soothsayers, 
who were, in their opinion, the interpreters of the will of the 
Gods. Similar criminal maxims and ridiculous observations 
are still to-day in force among our Gaspesians, who observe 
in the impostures of their jugglers all of the empty observa- 
tions and superstitions which the Romans recognised of old 
in the ministry of their diviners. 

In fact these Indians imagine [331] that certain ones 

among them have communication with the Devil, from whom 
they hope to learn that which they wish to know, or to obtain 


1 A number of passages in the following pages bear so close a resemblance 
to parts of the Re/ation of Father le Jeune of 1634 as to leave no doubt that 
our author made use of that Re/ation in preparing this chapter. The subject 
is discussed more fully in the antogee ion to the present volume (page 18). 


216 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


that which they ask. They believe that in all their maladies 
there is, in the part afflicted, a Devil, or germ, which these 
barbarians, whom we call jugglers, have the power to make 
come out, and they believe that these jugglers can restore 
health to the sick through their breathings, their songs, and 
the horrible postures which they take in their wigwams. 
They imagine also that their jugglers can know from their 
Devil, whom they call Oüahich,' the best places for hunting, 
and that all the dreams of these impostors are just so many 
revelations and prophesies, of which the success [332] and 
the realisation seem to them infallible. This credulity of a 
people who are extremely susceptible to these follies, and to 
all sorts of errors, has brought the jugglers so much into 
credit that these master frauds pass for the most important 
persons of the nation. In a word, that one is the most 
esteemed who appears to have the strongest Ouahich, and 
who makes himself distinguished among the others by the 
most extraordinary and most infallible results. 

Several of our French have believed, a little too easily, 
that these juggleries are nothing but trifles and child’s 
play, and that no belief should be placed in what the jugglers 
Say as to the invocation which they make to the Devil in 
these [333] superstitious and criminal juggleries. I am 
willing to admit that in some of these invocations there is 
very often nothing but empty talk; and accordingly it is 
perhaps these particular and wholly puerile juggleries which 
have given a basis for some to infer too readily that the 
others have in them nothing diabolical. It is true that I 
have never been able to discover any pact, explicit or implicit, 
between the jugglers and the Devil; but I cannot persuade 
myself on that account that the Devil is not predominant 
in their nonsense, and in the impostures which they use to 
beguile these people and to remove them just so much 


* On the origin of this word see the note under page 47 (page 90 of this 
volume). 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 217 


farther from the knowledge of the true God. For in fact 
it is difficult to believe that it is by natural means that a 
juggler [334] makes trees appear to be all on fire, and to 
burn visibly without being consumed, or gives the blow of 
death to Indians, even if forty to fifty leagues distant, when 
he buries his knife or his sword in the earth and draws forth 
the one or the other all covered with blood, saying that such 
a one is dead, who in fact does die and expire at the same 
moment that the juggler pronounces the sentence of death 
against him.! 

It is not, either, by natural means that, with the little bow 
they use, one of which a juggler gave me with his jugglers’ 
bag, they wound, and sometimes kill, children in the wombs 
of their mothers, when they discharge their arrows simply 
upon the representation of these little [33 5] innocents, which 
they sketch and represent on purpose, the best that they can, 
upon some piece of beaver or moose skin.2 

Judge from this whether it must not be admitted that 
there is something diabolical in these extraordinary results. 
Our Gaspesians, however, have so much esteem for their 
jugglers that, when in trouble, they seek those who pass for 
the most famous (just as among us the sick in their ills have 
recourse to the most clever physicians). They are convinced 
also that these frauds can surely cure their ills, and aid them 
in chasing out the Devil, or the germ, which they believe 
to be enclosed in the afflicted part. They summon [336] the 
juggler and have him enter the wigwam of the sick person. 
This Bouhinne* informs himself exactly as to the nature of 

* Our author here seems to have in mind the incident fully described by 
Father le Jeune in his Relation of 1634 (Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, 


VI. 195-199). 

* This matter is again mentioned by our author at pages 347 and 348 of 
his book. 

* This word occurs also on pages 339 and 517 (as Bouhine). It is pure 
Micmac, given by Rand as Boodin (ÆEnglish-Micmac Dictionary, 163), meaning 
“a magician.” The word occurs often in Micmac legends for a mighty 
mythical magician. 


* 


218 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the illness, and after having made the sick one hope that he 
will cause recovery, he asks and receives the present that he 
wishes, having the right to choose the most important, most 
beautiful, and the best article in the wigwam of the sick 
person who asks recovery of the juggler, and who implores him 
to obtain this from his Oühaiche, speaking to him these words, 
Emkadoui; as if he were to say, “Lend me thy Devil.” The 
juggler answers him, “If thou wishest that I employ him 
in thy service, it is necessary that thou givest me” such and 
such “presents.” He has no sooner received them than he 
chants some song in praise of the Oüahiche, and makes some 
[337] postures and frightful contortions : he comes near to, 
and draws back from, the sick man : he blows several times 
upon the affected part: he plants and drives deep into the 
ground a stick, to which he attaches a cord, and through this 
he passes his head as if he would strangle himself. Here 
he makes his invocations until he has worked himself all into 
a sweat and lather, making believe that, because of all these 
shameful and violent contortions, the Devil has at length 
come out, and that he even holds him bound in order that 
he may grant health to the sick person. He then calls the 
Indians and makes them enter the wigwam; and he shows 
them the cord which, says he, holds the Devil enchained. He 
cuts from it a piece, and thus lets him escape, promising [338] 
that the sick man will infallibly get well. Each one testifies 
to the juggler his gratitude for the service by means of the 
usual presents ; and they all sing in unison some song to the 
praise of the Devil, for the sake of rendering him propitious 
and favourable not only to the sick man, but also to the 
Gaspesian nation. 

The thing which seems to me most strange in the sur- 
prising blindness of these peoples concerning their jugglery, 
is that they juggle with the dead bodies as if they were living, 


! This word also is Micmac. Rand gives émkadooeegä as meaning “to 
lend ” (0. cif., 157). 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 219 


So much are they persuaded that the Devil, or germ, which 
they call by the name of Tchougis? or of Witchcraft, is the 
cause of all their maladies, and that it remains for some time 
in the [339] body of the sick man after his death. They 
sufficiently demonstrated this belief through an action which 
without doubt will seem to you genuinely cruel and wholly 
inhuman. 

One of the most prominent of our Gaspesians having fallen 
dangerously ill, he had the most expert Bouhinne called in 
order to restore him to health. But having expired in the 
midst of the hubbub of the invocations and blowings of this 
juggler, all his relations assembled in order to assist at the 
funeral services of him who had always been an honour to 
their family. They lamented together their misfortune and 
gave the usual feasts of the dead.. The nearest relative gave 
the funeral oration, with a [340] long discourse upon the 
most glorious actions which the deceased had performed on 
behalf of the nation. He began in a very moderate tone 
of voice, but at length, distracted as he was by the obvious 
grief which he felt for the death of his friend, he appeared 
suddenly to become filled with rage and fury. Then he said 
to those who accompanied him, that they must needs take 
vengeance on the Devil, which, not content with having caused 
the death of the bravest and most spirited of all the Gaspesians, 
still remained in the heart of the deceased to prevent him 
from reviving and to torment him after his death, as it had 
persecuted him cruelly during his life. He was believed, and 
all with one consent descended on the body, [341] which 
was exposed upon a kind of staging built by them in the 
wigwam. They opened the belly, and the juggler, after 
having torn out the heart, took it between his hands, and, 


* This is plainly the same word as the modern Micmac Choojech’, meaning 
“a worm” (Rand, English-Micmac Dictionary, 284). The idea involved in the 
use of this word “worm” is more accurately rendered in modern language 
by “germ,” as mentioned in a note on page 90 of the present volume. 


220 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


with a movement of indignation against the Tchougis, cut it 
into pieces as many as there were persons, and distributed 
these to the whole assembly. Each ate his part of it, in 
order, as they said, to take vengeance on the Devil, who was 
in the heart of the dead man. This barbarous and cruel 
action occurred only four or five leagues from the place where 
I was, and I learned it from the very persons who assisted 
in this horrible feast, at which anger and rage brought out. 
all [342] of the most inhuman attributes imaginable.’ 

Our Gaspesians are so addicted to their jugglery that it 
can be said this vice is natural and hereditary with them. 
This is why, when one wishes to draw them from it, some- 
thing which cannot be done except with a great deal of 
trouble, they have enough malice to say to the missionaries 
that these have not much sense to disapprove of their blowing 
on their sick, because the missionaries themselves make 
breathings when they baptize children, and that if the 
patriarchs have the intention of chasing out the Devil, or sin, 
by their breathings and their exorcisms, the Indians have also 
no other design than to chase out the germ, or the Devil, 
from the body of the sick man. 

[343] You will take notice that each juggler has his own 
particular bag in which are all the articles that he uses in his 
jugglery. Some have the picture of their Otiahich under the 
form of a wolverene,” others under form of a monster, or of 
a man without a head. One of these bags has come into my 
hands, having been given me by a juggler for the purpose of 
testifying to me that he wished to pray to God and to be 
instructed. I received him with so much the more joy, in 
that I had been hoping for a long time to gain this soul to 
God by making him leave his errors in order to follow the 


* On other cases of cannibalism among the Micmacs, consult the note 
under page 105 of our author’s book (page 115 of this volume). 

* This word in the original is Quézguajou, on which consult the note under 
page 491 of our author’s book (page 285 of this volume). 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 221 


truths of Christianity. He delivered the bag into my hands 
with the intention of becoming a Christian, giving me notice 
that [344] if I preserved it to send it to France, and to make 
it go out of the country, I should not live more than four or 
five days, and that if I threw it into the fire, I ought to be 
apprehensive lest the house be reduced at once to ashes, 
because of the extraordinary effects which his Ouahich would 
cause when it found itself in the flames. 

It is well to treat the Indians with consideration, and 
sometimes to delay instructing them until they have removed 
the obstacle which is opposed to their conversion. This gives 
them more esteem and veneration for Christianity, which they 
then believe is not compatible with their errors. This person 
had several times testified to me that he wished to be baptized 
[345] in order to enter with the others into the “ Wigwam of 
JESUS,” that he might pray to the God of the Sun. I knew, 
however, that he was one of the most famous jugglers of all 
this nation, a fact which obliged me to treat him with some 
indifference every time that he spoke to me of instructing 
him. He understood very well that all his advances would 
be useless if he did not change his conduct, and if he did not 
renounce his Oüahich for ever. I told him that all the 
promises he had made me up to that time had been without 
result, and that if his heart would speak wholly good he must 
give me more sincere indications of it than he had in the 
past. “Ah,” said he to me, “thou believest then that I wish 
always to deceive thee, as I have done up to [346] the present ! 
Thou deceivest thyself, and in order to convince thee effectively 
that I have a genuine disposition to abandon my errors, and 
to come to prayer, take,” said he to me, “ my jugglery-bag 
which I place in thy hands in order never more to make use 
Obits, 

Here is the inventory of that which I found in this little bag 
of the Devil. It was made of the skin of an entire head of a 
moose, with the exception of the ears, which were removed. 


222 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


There was, first of all, this juggler’s Oüahich, which was 
a stone of the size of a nut wrapped in a box which he called 
the house of his Devil. Then there was a bit of bark on 
which was a figure, hideous enough, [347] made from black 
and white wampum, and representing some monster which 
could not be well distinguished, for it was neither the re- 
presentation of a man nor of any animal, but rather in the 
shape of a little wolverene, which was adorned with black and 
white beadwork. That one, say the jugglers, is the master 
Devil, or Oüahich. There was, in addition, a little bow a foot 
in length, together with a cord, two fathoms long, interlaced 
with porcupine quills. It is this fatal bow which they use 
to cause the death of little children in the wombs of their 
mothers. I utilised this cord to make a line for fishing trout, 
and with it I took more than two hundred, in three hours’ 
time, in a place where they [348] were very abundant. That 
surprised our Indians a little—to see that I made so little 
account of a thing which the jugglers esteem so much. 

In addition to these things, this bag contained also a 
fragment of bark, wrapped in a delicate and very thin skin, 
on which were represented some little children, birds, bears, 
beavers, and moose. Against these the juggler, using his 
little bow, shot his arrow at pleasure, in order to cause the 
death of the children or of some other thing of which the 
figure is represented upon this bit of bark. Finally, I found 
there a stick, a good foot in length, adorned with white and 
red porcupine quills ; at its end were attached several straps 
[349] of a half-foot in length, and two dozen dew-claws of 
moose. It is with this stick that he makes a devilish noise, 
using these dew-claws as sounders—an arrangement which 
seems more suitable for amusing little children than for 
juggling. Finally, the last article in the bag was a wooden 
bird, which they carry with them when they go hunting, 
with the idea that it will enable them to kill waterfowl in 
abundance. 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 223 


Our Indian juggler was, however, much troubled as to 
what had become of his bag, and as to the use I had made of 
it. Five to six weeks after he had given it to me, he wished 
to inform himself on this point, and came for the purpose to 
the wigwam where I was. I told him that he had no further 
need [350] to be concerned about his bag, which had deserved 
to be thrown into the fire, since it was the property of the 
Devil who had dwelt therein so long a time, and that no ill 
had befallen either me or the house, although in giving it to 
me he had threatened me with some misfortune. Being con- 
vinced straightway that I had burnt it, he said, “ Alas! I have 
indeed discovered as much during the voyages I have made 
since I have given it to thee, for I have been hungry and I 
have been weary, something which never happened to me when 
I had my bag. I used to take my Devil in my hands and press 
it strongly against my stomach. ‘Hey, how is this,’ I used 
to say to him, ‘ wilt thou permit that I be overwhelmed by 
hunger and fatigue, thou who hast never abandoned me? 
Grant, [351] for mercy’s sake, that I get something to eat ; 
give me some comfort in the fatigues and the need which 
overwhelm me.’ He would hear my prayer and promptly 
grant my vows.” I made him admit, however, in showing 
him his Owahich, that this was another relic of his fancy and 
of his foolish imaginings, indicating to him several incidents 
in which he had suffered much without having received any 
aid from his Devil, whose virtue was so feeble that it had 
not the power to aid or comfort itself in the excess of its 
sufferings. 

Some of these jugglers also meddle with predictions of 
future affairs, and in such a way that if their predictions [352] 
are found correct, as happens sometimes by chance, they 
derive credit and reputation from this fact. If, on the 
contrary, they are found false, as is usually the case, they 
get out of it by saying that their Devil is angry against 
the whole nation. It is a very surprising thing that this 


224 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


impertinent excuse, far from discrediting the jugglers, 
procures them considerable presents ; these are made them 
in order to appease the anger of this Devil, who, through 
the ministry of these jugglers, abuses these people and plays 
easily on their simplicity." 

Our poor Gaspesians were formerly tormented by the 
Devil, who often beat them very cruelly, and even terrified 
them by [353] hideous spectres and horrible phantoms to 
such an extent that, on some occasions, frightful carcasses 
have been seen to fall in the midst of their wigwams, a 
circumstance which caused to the Indians so much terror that 
sometimes they fell dead upon the spot. 

As on occasions which make even the hardy lose courage, 
there is always found some person of determination, so it 
happened in this, that one of our Indians proposed alone by 
himself to avenge the outrages which the Devils were commit- 


1 The literature treating of the customs of the North American Indians 
abounds in references to the jugglers. One of the most interesting of the 
early Canadian accounts is that of Father le Caron, of 1624, which is worth 
citation here : “There is no nation but has its jugglers, whom some consider 
sorcerers ; but it is not likely that there is in their case any real pact or com- 
munication with the devil, who nevertheless rules in their deceit and imposture, 
which he employs to deceive these people and remove them the more from 
the knowledge of the true God; for they all have faith in these jugglers, 
although they every day fail to keep their word. These impostors are regarded 
as prophets who predict the future from the Almighty. They boast of making 
rain and clear weather, calm and storm, the fecundity or sterility of the earth, 
fortunate or unsuccessful hunts; they act as physicians, applying remedies 
which have often no healing power. Nothing is so horrible as the cries, noise, 
racket, fury, and contortions of these cheats when they begin to juggle and 
make their kind of enchantment. They have, however, great dexterity ; for, 
as they heal and predict only by chance, they have a thousand tricks to 
deceive these savages when the event does not answer their expectation and 
the predictions and remedies of these pretended prophets and physicians, who 
do nothing without presents and recompense. If, indeed, these jugglers are 
not adroit in getting credit and turning their very blunders to account when 
the person dies or the enterprise fails in the desired success, the juggler is 
sometimes executed on the spot without any other formality.” (First Establish- 
ment of the Faith, 1. 219.) Accounts of theJugglers or Medicine-men among 
our Micmacs are given by all writers upon our Indians, by Lescarbot, Biard, 
Denys, Diéreville, and Maillard. 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 225 


ting in all the wigwams of the nation. He conceived, in fact, 
the plan of killing him who had tormented them cruelly for 
so long a time. He even assured the Indians that he had no 
doubt as to the success [3 54| of his undertaking, and that there 
was nothing for them to do but to rejoice, for, he said, he 
knew exactly the route by which the Devil came among them. 
It was a little brook between two rocks, where he undertook 
to camp with his gun between his arms. One of our French- 
men having found him in that posture asked him what he 
was doing, and whom he was awaiting. “Whom am I 
awaiting,” answered he fiercely, “I am awaiting the Devil 
in order to kill him, to tear his heart from his belly, and after 
that to remove his scalp, in punishment and vengeance for 
the outrages and the insults which he has done us up to the 
present time. T’oo long has he been tormenting us, and the 
time has now arrived for me to deliver the Gaspesians from 
[355] these misfortunes. Let him come; let him appear. 
I await him without stirring.” 

It is known that since they have been instructed in our 
holy mysteries, especially those whom we have baptized, they 
are no more beaten or tormented by the Devil in the manner 
in which formerly they were before they had received the first 
and most necessary of our sacraments. 

If these peoples pay so much attention, as you have just 
seen, to their juggleries, they observe with no less exactness 
certain ridiculous and superstitious customs. Thus, the 
young unmarried men never eat roast porcupine, imagining 
that they would not travel faster than this animal, which [356] 
moves very slowly. It is, however, permissible for them to 
eat it boiled without any risk. 

The little foetuses of bears, moose, otters, beavers, and 
porcupines,. which are still inside the bellies of their mothers, 
are delicaté morsels which are reserved for the old men, the 
young men not being permitted to taste them, because they 


would feel, said they, great pains in the feet when they went 
P 


226 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


hunting. Through the same reasoning it is also forbidden 
them to eat the entrails of bears, marrow, or certain other 
delicate morsels, these dainty bits being reserved exclusively 
for the old men. 

The bones of the beaver are not given to the dogs, since 
[357] these would lose, according to the opinion of the 
Indians, the senses needed for the hunting of the beaver. 
No more are they thrown into the rivers, because the Indians 
fear lest the spirit of the bones of this animal would promptly 
carry the news to the other beavers, which would desert the 
country in order to escape the same misfortune.’ 

They never burned, further, the bones of the fawn of the 
moose, nor the carcass of martens ; and they also take much 
precaution against giving the same to the dogs; for they 
would not be able any longer to capture any of these animals 
in hunting if the spirits of the martens and of the fawns of 
the moose were to inform their own kind of the bad treatment 
they had received among the Indians. 

[358] If they take some beavers by trapping, custom wills 
that they be opened in public, and that the meat remain two 
days upon poles in the smoke before it is placed in the kettle. 
It is also necessary to take great care that the soup does not 
fall into the fire, and sedulously to preserve the bones, because 
the contrary is a portent of evil, or of some misfortune for 
all the nation. 

In my presence one time a leading man of the nation 


* On this matter Father le Caron wrote in 1624, “They have an insane 
superstition against profaning certain bones of elk, beaver, and other beasts, 
or letting their dogs gnaw them. They preserve them carefully or throw them 
into a river. They pretend that the souls of these animals come to see how 
their bodies are treated, and go and tell the living beasts and those that are 
dead ; so that if they are ill-treated the beasts of the same kind will no longer 
allow themselves to be taken either in this world or the next.” (First Establish- 
ment of the Faith,\. 220.) The subject is also discussed in a manner suggesting 
that our author had the work before him, by Father le Jeune in his Relation 
of 1634 (Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, VI. 211), Other superstitions, of 
like nature, are mentioned by Diéreville, Voyage, 164. 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 227 


threw the foot of an owl into the kettle at a solemn feast, 
as a sure omen that his son, who had killed it at the age of 
five years, would become some day a great hunter, and the 
most valiant warrior of the world. 

[359] The young men never eat the hearts of bears, for 
fear of getting out of breath in travelling, and of lacking 
courage in case of need. If some hunter has killed, or taken 
in a trap, one of these animals, many precautions are taken 
to prevent its entering by the usual door of the wigwam. 
Custom wills, and superstition orders, that a new door be 
made on the right or the left, because, say they, the Indian 
women do not deserve to pass through the place by which 
the bear enters the wigwam.! The girls, and the women who 
have not yet had children, leave the wigwam at the moment 
the bear approaches, and they never return there until it is 
wholly eaten. 

Our Gaspesians are still so credulous about dreams [3 60] 
that they yield easily to everything which their imagination 
or the Devil puts into their heads when sleeping ; and this 
is so much the case among them that dreams will make them 
come to conclusions upon a given subject quite contrary to 
those which they had earlier formed. 

A matter which is yet more surprising is this—they 
observe still to this day certain ceremonies of which they 
do not know the origin, giving no other reasons than that 
their ancestors have always practised the same thing. The 
first is this, that the women and girls, when they suffer the 
inconveniences usual to their sex, are accounted unclean, At 
that time they are not permitted to eat with the others, but 
they must [361] have their separate kettle, and live by them- 
selves. The girls are not allowed, during that time, to eat 
any beaver, and those who eat of it are reputed bad ; for the 


* Evidently many superstitions clustered about the hunting of the bear, 
for Father le Jeune in his Relation of 1634, gives others as prevalent among 
the Montagnais (/esuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, VI. 217). 


228 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Indians are convinced, they say, that the beaver, which has 
sense, would no longer allow itself to be taken by the Indians 
if it had been eaten by their unclean daughters. Widows 
never eat of that which has been killed by the young men ; 
it is necessary that a married man, an old man, or a prominent 
person of the nation shall be the one who hunts or fishes for 
their support. So scrupulously do they observe this superstitious 
custom that they still at this day relate with admiration how 
a Gaspesian widow [362] allowed herself to die of hunger 
rather than eat moose or beaver which was left in her wig- 
wam even in abundance, because it was killed by young men, 
and widows were not permitted to eat it. 

In the winterings I have made with the Indians in the 
woods, I have seen one of these widows who remained three 
days without eating, with as much cheerfulness as if she had 
the best fare in the world. I said everything I could to her 
to make her break her Lent, for it is thus that they name 
this abstinence, but it was in vain ; and I could never persuade 
her to eat, although there was meat in abundance in her 
wigwam. [363] Even her children murmured against me 
because I solicited their mother to abandon the customs of 
their ancestors, saying to me that the Indians had their 
manner of living, as well as the French, and that we should 
follow our maxims without wishing to oblige them to abandon 
theirs. This woman begged me to accompany the Indians in 
a hunt for beaver, to which they had invited me in order to 
give me the entertainment of it; and she assured me that she 
would willingly eat that which I might kill, if I had enough 
cleverness to capture any, because she considered me as 
their father and as one of their elders. I was fortunate 
enough to take two of them, of which I broke the [364] heads. 
I carried them to her wigwam, and made her a present 
thereof. She ate them both all alone by herself, for she was 
not permitted to eat with the others, nor the others to eat with 
her. They observe the same thing after their confinements, 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 229 


during a month, or two, according to their inclination ; and 
during all that time it is a kind of infamy, and an evil omen, 
if they drink from the kettles or from the bark dishes which 
are in daily use, because, say these barbarians, good hunting 
of moose or beaver cannot be made when that happens. 

As our Indians perceive that much honour is accorded to 
the missionaries, and that they have [365] given themselves 
in respect and reverence the title of Patriarch, some of these 
barbarians have often been seen meddling with, and affecting 
to perform, the office and functions of missionary, even to 
hearing confession, like us, from their fellow-countrymen. 
So therefore, when persons of this kind wish to give authority 
to that which they say, and to set themselves up as patriarchs, 
they make our Gaspesians believe that they have received 
some particular gift from heaven, as in the case of one from 
Kenebec," who said that he had received an image from 
heaven. This was, however, only a picture which had been 
given him when he was trading with our French. 

It is a surprising fact that this ambition to act the patriarch 
does not only prevail among the men, [366] but even the 
women meddle therewith. These, in usurping the quality 
and the name of religieuses, say certain prayers in their own 
fashion, and affect a manner of living more reserved than that 
of the commonalty of Indians, who allow themselves to be 
dazzled by the glamour of a false and ridiculous devotion. 
They look upon these women as extraordinary persons, whom 
they believe to hold converse, to speak familiarly, and to hold 
communication with the sun, which they have all adored as 
their divinity. Not long ago, we had a famous one of them 
who, by her extravagant superstitions, encouraged the same in 
these poor Indians. I had an extreme desire to see her, but 
she died in the woods without the baptism that I had the 
intention to [367] give her if I had been so happy as to render 


1 This phrase in the original is celuy de Kenibexi; I presume it simply 
refers to some Indian from the Kenebec River. 


230 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


her worthy of it. This aged woman, who counted more than 
a hundred and fourteen ' years since her birth, had as the basis 
for all her ridiculous and superstitious devotions, some beads 
of jet, which were the remains of an unthreaded rosary. These 
she carefully preserved, and gave them only to those who 
were her friends, protesting to them, meanwhile, that the 
gift which she gave them had come originally from heaven, 
which was always continuing to give her the same favour just 
so many times as she, in order to worship the sun, went out 
from her wigwam and rendered it her homage and adoration. 
“T have only, then,” said she to them, “to hold up my hand 
and to open it, in order to bring down from [368] heaven 
these mysterious beads, which have the power and the 
property not only of succouring the Indians in their sicknesses 
and all their most pressing necessities, but also of preserving 
them from surprise, from persecution, and from the fury of 
their enemies.” It can truly be said that if some one of these 
people would devote himself wholly to goodness, and would 
take care to instruct the others, he could accomplish prodigies 
among them, since they would easily believe everything that 
a man of their nation would tell them. This imposture, then, 
that these rosary beads came from heaven, was so well received 
by those who gloried in possessing some of them, that such 
persons preserved them as they did the things which they held 
most dear in the world ; [369] and it angered these persons 
beyond endurance to contradict them in a foolishness which 
passed in their esteem for something divine and sacred. Such 
was the sentiment of an Indian woman who had asked baptism 
of me, and whom I instructed to this end during my winter 
at Nipisiguit. She had, as a relative of that woman patriarch, 
five mysterious rosary beads which she kept wrapped up with 


* Other instances of advanced ages claimed to be reached by the Indians 
are mentioned on pages 84, 272, and 408 of our author’s book. No doubt these 
are all greatly exaggerated, the round numbers used in most cases being con- 
formable to such a suspicion. 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 231 


much care. She showed them to me, wishing to persuade me 
that it was a present which Heaven had made to this pre- 
tended religieuse. This trait of superstition which I perceived 
in this catechumen made me resolve to defer her baptism, 
though I acquainted her of [370] the obstacle which she had 
raised thereto by her false and foolish idea concerning these 
rosary beads, which had come from France. And I told ‘her 
that if she had as much eagerness for baptism as she had 
testified to me, she could give me no more obvious proofs of 
it than by placing these beads in my hands. She was a good 
deal surprised by this discourse. She promised me, however, 
although in a somewhat faint-hearted manner, that she would 
do everything I desired in this matter. She let me see them, 
and when I had them in my hands, I wondered at the 
simplicity of this creature. I hid one of them, and of the five 
which she had given me, I returned to her only four. She 
asked me, much embarrassed, [371] where the fifth was? I 
pretended to be ignorant of the number which she had given 
me, and I made as if to seek among the branches of fir upon 
which I was then seated. This catechumen, as well as her 
whole family, being then persuaded that I had inadvertently 
dropped this mysterious bead, she herself, together with all the 
others, made a search for it so thorough that there remained 
nothing in the wigwam which was not moved several times 
from its place. I had some trouble to keep serious when I 
saw all this amusing disarrangement of the housekeeping ; 
and little was necessary to make me burst into laughter when 
an old Indian woman, considering that all these researches 
were in vain, commenced to complain of [372] the little care 
I had taken to preserve so precious a thing. She told me, 
with tears in her eyes, that she had a mortal regret for a loss 
so considerable: that it was very easy to see that this bead 
had come from Heaven, since it had vanished from their 
wigwam so suddenly in order to fly into the womb of the sun, 
from which it would descend a second time when the woman 


232 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


patriarch had made her usual prayer : that all incredulous as 
I had seemed up to that time to everything the Gaspesians 
had told me as to the holiness of that aged woman, and of the 
familiar conversation which she had daily with God, she would, 
however, make me understand the truth thereof when we went 
in the spring, as we were proposing, [373] to the wigwam 
of this woman patriarch, where I should find without fail the 
bead which I had lost. She repeated the same thing to me 
during several days, and with so much importunity that I 
wondered at her folly and her superstitions. The most con- 
vincing reasons that I adduced to undeceive her were useless ; 
for, closing her ears to everything I could say to inspire more 
correct sentiments in her, she railed against me with so much 
anger and violence that I judged it suitable to undeceive her 
at once, and to convince her of the error in which she was, 
something which was quite easy for me when I showed her 
the rosary bead and the surprising error for which she was 
[374] responsible. She was extremely surprised, and frankly 
admitted to me that she had no sense. They all profited by 
my instructions, and our catechumen gladly gave me the 
four other beads, which she had kept carefully among her 
most important possessions. Some of our French, who had 
been in the wigwam of this aged Gaspesian woman, assured 
me that she held also in singular veneration a King of Hearts, 
the foot of a glass, and a kind of medal, and that she 
worshipped these trifles with so much respect that she 
prostrated herself before them as before her divinities. She 
was of the Cross-bearer nation, as it was easy [375] to see by 
her own cross, which she had placed in the most honourable 
part of her wigwam, and which she had beautified with bead- 
work, wampum, painting, and porcupine quills. The pleasing 


* She lived at Miramichi, as is proved by the reference on the next page, 
to her membership among the Cross-bearers. This little incident evidently 
occurred during our author’s first winter at Nepisiguit, between September 
1676 and January 1677. 


SUPERSTITIONS OF THE GASPESIANS 233 


mixture thereof represented several and separate figures of 
everything which was in her devotions. She placed it usually 
between her and the French, obliging them to make their 
prayers before her cross, whilst from her side she made her 
OWn prayers, according to her custom, before her King of 
Hearts and her other divinities. These the Indians buried 
with her after her death, convinced as they were that she 
would go to be a patriarch in the other world, and that she 
would not have the fate of other mortal men [376] in the 
Land of Souls. For these dance without ceasing at their: 
arrival, and are always in a continual movement, whilst she 
would enjoy a perpetual repose, and a happy tranquillity. 

I should never finish if I wished to report to you here all 
the traits of superstition in these barbarians. That which I 
have said thereon is enough to make you see the extent of 
the error and the simplicity of this blind people, who have 
lived in the shades of Christianity without law, without faith, 
and without religion. 


(3774 CHAPTER XIV 
On the Rulers and the Laws of the Gaspesians 


T is certain that laws have been the foundation of 
the most flourishing monarchies of the world. 
This is why they are called, and rightly, the soul 
of the republics, of the kingdoms, and of the empires of 
the universe, because these survive only in proportion as 
their peoples faithfully obey their laws. Consequently one 
cannot, it seems to me, give to-day a more convincing 
reason for the decadence of the Gaspesian nation, formerly 
one of the most numerous and most flourishing of Canada, 
than their disregard [378] for the fundamental laws which 
the elders had established, but which our Indians have not 
observed, and still do not observe at present, except in so 
far as it pleases them ; for it is truth to say that they have 
neither faith, nor king, nor laws. One sees no more among 
these people those large assemblies in the form of councils, 
nor that supreme authority of the heads of families, elders, 
and chiefs, who regulated civil and criminal affairs, and in the 
last resort decided upon war and upon peace, giving such 
orders as they thought absolutely essential, and enforcing the 
observance thereof with much submission and fidelity. There 
are now only two or three Indians who, in their own districts 
[379] still preserve, though feebly, a sort of power and 
authority, if one can say that such is found among these 
peoples. The most prominent chief is followed by several 
young warriors and by several hunters, who act always as his 
{ escort, and who fall in under arms when this ruler wishes 
"particular distinction upon some special occasion. But, in fact, 
234 


THE RULERS AND LAWS 235 


all his power and authority are based only upon the good will 
of those of his nation, who execute his orders just in so far as 
it pleases them.’ We had among us, at the River of Saint 
Joseph? one of these old chiefs whom our Gaspesians 
considered as their head and their ruler, much more because 
of his family, [380] which was very numerous, than because 
of his sovereign power, of which they have shaken off the 
yoke, and which they are not willing any longer to recognise. 

The occupation of this chief was to assign the places for 
hunting, and to take the furs of the Indians, giving them in 
return whatever they needed. This man made it a point of 
honour to be always the worst dressed of his people, and to 
take care that they all were better clothed than he. He held 
it as a maxim, as he told me one day, that a ruler, and a great 
heart like his, ought to take more care for others than for 
himself, because, good hunter as he was, he always obtained 
easily everything which he needed [381] for his own use, and 
that as for the rest, if he did not himself live well, he should 
find his desire in the affection and the hearts of his subjects. 
It was as if he had wished to say that his treasures and riches 
were in the hearts and in the affection of his people.® 

It happened that a stranger wished to dispute his right of 
command, or at least to share with this ruler that government, 


* A very similar case (if indeed this is not simply an echo thereof) of an 
Indian chief at Richibucto who required his warriors to act as his escort on 
special occasions, is recorded at some length by Denys (Description, 1. 176). 

* The Restigouche, as our author tells us at page 494 of his book, and as 
Father Jumeau’s map shows. No doubt the name was given by Father le 
Clercq, but it did not survive. 

* Another striking case of this spirit of zoë/esse oblige among Indian chiefs 
is related by Father Joseph le Caron in 1618, speaking of a Montagnais chief 
(First Establishment of the Faith, \. 136). On this chief’s complaint that 
the French charged the Indians too much for goods, the factor said they would 
be sold cheaper to him but not to his people. “This Indian then began to 
say to this factor in a disdainful way: ‘You make fun of me to say that you 
will sell cheap to me and dear to my people. If I did so I should deserve 
to be hung and beheaded by my people. I am a chief; I do not speak for 
myself ; I speak for my people.’ This I witnessed.” 


236 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


with its imaginary grandeur, for which he had as much regard 
as if it were the greatest empire of the world. This competitor 
arrived well provided with axes, with guns, with blankets, 
with beavers, and with everything which could give him some 
prominence and some entrance into the sovereignty which he 
[382] claimed was properly due him by right of hereditary 
succession, because his father had been formerly head and 
chief of the Gaspesian nation. ‘ Very well,” said our Indian, 
“show that thy heart is a true chief’s heart and worthy of 
absolute empire over the people whom I rule. There,” 
continued he, “are some poor Indians who are wholly naked ; 
give them thy robes of otter and beaver. Thou seest, again, 
that I am the worst dressed of all, and it is through this that 
I wish to appear chief—through despoiling and depriving 
myself of everything in order to aid my Indians. Therefore, 
when following my example, thou shouldst be as poor as I. 
Let us go a-hunting when the time is right, [383] and the one 
of us who kills the most moose and beavers shall be the 
legitimate king of all the Gaspesians.” The stranger 
accepted this challenge with spirit. In imitation of our chief, 
he gave away everything he had, and kept back nothing 
except the bare necessaries. He went hunting, but he was 
so unfortunate as to do it very badly, and consequently he 
was obliged to abandon the enterprise which he had formed 
of commanding our Gaspesians, who did not wish to recognise 
any other head than their old and brave chief whom they 
obeyed with pleasure. 

The Gaspesians have at present no fundamental laws 
which serve them as regulations. They make up and end 
all [384] their quarrels and their differences through friends 
and through arbiters. If it is, however, a question of 
punishing a criminal who has killed or assassinated some 
Indian, he is condemned to death without other form of law. 
“Take care, my friend,” say they, “if thou killest, thou 
shalt be killed.” This is often carried out by command of 


THE RULERS AND LAWS 237 


the elders, who assemble in council upon the subject, and 
often by the private authority of individuals, without any 
trial of the case being made, provided that it is evident the 
criminal has deserved death. 

Neither prisons, racks, wheels, nor gibbets are in use 
among these people, as in Europe. All are satisfied if 
the head of the guilty person is broken with a blow of an 
axe [385] oraclub. The other tortures are kept solely for 
tormenting and killing prisoners of war. 

It is the right of the head of the nation, according to the 
customs of the country, which serve as laws and regulations to 
the Gaspesians, to distribute the places of hunting to each 
individual. It is not permitted to any Indian to overstep the 
bounds and limits of the region which shall have been assigned 
him in the assemblies of the elders. These are held in autumn 
and spring expressly to make this assignment. 

The young people must strictly obey the orders of the 
chiefs. When it is a question of going to war, they must 
allow themselves to be led, and must [386] attack and fight 
the nation which they wish to destroy, in the manner which 
has been planned by the head of their council of war. 

It is not permissible for any Indian to marry his relative. 
One never sees among our Gaspesians those incestuous 


' A curious case, probably, however, apocryphal, of an execution of one 
of their number by the Micmacs within historic times, is thus related by 
Robert Cooney, in his Compendious History of Northern New Brunswick, &c., 
1832, page 138. ‘A few years after these affairs, [hence about 1730] the 
Richibuctos condemned one of their tribe, convicted of some treasonable 
correspondence with the Mohawks, to be stoned to death. After a regular 
and formal trial, the criminal was conveyed with a great deal of solemnity, from 
Snider’s Point, at the entrance of the harbour, [Richibucto] to Platt’s Point, 
about three miles further up, and there, being previously bound hand and 
foot, and fastened upon a rock, still visible at low water, was the sentence 
executed.” There is an independent reference to the same subject in John 
West’s Journal of a Mission to the Indians of the British Provinces of New 
Brunswick, &c., London, 1827, page 253. Speaking of the way in which the 
Micmacs punished an adulteress, he says, “The crime . . . was seldom known 
among them . . . It was said that they formerly stoned the offender to death.” 


238 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


marriages of father with daughter, of son with mother, of sister 
with brother, of uncle with niece, nor even of cousin with 
cousin. Incest is held in horror among them, and they have 
always testified to much aversion for this crime. 

The one of our Indians who wishes to marry a girl must 
live an entire year in the wigwam of his mistress’s father, 
whom he must serve and to whom he must give all the [387] 
furs of moose and beavers which he kills in hunting. By the 
same law it is forbidden to the future husband and wife to 
abandon themselves to their pleasure.’ 

After the death of one’s brother, it is permissible to marry 
his wife, in order that she may have children of the same 
blood if she has not had any by her first husband: 

If, when the father of a family is dead, the widow contracts 
a second marriage, it is necessary that the eldest son take the 
care of his brothers and sisters, and that he build a separate 
wigwam. This is for the purpose of avoiding bad treatment 
by their step-father, and in order not to cause any trouble in 
the housekeeping. 

It is the duty of the head man and chief to have care over 
the orphans. The chiefs are obliged to [388] distribute them 
among the wigwams of the best hunters, in order that they 
may be supported and brought up as if they were the own 
children of the latter.? 

All the Gaspesians must without fail aid the sick; and 
those who have meat or fish in abundance must give some of 
it to those who are in need. : 

It is a crime among our Indians not to be hospitable. 
They receive all strangers who are not their enemies very 
kindly into their wigwams. 

They must take great care of the bones of the dead, and 
must bury everything which was in use by the deceased, in 


* This subject of marriage is treated by our author at length in Chapter XVI, 
(beginning at page 437) of his book, where he makes again these statements. 
* Our author refers again to this matter at page 111 of his book. 


THE RULERS AND LAWS 239 


order that the spirits of each thing, such as his snowshoes, 
guns, axes, [389] kettles, &c., may render him service in the 
Land of Souls. 

According to the Gaspesian laws, it is allowable to break 
marriages and declare them void when those who are married 
have no longer any affection for one another. 

It is considered shameful to show anger or impatience for 
the insults that are offered, or the misfortunes which come, to 
the Indians, at least unless this is to defend the honour and 
reputation of the dead, who cannot, say they, avenge them- 
selves, nor obtain satisfaction for the insults and affronts which 
are done them. 

It is forbidden them by the laws and customs of the 

country to pardon or to forgive any one of their enemies, 
[390] unless great presents are given on behalf of these to the 
whole nation, or to those who have been injured. 
4 The women have no command among the Indians. They 
must needs obey the orders of their husbands. They have 
no rights in the councils, nor in the public feasts. It is the 
same, as to this, with the young men who have not yet killed 
any moose, the death of which opens the portal to the honours 
of the Gaspesian nation, and gives to the young men the right 
to assist at public and private assemblies. One is always a 
young man, that is to say, one has no more rights than the 
children, the women, and the girls, as long as he has not 
killed a moose. In [391] brief, it can also be said that 
all the superstitions which we have considered* pass for so 
many laws among these peoples. They have also many 
others of them, of which I do not speak here, but which 
shall be seen in the body of this history. 


* This subject is more fully treated by our author earlier, in Chapter XII., 
beginning at page 308. we 
* This matter is treated by our author more fully in Chapter XVI., beginning 


at page 437. : se 
8 z.e. those considered in the preceding chapter, which is devoted to them, 


CHAPTER XV 


On the Customs of the Gaspesians* 


N the preceding chapters we have spoken of the origin 
and birth of the Gaspesians. We have told how they 
were clothed, lodged, and fed; what were the 

language, religion, superstitions, head men, rulers, and [392] 
laws of these peoples. It is right, now, in order to satisfy 
fully the curiosity of the reader, to present to him here a 
faithful picture of their customs in general, and a synopsis 
of the good and bad qualities, whether of body or of mind, 
of the Gaspesians. 

They are all naturally well built in body, of a fine size, 
tall, well-proportioned, and without any deformity, powerful, 
robust, dexterous, and of surprising agility, especially when 
they pursue the moose, whose swiftness is not less than that 
of fallow deer and stags. The men are taller than the women, 
who are nearly always short; but both are of a deportment 
grave, serious, and very aie 

[393] walk with dignity as if they, ea always some 


great affair to think upon, and to decide, in their minds.” 


* In this chapter, as in some others of this book, there are many passages 
so closely like the corresponding parts of Father le Jeune’s Relation of 1634 
as to make it quite certain that our author used that work in writing this book. 
I have considered the subject in the Introduction to the present volume 
(page 18). 

* Our author’s statement as to the dignified bearing of the Micmac Indians 
is amply confirmed by much independent testimony relating both to them 
and to the neighbouring tribes. Champlain said of the chief Marchin of 
Kennebec: “He had a fine appearance; all his motions were dignified, 
savage as he was” (Œuvres, Laverdiére’s edition, 222). Father le Jeune 
said of certain Montagnais, ‘‘ this or has something inexpressibly noble 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 241 


Their colour is brown, tawny, and swarthy, but their teeth 
are extremely white, perhaps because of the fir gum which 
they chew very often and which communicates to them this 
whiteness. Their colour, however, does not lessen at all the 
natural beauty of the features of their faces, and it can be 
said with truth that there are seen in Gaspesia as fine chil- 
dren, and persons as well built, as in France ; whilst among 
them there are as a rule neither humpbacks nor crippled, one- 
eyed, blind, or maimed persons. 


They enjoy a perfect health, not being subject to an [394] 
infinity of diseases as we are. They are neither too stout nor 
too thin, and one does not see among the Gaspesians any of 
those fat bellies full of humours and of grease. Consequently 
the very names of gout, stone, gravel, gall, colic, rheumatism, 
are entirely unknown to them. 

They all have naturally a sound mind, and common sense 
beyond that which is supposed in France. They conduct 
their affairs cleverly,! and take wise and necessary steps to 
make them turn out favourably. They are very eloquent and 
persuasive among those of their own nation, using metaphors 


about it,” and again, “their demeanour and gait were full of dignity and real 
grace” (Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, V. 145, XV. 229 ; compare also 
V. 205, and XLVIII. 171). The matter-of-fact John Allan, leader of the 
sympathisers with the Revolution on the River Saint John in 1777, said 
of Ambroise St. Aubin, a chief of that river, “there was something in his 
demeanour august and noble” (Kidder’s Military Operations in Eastern Maine 
and Nova Scotia during the Revolution, Albany, 1867, 105). And almost in 
our own time Governor Gordon speaks thus of a Micmac who, at the village 
of Burnt Church, interpreted the address of the Bishop: “ He never faltered 
or hesitated, always rendering with the most perfect fluency the sentence 
which the Bishop had uttered, whilst his gestures—sometimes folding both 
hands on his breast, sometimes raising one arm, sometimes gently extending 
both—were not only forcible but excessively graceful” (W2lderness Journeys 
in New Brunswick, St. John, 1864, 39). And I can add that I have myself 
known both Micmac and Maliseet Indians whose demeanour bore ample 
testimony to the truth of these characterisations. 

* Indeed they were able to outwit the French captains in trade, as Denys 
makes very plain (Description, 11. 477, 478). Father Biard also speaks of the 
same ability (Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, III. 81). 


Q 


242 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


and very pleasing circumlocutions in their speeches, which are 
very eloquent, especially when [395] these are pronounced in 
the councils and the public and general assemblies. 

If it is a great good to be delivered from a great ill, our 
Gaspesians can call themselves happy, because they have 
neither avarice nor ambition,—those two cruel executioners 
which give pain and torture to a multitude of persons. As 
they have neither police, nor taxes, nor office, nor command- 
ment which is absolute (for they obey, as we have said, only 
their head men and their chiefs in so far as it pleases them), 
they scarcely give themselves the trouble to amass riches, or 
to make a fortune more considerable than that which they 
possess in their woods. They are content enough provided 
that they [396] have the wherewithal for living, and that they 
have the reputation of being good warriors and good hunters, 
in which they reckon all their glory and their ambition. 
They are naturally fond of their repose, putting away from 
them, as far as they can, all the subjects for annoyance which 
would trouble them. Hence it comes about that they never 
contradict any one, and that they let every one do as he pleases, 
even to the extent that the fathers and the mothers do not 
dare correct their children, but permit their misbehaviour for 
fear of vexing them by chastising them. 

They never quarrel and never are angry with one another, 
not because of any inclination they have to practise virtue, 
but for their own satisfaction, [397] and in the fear, as we 
have just said, of troubling their repose, of which they are 
wholly idolaters.’ 

Indeed, if any natural antipathy exists between husband 
and wife, or if they cannot live together in perfect under- 
standing, they separate from one another, in order to seek 
elsewhere the peace and union which they cannot find 


* Their love for repose is exemplified very clearly by the high place they 
give it among the desirable attributes of the Land of Souls, as our author 
incidentally illustrates at pages 228 and 376 of his book. 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 243 


together. Consequently they cannot understand how one 
can submit to the indissolubility of marriage. “Dost thou 
not see,” they will say to you, “that thou hast no sense? 
My wife does not get on with me, and I do not get on with 
her. She will agree well with such a one, who does not 
agree with his own wife. Why dost thou wish that we [398] 
four be unhappy for the rest of our days?” In a word, they 
hold it as a maxim that each one is free: that one can do 
whatever he wishes: and that it is not sensible to put con- 
straint upon men. It is necessary, say they, to live without 
annoyance and disquiet, to be content with that which one 
has, and to endure with constancy the misfortunes of nature, 
because the sun, or he who has made and governs all, orders 
it thus. If some one among them laments, grieves, or is 
angry, this is the only reasoning with which they console 
him. “Tell me, my brother, wilt thou always weep? 
Wilt thou always be angry? Wilt thou come nevermore 
to the dances and the feasts of the Gaspesians ? Wilt thou 
die, indeed, in weeping and [399] in the anger in which thou 
art at present :”’ If he who laments and grieves answers him 
no, and says that after some days he will recover his good 
humour and his usual amiability,—“ Well, my brother,” will 
be said to him, “thou hast no sense; since thou hast no 
intention to weep nor to be angry always, why dost thou 
not commence immediately to banish all bitterness from thy 
heart, and rejoice thyself with thy fellow-countrymen ? ” 
This is enough to restore his usual repose and tranquillity 
to the most afflicted of our Gaspesians. In a word, they rely 
upon liking nothing, and upon not becoming attached to the 
goods of the earth, in order not to be grieved or sad when 
they lose them. They are, [400] as a rule, always joyous, 
without being uneasy as to who will pay their debts. 

They have the fortitude and the resolution to bear bravely 
the misfortunes which are usual and common to all men. 
This greatness of spirit shows grandly in the fatigues of war, 


244 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


hunting, and the fishery, in which they endure the roughest 
labours with an admirable constancy. They have patience 
enough in their sicknesses to put Christians to confusion. In 
case there is shouting, blustering, singing, and dancing in the 
wigwam, it is very rarely that the sick one complains. He 
is content with that which he is given, and takes without 
repugnance whatever is presented to him, for the purpose of 
[401] restoring him to his original health. Also they endure 
with patience the severest punishments when they are con- 
vinced that they have deserved them, and that one has reason 
to be angry against them. They even make considerable’ 
presents to those who punish them severely for their mis- 
behaviour, in order, say they, to remove from the hearts of 
the former all the bitterness caused by the crime of which 
they are guilty. They always allege, as their usual excuse, 
that they had no sense when they had committed such and 
such actions. When they are convinced at length of their 
fault, one may threaten to break their bones with blows of 
clubs, to pierce their bodies with swords, or to break their 
heads with guns, and they present themselves to [402] submit 
to these punishments. “Strike me,” say they, “and kill me 
if thou wilt ; thou art right to be angry, and as for me I am 
wrong to have offended thee.’ ! 

It is not the same, however, when they are ill-treated with- 
out cause, for then everything is to be feared from them. 
As they are very vindictive against strangers, they preserve 
resentment for the ill-treatment in their hearts until they are 
entirely avenged for the injury or for the affront which will 
have been wrongly done them. They will even make them- 
selves drunk on purpose, or they will pretend to be full with 
brandy, in order to carry out their wicked plan, imagining 
that they will always be amply justified in the crime which 

* Compare an incidental confirmation of this spirit and speech related by 


our author at page 317 of his book. The spirit is also confirmed by Diéreville 
in his Relation du Voyage du Port Royal (Amsterdam, 1710), 171. 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 245 


they have committed [403] if they but say to the elders and 
heads of the nation, that they were tipsy, and that they had 
no reason or judgment during their drunkenness. 

They do not know what it is, as a rule, to give up 
an enterprise which they once have formed, especially if it is 
public and known to their fellow-countrymen ; for they fear 
to incur the reproach that would be made to them that they 
did not have heart enough to carry out the design. 

They are so generous and liberal towards one another that 
they seem not to have any attachment to the little they 
possess, for they deprive themselves thereof very willingly 
and in very good’spirit the very moment when they know 
that their friends have [404] need of it. It is true that this 
generous disposition is undergoing some alteration since the 
French, through the commerce which they have with them, 
have gradually accustômed them to traffic and not to give 
anything for nothing ; for, prior to the time when trade came 
into use among these people, it was as in the Golden Age, 
and everything was common property among them. 

Hospitality is in such great esteem among our Gaspesians 
that they make almost no distinction between the home-born 
and the stranger. They give lodging equally to the French 
and to the Indians who come from a distance, and to both 
they distribute generously whatever they have obtained in 
hunting and in the fishery, giving themselves little concern if 
the strangers remain among [405] them weeks, months, and 
even entire years. They are always good-natured to their 
guests, whom, for the time, they consider as belonging to the 
wigwam, especially if they understand even a little of the 
Gaspesian tongue. You will see them supporting their 
relatives, the children of their friends, the widows, orphans, 
and old people, without ever expressing any reproach for the 
support or the other aid which they give them. It is surely 
necessary to admit that this is a true indication of a good 
heart and a generous soul. Consequently it is truth to say 


246 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


that the injury most felt among them is the reproach that an 
Indian is Medousaotiek,’ that is to say, that he [406] is 
stingy. This is why, when one refuses them anything, they 
say scornfully : “Thou art a mean one,” or else, “Thou 
likest that ; like it then as much as thou wishest, but thou 
wilt always be stingy and a man without heart.” 

They are nevertheless ungrateful towards the French, 
and they do not, as a rule, give anything for nothing. 
Their ingratitude reaches even to a point that, after having 
been supported and provided with the necessaries of life 
in their needs and their necessities, they will demand of 
you a compensation for the least servicé they will render 
you.” 

They are fond of ceremony, and are anxious to be 
accorded some when they come to trade at the French establish- 
ments ; [407] and it is, consequently, in order to satisfy them 
that sometimes the guns, and even the cannon, are fired on 
their arrival. The leader himself assembles all the canoes 
near his own and ranges them in good order before landing, 
in order to await the salute which is given him, and which all 
the Indians return to the French by the discharge of their 
guns. Sometimes the leader and chiefs are invited for a meal 
in order to show to all the Indians of the nation that they 
are esteemed and honoured. Rather frequently they are 
even given something like a fine coat, in order to distinguish 
them from the commonalty. For such things as this they 
have a particular esteem, especially if the article has been in 
use by the commander of the French. [408] It was, perhaps, 


* This word is obviously Micmac, and is evidently identical with the word 
given by Rand in his Æng/ish-Micmac Dictionary (page 253) for “stingy,” 
namely, Médoojdwae. Since, aside from the additional & of our author’s form, 
the two words differ practically only in one letter, I infer that the s of Father 
le Clercq’s form is a misprint for 7. 

* An example of a closely related trait, the demanding of a great reward 
as a condition of helping the French in distress, is given by our author from 
his personal experience at page 230 of his book. 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 247 


for this reason that a good old man who loved me tenderly 
was never willing to appear in any ceremony, whether public 
or private, except with a cap, a pair of embroidered gloves, 
and a rosary which I had given him. He held my present 
in so much esteem that he believed himself something more 
grand than he was, although he was then all that he could be 
among his people, of which he was still the head man and the 
chief at the age of more than a hundred and fifteen years." 
This good man gloried in the fact, and boasted everywhere, that 
he was my brother, and said that we were so closely bound 
together in friendship that his heart and mine were one and 
the same, thing. The affair went even to this extent [409] 
that he wished to accompany me everywhere I went, perhaps 
as much to profit by whatever was given me among the French 
as to gratify his friendship. 

The Gaspesians, however, are so sensitive to affronts which 
are offered them that they sometimes abandon themselves 
to despair, and even make attempts upon their lives, in the 
belief that the insult which has been done them tarnishes the 
honour and the reputation which they have acquired, whether 
in war or in hunting. 

Such were the feelings of a young Indian who, on account 
of having received by inadvertence a blow from a broom, given 
by a servant who was sweeping the house, imagined that he 
ought not to survive this imaginary insult [410] which waxed 
greater in his imagination in proportion as he reflected upon 
it. What,” said he to himself, “to have been turned out 
in a manner so shameful, and in presence of so great a 
number of Indians, my fellow-countrymen, and after that to 
appear again before their eyes? Ah, I prefer to die! What 
shall I look like,in the future, when I find myself in the 
public assemblies of my nation? And what esteem will there 
be for my courage and my valour when there is a question of 


1 On the probable exaggeration of their age by the Indians, consult an 
earlier note under page 230 of this volume. 


248 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


going to war, after having been beaten and chased in con- 
fusion by a maid-servant from the establishment of the captain 
of the French. It were much better, once more, that I die.” 
In fact he entered into the woods singing certain mournful 
songs [411] which expressed the bitterness of his heart. He 
took and tied to a tree the strap which served him as girdle, 
and began to hang and to strangle himself in earnest. He 
soon lost consciousness, and he would even infallibly have 
lost his life if his own sister had not happened to come by 
chance, but by special good fortune, to the very place where 
her miserable brother was hanging. She cut the strap 
promptly, and after having lamented as dead this man in whom 
she could not see any sign of life, she came to announce this 
sad news to the Indians who were with Monsieur Denys." 
They went into the woods and brought to the habitation this 
unhappy Gaspesian, who was still breathing [412] though but 
little. I forced open his teeth, and, having made him swallow 
some spoonfuls of brandy, he came to himself, and a little 
later he recovered his original health. 

His brother had formerly hung and strangled himself 
completely, in the Bay of Gaspé, because he was refused by 
a girl whom he loved tenderly, and whom he sought in 
marriage. For, in fact, although our Gaspesians, as we have 
said, live joyously and contentedly, and although they 
sedulously put off, so far as they can, everything which can 
trouble them, nevertheless some among them fall occasionally 
into a melancholy so black and so profound that they become 
immersed wholly in a cruel despair, and even make attempts 
[413] upon their own lives. 

The women and the girls are no more exempt than the 
men from this frenzy, and, abandoning themselves wholly to 


* This incident evidently occurred at Petite Riviere (Barachois), since the 
Monsieur Denys of our author was Pierre Denys, Sieur de la Ronde, whose 
habitation was at that place, not Richard Denys of Miramichi, who is always 
called in this book by his title of Fronsac. 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 249 


grief and sadness caused either by some displeasure they may 
have received, or by the recollection of the death of their 
relatives and friends, they hang and strangle themselves, as 
formerly did the wives and daughters of the Milesians, whom 
only the apprehension of being exposed wholly nude in the 
public places, according to the law that was made expressly for 
this purpose, kept from committing like cruelties. Nothing, 
however, has been effective up to the present in checking the 
mania of our Gaspesian women, of whom a number would 
miserably end their lives, if, at the time when [414] their 
melancholy and despair becomes known through the sad and 
gloomy songs which they sing, and which they make resound 
through the woods in a wholly dolorous manner, some one 
did not follow them everywhere in order to prevent and to 
anticipate the sad effects of their rage and their Pry ets, 
however, surprising to see that this melancholy and despair 
become dissipated almost in a moment, and that these people, 
however afflicted they seem, instantly check their tears, stop 
their sighs, and recover their usual tranquillity, protesting to 
all those who accompany them, that they have no more bitter-. 
ness in their hearts. ‘“ Ndegouche,”’ say they, “apche mou, 
adadaseou, apche mou oitahga- [415] hi, apche mou kedoukichtone- 
bilthi.”* “There is my melancholy gone by; I assure thee 


* The Micmac roots and modern equivalent of this sentence are fairly 
plain. The thrice repeated words apche mou are without question apch, mean- 
ing “again” or “more,” and moo, meaning “not.” Ndegouche is evidently 
closely equivalent to Vi/gooch, meaning “now” ; adadaseou evidently includes 
the root ajedasoo, found in the Micmac words for “ grief,” “ melancholy,” and 
“sorrow,” and perhaps is misprinted from ajadaseou; otiahgahi evidently 
includes the root akayé in words for “lament” and “ weep” (compare akahié 
of page 148); #edoukichtonebilchi evidently includes #edoo, an inseparable 
prefix meaning “I am about to,” and the equivalent of £éstoondpilse, meaning 
“to choke.” The entire expression could therefore be literally expressed, 
so far as its roots are concerned, ‘Now! again no melancholy, again no 
lamenting, again no intention to hang.” But this ignores, of course, all the 
participles, &c., upon which so much of the exact shade of meaning depends. 
All of the above roots are from Rand’s Dictionaries, where they may readily 
be found under their respective headings. 


250 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


that I shall lament no more, and that I have lost any intention 
to hang and strangle myself.” 

They are sweet tempered, peaceable, and tractable, having 
much charity, affection, and tenderness for one another : good 
to their friends, but cruel and pitiless to their enemies : 
wanderers and vagabonds, but industrious, nevertheless, and 
very clever in all that they undertake, even to making the 
stocks of guns as well as it can be done in France. I have 
seen some of them who have made locks from wood, and 
keys of the same material, upon the model of the one serving 
to close our casket in which were kept the ornaments [416] 
of the Chapel that were used by me. 

It can be said, to the praise and the glory of our Gaspesian 
women, that they are very modest, chaste, and continent, 
beyond what could be supposed ; and I can say with truth 
that I have specially devoted myself to the mission of Gaspesia 
because of the natural inclination the Gaspesians have for 
virtue. One never hears in their wigwams any impure words, 
not even any of those conversations which have a double 
meaning. Never do they in public take any liberty—I do 
not say criminal alone, but even the most trifling ; no kissing, 
no badinage between young persons of different [417] sexes ; 
in a word, everything is said and is done in their wigwams 
with much modesty and reserve.' 

There are among our Indian women none of those who, 
as in the case of the girls of some nations of this new world, 
take pride in prostituting themselves to the first comer, and 
whom their fathers and mothers themselves present to the 

* Our author’s testimony as to the modesty and chastity of the Micmacs is 
substantiated, well-nigh unanimously, by all of our early writers who knew 
them. Thus, it is emphasised by Lescarbot (Æistoire, 738, 740), by Father 
Biard (Relations, Thwaites’ edition, II. 9; III. 103), by Father le Jeune (of. 
cit, VIII. 157, 165-167), by Denys (Description, 11. 374, 393), by Monseigneur 
de Saint Valier (Estat present, pages 43-47), by Diéreville (Voyage, 168), and 
by PAbbé Maillard (Customs, 55), though the latter intermingles some details 


belonging to the Canadian tribes, while more recently it has been emphasised 
by Montague Chamberlain for all the Abenaki tribes (Acadiensis, 11. 81). 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 251 


most famous and prominent hunters and warriors. All of 
these shameful prostitutions are held in horror and abomina- 
tion among our Gaspesians, and one sees without wonder 
young Indian women so chaste and modest as to serve as 
an example, and to teach those of their sex the love and 
esteem which they ought to have for modesty and chastity. 
[418] I have seen one of them, who, being solicited strongly 
to submit to the pursuit and the importunities of a young 
warrior, whom she could not love without the loss of her 
honour, which was as dear to her as life, and who, wishing 
to escape his insolent pursuit, fled from the wigwam of her 
father and betook herself more than fifty leagues away, travel- 
ling with one of her companions upon the ice and in the 
snow, where she preferred to pass the nights in mid-winter 
upon some branches of fir, rather than to expose herself to 
committing a crime which she detested infinitely in her heart. 
The young Indian sought her in vain in the company of the 
other Indian women, who, not being able to imagine what 
had become [419] of their companion, feared lest she had 
fallen over some precipice, or had made an attempt on her 
life in the displeasure and the annoyance which she felt in 
seeing herself persecuted by the brutality of her lover. All 
the Indians, however, were agreeably surprised when this girl 
appeared some time after in the wigwam of her father, to 
whom she gave an account of the matter and of the cause 
of her absence. 

I do not claim, however, to affirm that chastity has an 
absolute empire in all the hearts of our Gaspesian women, for 
one does see among them some girls and women who are 
libertines and who live in dishonour. But indeed it is a 
fact that the drinking of brandy [420] and drunkenness causes 
these lapses, in accordance with the proverb, Jz vino Venus. 
For those who do not drink are so jealous of their honour 
that not only do they not abandon themselves to evil, 
but, on the contrary, they even go so far as to defeat and 


252 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


put to confusion, by their strong and brave resistance, 
those who have the insolence and temerity to solicit them 
to the least criminal action which can turn them from 
their duty. 

They are naturally fickle, mockers, slanderers, and dis- 
simulators. They are not true to their promises except in so 
far as they are restrained either by fear or by hope ; and they 
believe any person would have no sense who would keep [421] 
his word against his own interest. 

Their swearing is like that of the Romans. They swear 
by the sun, which they have worshipped as their deity, by 
their children, by their fathers, and by everything which 
they esteem most dear and most important, as did the 
Romans, who swore formerly by Jupiter, by Cæsar, and by 
the immortal Gods. It is true that our Gaspesians sometimes 
place the fingers in form of a cross in invoking the sacred 
name of JESUS, when they swear about some matter of the 
utmost consequence. There are even some of them who 
swear and blaspheme the holy name of God, like the French, 
who serve as stumbling-blocks to these peoples by their bad 
example [422] in the execrable blasphemies which they launch 
against Him whom the angels adore in Heaven, and whom the 
demons revere in the abysses of Hell. 

Never can there apply better than to our Gaspesians the 
couplet Rustico progenies nescit habere modum, because in fact 
they do not know what civility is, nor decorum. Since they 
consider themselves all equal, and one as great, as powerful, 
and as rich as another, they mock openly at our bowings, at 
our compliments, and at our embracings. They never remove 
their hats when they enter our dwellings; this ceremony 
seems to them too troublesome. They throw their presents on 


* That is to say in our tongue,—“An unpolished race knows nothing of 
the practice of self-restraint.” This is obviously a quotation from one of the 
poets, but Professor W. T. Raymond, to whom I owe the translation, has 
sought its source in vain. 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 253 


[423] the ground at the foot of the one to whom they wish to 
give them, and they smoke a pipe of tobacco before speaking. 
“Listen!” say they, “Take the present which I give thee 
with all my heart.” That is the sole compliment which they 
make on this occasion; but, nevertheless, all is affability 
among them, for everything which gives contentment to the 
senses passes for virtue. 

They are filthy and vile in their wigwams, of which the 
approaches are filled with excrements, feathers, chips, shreds of 
skins, and very often with entrails of the animals or the fishes 
which they take in hunting or fishing. In their eating they 
wash their meat only very superficially before putting it upon 
the fire, and they never clean [424] the kettle except the first 
time that they use it. Their clothes are all filthy, both out- 
side and inside, and soaked with oil and grease, of which the 
stink often produces sickness of the stomach. They hunt for 
vermin before everybody, without turning aside even a 
little. They make it walk for fun upon their hands, and 
they eat it as if it were something good. They find the 
use of our handkerchiefs ridiculous; they mock at us and 
say that it is placing excrements in our pockets. Finally, 
however calm it may be outside of the wigwam, there 
always prevails inside a very inconvenient wind, since these 
Indians let it go very freely, especially [425] when they 
have eaten much moose, of which one can say Corruptio optimi 
pessima. 

Their opposition to Christianity is great, from the side 
of their indifference, insensibility, and other faults which 
we have noted. But it is also no less from the point of 
view of drunkenness, which is the predominant vice of our 
Gaspesians ; and I can even say with truth, that this is one 
of the most powerful obstacles to the conversion of these 
peoples. 


These barbarians, who formerly mistook wine for blood)! 


1 As our author states, in another connection, at page go of his book. 


a 


254 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


and brandy for poison, and who fled with horror from the 
French who would give them these liquors, are to-day so 
enamoured with these kinds of drinks that they [426] make 
it a principle of honour to gorge themselves therewith like 
beasts ; and they only drink, properly speaking, in order to 
get drunk. It is this which compels the missionaries to regard 
with grief the immoderate traffic in brandy in Canada, and to 
view it as the most pernicious of the obstacles which the Devil 
has been able to raise against the salvation of the Indians,’ and 
against the establishment of the faith among these pagan and 
barbarous nations. For all the vices and the crimes, which 
are usually found separate from one another, are united in the 
single trade in brandy when it is made without regulations and 
moderation. 

Avarice, self-seeking, and the immoderate desire to amass 
riches, all of which the Son of God has [427] condemned by 
the choice which He has made of evangelical poverty, is the © 
unhappily fertile source of the surprising disorders which are 
committed by those who trade and traffic in brandy with the 
Indians. For you will note, if you please, that the traders 
make them drunk quite on purpose, in order to deprive these 
poor barbarians of the use of reason, so that the traders can 
deceive them more easily, and obtain almost for nothing their 
furs, which they would not sell except for a just and reason- 
able price if they were in their right minds. This trade is 
fraudulent, and liable to restitution in proportion to what the 
thing is worth, according to the customs of trade, these’ bar- 
barians not having in their drunkenness the liberty [428] nor 
the judgment which is necessary for concluding a deed of sale 
or purchase, which requires a free and mutual consent from 
both parties. 

Although it is not allowable to sell water for wine or for 
brandy, yet this is very often done by the mixing of these liquors 


* These words are des François in the original, though surely our author 
meant to write des Sauvages, 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 255 


in the sale and distribution of these kinds of drinks. This is 
therefore the second irregularity of which our traders in 
brandy are guilty ; and they colour this. injustice by the title 
of charity, alleging as their reason, that they make this mixture 
in order not to get the Indians drunk. It is true that the 
traders would be to some extent excusable if they made up 
the difference by other goods, but it is well known that they 
do [429] nothing of the kind. On the contrary, they take the 
same profit as if they sold honestly, and they still make the 
Indians drunk by these mixed liquors, thus rendering them- 
selves, by this miserable kind of trading, the masters not only of 
the furs of the Indians, but also of their blankets, guns, axes, 
kettles, &c., which the traders have sold them at a very dear 
rate. Thus these poor barbarians find themselves wholly 
naked, and deprived of the furs and goods which they had 
brought and traded for their own use, and for the support of 
their families. 

Lewdness, adulteries, incests, and several other crimes 
which decency keeps me from naming, are the usual disorders 
which are [430] committed through the trade in brandy, of 
which some traders make use in order to abuse the Indian 
women, who yield themselves readily during their drunkenness 
to all kinds of indecency, although at other times, as we have 
said, they would be more like to give a box on the ears than 
a kiss to whomsoever wished to engage them to evil, if they 
were in their right minds. 

Injuries, quarrels, homicides, murders, parricides are to 
this day the sad consequences of the trade in brandy ; and one 
sees with grief Indians dying in their drunkenness : strangling 
themselves : the brother cutting the throat of the sister: the 
husband breaking the head of his wife: a mother [431] 
throwing her child into the fire or the river: and fathers 
cruelly choking little innocent children whom they cherish 
and love as much as, and more than, themselves when they 
are not deprived of their reason. They consider it sport to 


256 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


break and shatter everything in the wigwams, and to bawl 
for hours together, repeating always the same word. They 
beat themselves and tear themselves to pieces, something which 
happens never, or at least very rarely, when they are sober. 
The French themselves are not exempt from the drunken 
fury of these barbarians, who, through a manifestation of the 
anger of God justly irritated against a conduct so little 
Christian, sometimes rob, ravage, and burn the French 
houses and [432] stores, and very often descend to the 
saddest extremes. 

I abbreviate an infinity of other disturbances resulting 
from the immoderate trade which is made to our Indians in 
wine, brandy, and all other intoxicating drinks,-in order that 
I may justify the zeal of Monseigneur the Bishop of Quebec, 
the Recollects, and the other missionaries who have strongly 
declared themselves against these disturbances, and with so 
much more of justice since, through long experience, they 
have recognised the sad cause of the loss of the spiritual and 
temporal good of the French and of the Indians of New 
France. They have recognised, too, that among a great 
number of obstacles—from superstition, from insensibility, 
from blindness, [433] from indifference, from impurity—which 
are opposed to the conversion of these pagan nations, there 
will always be much less likelihood of establishing solidly 
a true Christianity among these peoples so long as they are 
made drunk, and so long as no rule or moderation is 
observed in the distribution and sale of brandy. It was 
also this, perhaps, which a young libertine wished to express 
to me. He, not giving himself any concern about the salva- 
tion of the Indians, provided that he had their furs in order 
to satisfy his ambition and selfishness, boasted that he could 
do more evil with a bottle of brandy than the missionaries 
could do good with a [434] bottle of holy water; that is to 
say, that he could damn more Indians by making them 


THE CUSTOMS OF THE GASPESIANS 257 


drunk, than the missionaries could save by instructing them 
in the truths of Christianity.! 

I do not wish to stop here to consider the arguments 
which the traders advance to justify the injustice of their 
proceedings. They say that it would be necessary to close 
the public-houses in France: that it is not a sin to make 
a Frenchman drunk, still less an Indian, even when he has 
been induced to drink, and although it is known that they 
take brandy only in order to become drunk, these barbarians 
not finding pleasure in this drink except so far as it makes 
them entirely lose their understanding and reason: that it 
would ruin absolutely the [435] commerce and trade of the 
colony if brandy were not given to the Indians, because these 
barbarians would betake themselves to the English and the 
Hollanders of New England and New Holland : and that, 
finally, there was needed a regulation of police, and above all 
no favouritism of persons, neither of relatives nor friends, 
so that the trade should be free to everybody to use it with 
moderation. This is in order that the profit should not 
be, as it was formerly, in the hands of those to whom the 
trade had been granted exclusively of all others, under the 
pretext, it was said, that they would not make the Indians 
drunk, but among whom, nevertheless, were seen many dis- 
turbances [436] and irregularities. 

It would be very easy to answer all this reasoning, but 
since the greater part of the arguments destroy one another, 
I will only say this ; it is desirable that a regulation of police 
be made to check, under rigorous penalties, the disturbances 
caused by this unfortunate liquor: that the trade be free, 
without distinction of persons, in order to avoid all jealousy : 
and finally, that each one be willing to relax something of his 

* All of the early missionaries were unanimous both as to the vast evil 
attending the sale of brandy to the Indians, and also in their denunciation of 
this traffic. And their observations and views were shared by at least one 
prominent layman, for Denys gives an account of the subject very like our 


author’s (Description, Il. 465-483). 
R 


258 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


selfishness in order to facilitate the conversion of these peoples, 
and the establishment of Christianity among these barbarians, 
by settling and civilising them among us. This would be 
in accordance with the ancient plan of the Reverend Recollect 
Fathers of the Province of Paris, who have the honour to have 
[437] been the first Apostles of this new world, as I have 
demonstrated in the First Establishment of the Faith in New 
France. 


* Our author’s other book, in which the subject is fully treated. 


CHAPTER XVI 
On the Marriage of the Gaspesians 


HE boys, according to the usual custom of the 
country, never leave the wigwams of their fathers 
except to go and live with some of their friends, 

where they hope to find girls whom they may marry. A 
boy has no sooner formed the design to espouse a girl than 
he makes for himself a proposal about it to her father, 
because he well knows that the girl [438] will never 
approve the suit, unless it be agreeable to her father. The 
boy asks the father if he thinks it suitable for him to 
enter into his wigwam, that is to say, into relationship with 
him through marrying his daughter, for whom he professes 
to have much inclination. If the father does not like the 
suit of the young Indian, he tells him so without other 
ceremony than saying it cannot be; and this lover, however 
enamoured he may be, receives this reply with equanimity 
as the decisive decree of his fate and of his courtship, and 
seeks elsewhere some other sweetheart. It is not the same 
if the father finds that the suitor who presents himself is 
acceptable for his daughter ; for then, after having given his 
consent to [439] this lover, he tells him to speak to his 
sweetheart, in order to learn her wish about an affair which 
concerns herself alone. For they do not wish, say these 
barbarians, to force the inclinations of their children in the 
matter of marriage, or to induce them, whether by use of 
force, obedience, or affection, to marry men whom they 
cannot bring themselves to like. Hence it is that the fathers 


and mothers of our Gaspesians leave to their children the 
259 


260 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


entire liberty of choosing the person whom they think most 
adaptable to their dispositions, and most conformable to their 
affections, although the parents, nevertheless, always keep the 
right to indicate to them the one whom they think most likely 
to be most suitable for them. But [440] in the end this 
matter turns out only as those wish who are to be married ; 
and they can very well say that they do not marry for the 
sake of others, but for themselves alone. 

The boy, then, after obtaining the consent of the father, 
addresses himself to the girl, in order to ascertain her senti- 
ments. He makes her a present from whatever important 
things he possesses ; and the custom is such that if she is 
agreeable to his suit, she receives and accepts it with pleasure, 
and offers him in return some of her most beautiful work- 
manship. She takes care, say they, not to receive the least 
thing from those who seek her in marriage, in order not 
to contract any engagement with a young man whom she 
has not the intention of marrying. 

[441] The. presents having been received and accepted 
by both parties, the Indian returns to his home, takes leave 
of his parents, and comes to live for an entire year in the 
wigwam of his sweetheart’s father, whom, according to the 
laws of the country, he is to serve, and to whom he is to 
give all the furs which he secures in hunting.* It is very 
much as formerly Jacob did, who served his father-in-law 
Laban before marrying Rachel. It is necessary then that he 
show himself a good hunter, capable of supporting a large 
family : that he make himself pleasant, obedient, and prompt 
to do everything which is connected with the welfare and the 


1 This statement is also made by our author on page 387 of his book. The 
period of probation is also mentioned by Denys (escrifiion, II. 372), and as 
well by Lescarbot in his Æ/zs/oire (738), by Diéreville in his Voyage (140), and 
by Gyles in his Memoirs of Odd Adventures (Boston, 1736), edition of 1869, 45, 
though the three latter appear to have considered it a period of marriage but 
of continence. A similar custom elsewhere is described in the Sevemdteenth 
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Part I., page 282. 


MARRIAGE OF THE GASPESIANS 261 


comfort of the wigwam : and that he be skilled in the usual 
exercises of the nation; this he does in order to merit the 
esteem of his mistress and to make her believe [442] that 
she will be perfectly happy with him. The girl, for her part, 
also does her best with that which concerns the housekeeping, 
and devotes herself wholly, during this year, if the suit of 
the boy be pleasing to her, to making snowshoes, sewing 
canoes, preparing barks, dressing skins of moose or of 
beaver, drawing the sled—in a word, to doing everything 
which can give her the reputation of being a good house- 
wife.! 

As they are all equally poor and rich, self-interest never 
determines their marriages. Also there is never a question 
of dowry, of property, of inheritance, of a contract, or of a 
notary who arranges the property of the two parties in case 
of divorce. If they [443] possess a blanket, or some beaver 
robe, it is sufficient for setting up housekeeping, and all that 
even the richest can hope for is a kettle, a gun, a fire-steel, 
a knife, an axe, a canoe, and some other trifles. These are 
all the riches of the newly-married couples, who do not 
fail, nevertheless, to live content when this little is wanting, 
because they hope to find in hunting that with which to 
supply in plenty their needs and necessities. 

Many persons are persuaded but too easily that the 
young man abuses his future spouse during this year which 
he is obliged to spend in the wigwam of his sweetheart. But 
aside from the fact that it is a [444] custom and an invariable 
law among our Gaspesians, which it is not permissible to 
transgress without exposing the entire nation to some con- 
siderable evil, it is truth to say that these two lovers live 
together like brother and sister with much circumspection. 
I have never heard, during all the time that I have lived 


1 The duties of the women in the household are described much more fully 
by Denys (Description, 11. 373, 411); and earlier writers, notably Lescarbot 
and Father Biard, also give the subject some attention. 


262 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


in Gaspesia, that any disorder occurred between them, 
considering likewise that the women and the girls, as 
we have said, are themselves so modest as not to permit 
in this matter any liberty which would be contrary to their 
duty. 

When, then, the two parties concur in disposition and 
tastes, at the end of the year the oldest [445] men of the 
nation, and the parents and friends of the future married 
couple, are brought together to the feast which is to be made 
for the public celebration of their marriage. The young man 
is obliged to go for the provision, and the entertainment is 
more or less magnificent according as he makes a hunt or 
a fishery more or less successful. The usual speeches are 
made, they sing, they dance, they amuse themselves ; and in 
the presence of the whole assembly the girl is given to the 
boy as his wife, without any other ceremony. If it turns 
out then that the disposition of one is incompatible with 
the nature of the other, the boy or the girl retires without 
fuss, and everybody is as content and satisfied as if the 
marriage had been accomplished, because, say they, one ought 
not to marry [446] only to be unhappy the remainder of 
one’s days. 

There is nevertheless much instability in these sorts of 
alliances, and the young married folks change their inclinations 
very easily when several years go by without their having 
children. ‘For in fact,” say they to their wives, “I have 
only married thee in the hope of seeing in my wigwam a 
numerous family, and since I cannot have children with thee, 
let us separate, and seek elsewhere each his own advantage.” 
It is such that if any stability is found in the marriages of 
our Gaspesians, it is only when the wife gives to her husband 
evidence of her fecundity ; and it can be said with truth that 
the children are [447] then the indissoluble bonds, and the 
confirmation, of the marriage of their father and mother, who 
keep faithful company without ever separating, and who live 


MARRIAGE OF THE GASPESIANS 263 


in so great a union with one another, that they seem not 
to have more than a single heart and a single will. They’ 
are very fond of one another, and they agree remarkably well. 
You never see quarrels, hatred, or reproaches among them. 
The men leave the arrangements of the housekeeping to the 
women, and do not interfere with them. The women cut 
up, slice off, and give away the meat as they please, but the 
husband does not get angry ; and I can say that I have never 
seen the head of the wigwam where I was living ask of his 
wife what [448] had become of the meat of moose and of 
beaver, although all that he had laid in had diminished very 
quickly. No more have I ever heard the women complain 
because they were not invited to the feasts or the councils : 
because the men amused themselves and ate the best morsels : 
because they themselves worked incessantly going to fetch 
wood for the fires, building the wigwams, dressing the skins, 
and occupying themselves with other severe labours, which 
are done only by the women. Each does her little duty 
quietly, peaceably, and without debate. The multiplication 
of children does not embarrass them; the more they have, 
the more they are content and satisfied. 

One cannot express the grief [449] of a Gaspesian when 
he loses his wife. It is true that outwardly he dissimulates 
as much as he can the bitterness which he has in his heart, 
because these people consider it a mark of weakness unworthy 
of a man, be he ever so little brave and noble, to lament in 
public. If, then, the husband sometimes sheds tears, it 
is only to show that he is not insensible to the death of 


1 From this word almost to the end of this paragraph, our authors text, 
while displaying some variations, agrees closely, and through whole phrases 
is identical, with a passage in Father le Jeunes Ae/afion of 1634 (Jesuit 
Relations, Thwaites’ edition, VI. 233). It is perfectly evident that our author 
here as elsewhere used Father le Jeune’s Re/atzon as a guide in the preparation 
of his own narrative, altering it to fit the conditions among the Gaspesians 
—a subject I have discussed in the Introduction (page 18) to the present 
volume. 


264 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


his wife, whom he loved tenderly ; although it can truly 
be said that in his own privacy he abandons himself entirely 
to melancholy, which very often kills him, or which takes 
him to the most distant nations, there to make war and 
to drown in the blood of his enemies the sorrow and grief 
which overwhelm him. 


[450] CHAPTER XVII 
Ox the Manner in which the Gaspesians make War 


F we investigate the motives and the particular causes 
which have inspired these peoples in going to war, 
we find nothing other than a desire to avenge an 

injury they have received, or, more often, the ambition 
to make themselves feared and dreaded by foreign nations. 
Hence it comes to pass that the Indians have been seen 
traversing great extents of country with a few handfuls of 
Indian corn as their entire provision, sleeping upon the snow, 
suffering hunger and _ thirst, exposing themselves to the 
inclemency of the weather in the [451] most rigorous seasons, 
lying in wait ten to fifteen days behind some tree—all in 
order to find opportunity to surprise, fight, and vanquish 
their enemies, to remove their scalps, and to return to their 
own country loaded with these cruel spoils. In a word, they 
do it for the purpose of indicating to the whole nation that 
they have ample courage to avenge by themselves any insults 
which may be offered them when the nation is not prepared 
itself to participate in their resentment. 

Neither profit nor the desire to extend the boundaries of 
their province ever has influence in the council of war ; and 
they never attack their enemies with the intention of seizing 
their country or of subjugating them to the laws and the 
customs of [452] Gaspesia. They are entirely content, pro- 
vided they are in a position to say “ We have conquered ” 
such and such “ nations ; we are avenged upon our enemies ; 


and we have taken from them a multitude of scalps, after 
265 


266 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


having slaughtered great numbers of them in the heat of 
combat.” 

Although our Gaspesians enjoy the delights of peace (and 
I am speaking here especially of the wars of the ancestors of 
this nation rather than of those of the present day, who seem to 
have lost entirely that warlike disposition through which their 
ancestors formerly conquered and triumphed gloriously over 
the most numerous peoples of New France), they preserve, 
nevertheless [453] even yet a remnant of cruelty and of a desire 
to wage war against the ancient enemies of their nation, and 
especially against the Indians who live on the north of the 
mouth of the River of Saint Lawrence, and who dread our 
Gaspesians as the most terrible and most cruel of their 
enemies. 

We call these barbarians the little Eskimaux,' to dis- 
tinguish them from the great, who live at the Baye des 
Espagnols, where the Basques go to make their cod fishery. 
This they do with much peril and danger because of the 
implacable warfare which they wage with these Indians. The 
source and origin of this warfare arises from this, that a 


1 This hostility between Micmacs and Esquimaux, which had become 
traditional, was obviously based upon that same psychological need for an 
enemy to bluster against, and a foe to avenge imaginary insults upon, which 
characterises the most enlightened of modern nations. Ample confirmation 
and considerable extension of our author’s statement upon this matter occur 
in the /esuif Relations. Thus a reference exists to such a war in 1633 
(Thwaites’ edition, XXX. 133), and in the Relation of 1644-45, an account is 
given of a war party of Micmacs which passed Miscou, and later’ returned 
with scalps and prisoners after a foray on the north coast of the Gulf of Saint 
Lawrence (of. cé¢., XXVIII. 34, 105). Again, in the Relation of 1659-60 it is 
stated that there had been a similar expedition two years before, and additional 
details are given (02. cif., XLV.65). Another expedition of 1661 is very fully 
described with much interesting detail by Father Richard in the Relation of 
1661-62 (09. cit., XLVII. 221). But I have not found any actual statement of 
a descent of the Esquimaux upon Micmac territory. 

The distinction our author makes between the fefzis Eskimaux and the 
grands 1 have not found elsewhere. The Baye des Espagnols was a temporary 
name of the Bay now called Bradore Bay, as I learn from a note by Dr. S. E. 
Dawson in 7ransactions of the Royal Society of Canada, X1., 1905, ii. 26. 


MANNER OF MAKING WAR 267 


Basque or Spanish sailor [454] having become lost in the 
woods, without ability to return on board ship before the 
departure of the vessels whose crews searched and waited for 
him in vain, found himself obliged to remain in the wigwams 
of the Indians, whom he fortunately met after suffering many 
troubles and fatigues. These barbarians did everything they 
could to console him for his hardships. They even gave him 
the daughter of the leading one of their chiefs, whom he 
married, and with whom he lived in peace. This Indian 
woman had all the affection imaginable for him, especially when 
she found herself in a condition soon to become the mother 
of a child, which she passionately desired in order to induce 
her husband to love her tenderly. [455] The winter passed 
very pleasantly ; the ships arrived as usual; and the captain 
was rejoiced to find his sailor in perfect health, and to learn of 
the generous way in which the Indians had treated him. He 
gave a solemn feast of gratitude to all the Eskimaux. This 
miserable creature was the only one who was insensible to 
the friendliness he had received from these people ; and not 
only this, but he even formed the horrible intention of cut- 
ting his wife’s throat before returning to France. Animated 
by rage and fury, but concealing, nevertheless, the cruel plan 
he had formed against her who had saved his life, he made 
pretence of wishing to go a hunting, in order to entertain 
[456] the French. For this purpose he keeps away from 
the ships, he avoids the wigwams, he embarks in a canoe 
with his wife ; and, having arrived at a place where a pleasing 
stream runs down between two rocks, he disembarks with 
her, quarrels with her, throws her upon the ground, kills 
her, murders her, and to finish his cruelty, he opens her 
belly with his knife in order to see whether children were 
conceived and formed in the womb of the Indian women 
as in the womb of the women of Europe. It seems that 
Nature reproached him immediately for the horror of his 
cruelty and the enormity of his outrage, by making him see 


268 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


the body of a little infant, which formed a silent reproach 
to him for killing it so cruelly [457] after having given it 
life. 

I do not know whether this unnatural sailor, who embarked 
after so black and wicked a deed, conceived all the remorse 
which he ought to have had for it in his heart. But I know 
well that the Indians were thereby so keenly grieved to the 
heart that they have wreaked upon the Spaniards and the 
Basques the vengeance which they all swore against the 
author of so detestable a murder. They have in fact killed 
and eaten a great number of them since that time, without 
any distinction of innocent or guilty." The arms of these 
cannibals are ordinarily the bow and arrow, with which they 
are so skilled that they kill every kind of bird upon the 
wing, and [458] very often they pierce their enemies through 
and through. The shots from these arrows are very dangerous 
for this reason, that at the end is always a kind of barb, 
which remains in the wound when one wishes to draw the 
arrows out. Some, however, make use of guns, just as do 
our Gaspesians, who have two or three times ravaged the 
nation of the Little Eskimaux. 

Never does one see in their army either baggage or 
women, as were in that of Darius, to whom too great a train 
was the cause of the loss of his life and his kingdom. Our 
Gaspesians take nothing superfluous ; they are content, like 
the soldiers of Alexander, in having good arms and very little 
provision, although they carry [459] the war into the most 
distant countries, where, however, they find in abundance 


1 This incident appears to be the same as that alluded to by Father Biard 
in his Relation of 1616 (Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ edition, III. 69). Father 
Biard describes this same hostility of the Labrador tribe, which he names 
Excomminiguois (obviously a form of Eskimaux) towards the French. It is 
also mentioned in brief by Father le Tac (Æés/oire Chronologigue, 34), who 
states that he was told the murderer was a Basque physician. In any case it 
is quite evident that most of the wealth of detail is supplied by our authors 
imagination. 


MANNER OF MAKING WAR 269 


that which they need. This is because there is a band of 
Indians who do the hunting every day, in order to subsist 
the body of the army, which is constantly making advance. 

They never ask the aid of their allies except in the last 
extremity, finding in their own ambition courage enough to 
fight and overcome their enemies, if these be not invincible. 
They ask, nevertheless, for auxiliary troops from their allies 
if they cannot themselves settle their quarrels ; and they send 
ambassadors, with collars of wampum, to invite these to take 
up the hatchet against the enemies of the nation. 

[460] War, however, is never declared except by advice 
of the old men, who alone decide, in the last resort, the affairs 
of the country. They prescribe the order which must be 
followed in the execution of their military undertakings ; they 
fix the day of departure ; and they assemble the young warriors 
to the war feast. These come there with their usual arms, 
firmly resolved to fight valiantly for the good of the nation. 
They paint their faces in red before starting, in order, they 
say, to conceal from their comrades and from their enemies 
the various changes of colour which the natural fear of the 
combat sometimes makes appear in the face, as well as in 
the heart, of the bravest [461] and the most intrepid." 

The speeches, the feasts, the songs, and the dances are 
no sooner finished than they embark in boats? and cross to 
the Isles aux Maingan, the land of the little Eskimaux. The 
women and girls without exception invoke their husbands 
and the young men to do their duty well. 

Having arrived at the home of the enemy, they reconnoitre 
the land and observe the places where the Eskimaux are 
encamped. Then they attack them vigorously, and take the 
scalps of all who succumb to the power of their arms, that 


1 Our author has spoken earlier of this matter, at page 62 of his book. 

2 Chaloupes in the original; it is not an error for canofs, since, as Denys 
tells us (Description, 1. 180), the Indians used boats, bought from the French, 
in their sea voyages. 


270 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


is, if they are so fortunate as to remain masters of the field 
of battle. 

It is in order to gratify their [462] spirit of cruelty that 
every one of these barbarians wears always hung from his 
neck a knife, with which he makes incisions in the heads of 
their enemies, and removes the skin to which the hair is 
attached. These they carry off as the glorious mementoes of 
their valour and spirit. In this they resemble our ancient 
Gauls, who made no less than our Gaspesians a trophy of 
their enemies’ heads, which they let hang from the breasts 
of their horses on their return from war. They even attached 
them to their doors, very much as is done to-day with the 
heads of bears and of wild boars. 

The combat finished, all of our warriors embark to [463] 
return to their country, where the entire nation receives them 
with uncommon rejoicings. As soon as the victorious boats 
of the Gaspesians have been sighted, the girls and women, all 
painted and adorned and wearing their necklaces of bead- 
work and of wampum, appear at the edge of the water in 
order to receive the trophies and the scalps which their 
husbands are bringing from the combat. They even throw 
themselves in blind haste into the water in order to receive 
them, and plunge into the river or the sea every time the 
warriors make their hues and cries of joy. These cries 
indicate the number of the enemies they have killed outright, 
and of the prisoners whom they are bringing to make suffer 
the usual torments and [464] tortures. | 

If some one of their number has fallen in the combat, they 
go into particular mourning for him, and give up several 
days to grief and sorrowing. Then they make feasts for the 
dead, at which the chief sets forth in his speech the fine 
actions of those who have distinguished themselves and who 


* These ceremonies on the return of the war parties are described in very 
similar terms in the Relation of 1645-46 and in that of 1661-63 (Jesuit 
Relations, Thwaites’ edition, XXVIII. 35, and XLVII. 231). 


MANNER OF MAKING WAR 271 


have been killed in the combat. A profound silence follows 
forthwith, but it is broken suddenly by the relatives of the 
deceased, who cry aloud with all their might and say, that 
it is not a question of lamenting further a misfortune for 
which there is no remedy, but rather of avenging the death 
of their countrymen by a complete ruin of their enemies. 
It is thus that our Indians live almost [465] always at war 
with the Eskimaux. For since it is impossible that some- 
body shall not remain dead on the battlefield whenever they 
fight with these barbarians, they are forever newly conceiving 
designs of revenging themselves, at whatsoever price this 
may be. 

The prisoners, however, are those who suffer the most. 
Indeed, if the Diomedes, the Buziris, the Diocletians, the 
Neros, and their like were still alive, I believe that they 
would hold in horror the vengeance, the tortures, and the 
cruelty of the Indians of New France, and above all of the 
Iroquois, towards their prisoners. For, in brief, to cut off the 
fingers of their enemies : to burn them with glowing firebrands 
over their whole bodies: to tear away [466] their nails : 
to make them eat their own flesh after it is all cooked and 
roasted by the violence of the fire: to throw burning sand, 
all red hot, upon the wounds of the victim: to pass sticks 
through the nerves of the arms and the legs, and to turn 
these until the body becomes quite doubled up by the 
retraction of these nerves: to make axes red hot and to 
place them in the manner of a flaming collar upon the body : 
these are only the usual tortures which the Iroquois and the 
other nations make their prisoners suffer.! 


* It will be noticed that our author is here describing the tortures inflicted 
upon prisoners by the Iroquois, not by the Micmacs. I cannot recall a single 
statement in all of our early records that the Micmacs burnt prisoners at the 
stake, or inflicted upon them the more cruel of these tortures; while, to the 
contrary, there is mention in the Relation of 1659-60 that it was not their 
custom to burn prisoners at the stake (Jesud¢ Relations, Thwaites’ edition, 
XLV. 69), Yet they were cruel enough to captives in minor respects, 


272 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


It has seemed to me in fact that our ancient Gaspesians 
were not less cruel than the others, since our Indians of the 
present day exhibited, [467] but a few years since, a remnant 
of that cruelty in the war which they have waged with the 
English of New England. In effect, having taken in the 
heat of combat an English officer who had distinguished 
himself by the great number of Indians he had killed upon 
the spot, these barbarians, animated with rage and the spirit of 
vengeance, stripped him wholly naked and made in his body 
a number of incisions, through which they passed and tied 
the set of ribbons which he had on his uniform; and they 
did it with such inhumanity that this poor Englishman died 
under this cruel torture.! They are not, however, so cruel 
with regard to the women and the children ; but, quite on 
the contrary, they support them and bring them up [468] 
among those of their own nation. Or, indeed, they not 
infrequently send them back to their own homes again, with- 
out doing them any injury. However, sometimes they break 
their heads with blows of an axe or a club. 

It could scarcely be believed with what fortitude the 
prisoners endure all the cruelties of their enemies, whom 
they defy even in the midst of their tortures. This they 
do even to reproaching them for not knowing anything of 
how to inflict suffering, and threatening to treat them much 
more cruelly if they catch them in their country. If you saw 
them singing in the midst of the flames which surround them 
on all sides, you would say that they were insensible to these 
fires. “Ah! you will kill me,” say they to their executioners, 
“you [469] will burn me. But also you must know that I 
have killed and burned many of your people. If you eat me, 
I have the consolation of having also eaten several of your 

* Our author’s account of this matter, while no doubt authentic, appears to 
lack confirmation in the literature of the French and Indian wars. Dr. S. A. 
Green, Secretary of the Massachusetts Historical Society, who knows that 


literature with altogether unusual thoroughness, has been so kind as to make 
search for a mention of the incident, but without result. 


MANNER OF MAKING WAR 273 


nation. Do then what you will; I have uncles, I have 
nephews, brothers and cousins, who will well avenge my 
death, and who will make you suffer more torments than 
you know how to invent against me.” To die in this manner 
is, among the Indians, to die as a great captain and as a 
man of courage. Consequently these barbarians make their 
children drink the blood of those who die without complaint 
in the tortures, in order to inspire them with the same courage 
and bravery. It is a matter of public rejoicing when the victim 
[470] weeps, groans, or gasps in the excess of his sufferings. 
This is why these barbarians make him suffer all the torments 
imaginable ; it is in order to compel him whom they torture 
to complain, and to confess that they are clever and ingenious 
in torturing prisoners. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
On the Hunting of the Gaspesians 


UR Indians have, apart from war, no occupation 
more honourable than hunting ; and they acquire 
no less glory and reputation from the number of 

Moose and of Beavers which they capture, and which they kill 
in [471] the chase, than from the number of scalps which they 
take from the heads of their enemies. 

The hunting of the Elk, or Moose,’ is followed at all 
times of the year. That in winter is the easiest and most like 
to succeed, especially when the snow is deep, solid, hard and 
frozen, for because of this the Indians, having snowshoes on 
their feet, easily approach the elk, which sinks in and cannot 
escape the pursuit of the hunters. It is different in summer, 
because these animals run with such speed that it is almost 
impossible to overtake them, sometimes not even after ten 
days of pursuit. 

The Moose is tall as a horse ; it has grayish hair [472] and 
a head almost like that ofa mule. It carries its antlers branched 
like the stag, except that they are broad as a board, and two to 


1 L'élan ou orignac in the original. The former word is the French name 
for the European elk which our moose so closely resembles, while the latter, 
which our author sometimes writes in his book origniac, is the Canadian-French 
name, adopted, as Lescarbot tells us, from the Basque word for deer. 

The hunting of the moose in the snow was so important a feature of the 
winter life of the Indians that it receives mention from practically all of our 
early writers (Lescarbot, Æis/oire, 804; Champlain, Voyages, Laverdière’s 
edition, 191 ; Denys, Description, I. 425 ; Gyles, Memoërs, 19 ; Jesuit Relations, 
Thwaites’ edition, XXXII. 41, XLV. 61, XLIX. 159). So dependent were 
they upon this hunting that in winters when snow was scant they were like to 
starve, while abundant snows meant eee of good cheer. 

4 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 275 


three feet long ; they are provided on both sides with prongs, 
which fall in autumn and are renewed in the spring with the 
addition of as many new branches as there are years! It 
browses on grass, and grazes in the meadows along the margins 
of the rivers, and in the forests during the summer. In 
winter it eats the tenderest tips of the branches of trees. Its 
hoof is cloven, and the left hind foot is a remedy against 
epilepsy ; but it must be secured, say the Indians, at a time 
when the animal is itself ill from this malady, of which it cures 
itself by placing this left foot to its ear.2 In [473] its heart 
is found a little bone which the Gaspesians call Oagando hi 
guidanne*; it isa sovereign remedy for easing the confine- 
ments of women, and for relieving the spasms and the suffer- 
ings of childbirth, when taken in broth after having been first 
reduced to powder. This animal weeps like stags and hinds 
when it is taken and cannot escape death ; the tears fall from 
its eyes as large as peas. It does not fail, however, to defend 
itself the very best that it can ; and an approach to it is some- 
what dangerous, because, thanks to a road which it has the 
cunning to beat out with its feet, it charges at times with such 
fury upon the hunters and their dogs, that it buries [474] both 
the one and the other in the snow, with a result that a number 

1 In this paragraph our author promulgates several errors, which is 
surprising since he should have known the moose well; but then, as this 
chapter will show, our good missionary was no naturalist. The colour of the 
moose is not grayish, except on some under parts and in old age, but is 
brownish to nearly black; it is not the prongs of the antlers which fall, but 
the entire horn, and they fall in early winter rather than in autumn; and while 
the moose does, to a small extent, browse on grass in meadows, it is prin- 


cipally lily-roots and other succulent water plants which it seeks along the 
margins of streams and lakes. 

* This bit of folk-medicine is also mentioned by Denys (Description, 11. 
320), and doubtless represents a widely repeated belief of the time. 

3 The first part of this phrase, Oagando is evidently simply the Micmac 
word for “bone,” which Rand gives as Wokundioo (English- Micmac Dictionary, 
4o).. The remainder I have not been able to trace in Rand’s works, but Father 
Pacifique suggests that the Zz is no doubt a misprint for 7z, making the two 
words equal to the modern Micmac zzgztamz, which means “ for giving birth.” 
This makes the phrase quite clear. 


276 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


of Indians are often crippled by them, while their dogs are 
killed on the spot. The hunters know the places where the 
moose have their retreat from certain gnawed or broken tips 
of branches, which they call Pactagane,' that is to say, the 
depredations of the Elk. They chew this wood, and they 
recognise from the taste of the branches the time since these 
animals have passed this place. They capture them some- 
times from ambush, and also by use of certain nooses made 
of large leather thongs set in the usual trail of this animal. 

The most ingenious method which our Gaspesians have 
for taking the Moose is this. The hunters, knowing [475] 
the place on the river where it is accustomed to resort when 
in heat, embark at night in a canoe, and, approaching the 
meadow where it has its retreat, browses, and usually sleeps, 
one of them imitates the cry of the female, while the other at 
the same time takes up water in a bark dish, and lets it fall 
drop by drop, as if it were the female relieving herself of her 
water. The male approaches, and the Indians who are on the 
watch kill him with shots from their guns. The same cun- 
ning and dexterity they also use with respect to the female, 
by counterfeiting the cry of the male.’ 

The hunting of the Beaver is as easy in summer as it is 
laborious in winter, although it is equally pleasing and [476] 
entertaining in both of these two seasons, because of the 
pleasure it is to see this animal’s natural industry, which 
transcends the imagination of those who have never seen the 
surprising evidences thereof. Consequently the Indians say 


1 Evidently involving the roots of the Micmac fakadoo, “to bite” (Rand, 
English-Micmac Dictionary, 37) and the termination ofwm, meaning place of 
occurrence. 

2 This account of the habits and the hunting of the moose accords with 
other information given in the /eswi{ Relations, by Denys, and by others, 
while adding a few new points. The calling of the bull moose by the method 
here described is also related by Denys (Description, 11. 424) and is still in 
extensive use. The killing of cow moose is now prohibited by law; but aside 
from this, I have never heard of the calling of cow moose by the method of 
imitating the call of the bull. 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 277 


that the Beavers have sense, and form a separate nation ; 
and they say they would cease to make war upon these 
animals if these would speak, howsoever little, in order that 
they might learn whether the Beavers are among their friends 
or their enemies. 

The Beaver is of the bigness of a water-spaniel. Its fur 
is chestnut, black, and rarely white, but always very soft and 
suitable for the making of hats. It is the great trade of New 
France. The Gaspesians say that the Beaver is the beloved 
of the French and [477] of the other Europeans, who seek it 
greedily ; and I have been unable to keep from laughing on 
overhearing an Indian, who said to me in banter, Tahoé messet 
kogoilar pajo ne daoïi dogoüil mkobit “In truth, my brother, 
the Beaver does everything to perfection. He makes for us 
kettles, axes, swords, knives, and gives us drink and food 
without the trouble of cultivating the ground.” 

This animal has short feet ; those in front are formed like 
paws, and those behind like fins, very much as in the 
Seals. It walks very slowly. For a time it was considered 


* The modern Micmac equivalents of these words can be traced with 
considerable certainty through Rand’s Euglish-Micmac Dictionary, to which 
the following page numbers refer. Zahoé evidently involves the root of Da, 
meaning “friend,” to which the Indian “brother” is equivalent (117) ; sesset 
evidently equals ‘A/sz4, meaning “every” (101); Aogoiiar pajo evidently 
involves the roots of kokwdjea', meaning “ good,” in the sense of “well” (122) ; 
ne daowi is the same as va titi, meaning “it is a fact” (105) ; dogoiil equals 
élookwa’, meaning “to do,” the @ being probably a misprint for e/ (88) ; while 
mhobit is kobef meaning “a beaver,” with the 7 perhaps indicating a skin (32). 
The entire phrase would then read, “ My friend, every(thing) well it is a fact 
does the beaver.” 

Our author says that an Indian used this expression to him. Yet in the 
elation of Father le Jeune of 1634 we read: “The Savages [z.e. the Mon- 
tagnais] say that it [the beaver] is the animal well-beloved by the French, 
English, and Basques,—in a word by the Europeans. I heard my host say 
one day, jokingly, Mtsst prcoutau amiscou, ‘The Beaver does everything 
perfectly well, it makes kettles, hatchets, swords, knives, bread; and, in 
short, it makes everything’” (Thwaites’ edition, VI., 297). I have pointed out 
in the Introduction (page 18) the probable meaning of the resemblances be- 
tween the work of our author and of Father le Jeune. 


278 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


amphibious, half-flesh half-fish, because it has a tail of appear- 
ance very like a sole, furnished [478] with scales which are 
not removable ; but at present it is eaten like fish in Lent, 
whether it be so in fact, or whether it is in order to obviate 
abuses which had crept in, some reducing to tail more than 
half of the body of that animal. It has a large but short 
head ; its jaws are armed with four large cutting teeth, to wit, 
two above and two below, which are suitable for polishing 
gold or silver, since they are both hard and soft at one and 
the same time. With these four teeth the Beaver cuts little 
poles for building its house, as well as trees as large as the 
thigh ; these it can fell exactly in the very spot where it 
foresees that they will be most useful and most needed. It 
cuts [479] these trees into pieces of different lengths, accord- 
ing to the use it wishes to make of them. It rolls them on 
the ground or pushes them through the water with its fore- 
paws, in order to build its house and to construct a dam which 
checks the current of a stream and forms a considerable pond, 
on the shore of which it usually dwells. There is always a 
master Beaver, which oversees this work, and which even 
beats those that do their duty badly. They all cart earth 
upon their tails, marching upon their hind feet and carrying 
in their fore-paws the wood which they need to accomplish 
their work. They mix the earth with the wood, and make 
a kind of masonry with their tails, [480] very much as do the 
masons with their trowels. They build causeways and dams 
of a breadth of two or three feet, a height of twelve or fifteen 
feet, and a length of twenty or thirty ; these are so incon- 
venient and difficult to break that this is in fact the hardest 
task in the hunting of the Beaver, which, by means of these 
dams, makes from a little stream a pond so considerable that 
they flood very often a large extent of country. They 
even obstruct the rivers so much that it is often necessary 
to get into the water in order to lift the canoes over the 
dams, as has happened several times to myself in going from 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 279 


Nipisiguit to the River of Sainte-Croix,! and in other places 
in Gaspesia. 

[481] The Beaver’s house is of some seven to eight feet 
in height, so well built and cemented with earth and wood 
that neither the rain nor the wind can enter. It is divided 
into three stories, and in these the large, the mid-sized, and 
the small beavers live separately and sleep upon straw. And 
the following circumstance is also worthy of remark, that when 
the number of these animals, which multiply rapidly, comes 
to increase, the older yield the house to the younger, which 
never fail to aid the others in building a house. It is as if 
these animals wished to give a natural lesson to both fathers 
and children mutually to aid one another. 

The Beaver does not feed [482] in the water, as some 
have imagined. It takes its food on land, eating certain barks 
of trees, which it cuts into fragments and transports to its 
house for use as provision during the winter. Its flesh is 
delicate, and very much like that of mutton. The kidneys? 
are sought by apothecaries, and are used with effect in easing 
women in childbirth, and in mitigating hysterics. 

Whenever the Beaver is hunted, whether this be in winter 
or in summer, it is always needful to break and tear down the 
house, all the approaches to which our Indians note exactly, in 
order, with greater assurance of success, to besiege and attack 
this animal which is entrenched in his little fort. 

[483] In Spring and Summer they are taken in traps ; 


1 The river here meant, on the old portage route from Nepisiguit to 
Miramichi, must be Portage River (shown on the map on page 175), for both 
the Nepisiguit and the Northwest Miramichi are too large to be dammed by 
beavers, and Gordon Brook is a very small stream. It interests me to recall 
that I have myself, within four years past, seen several fine new Beaver dams 
on this same Portage River, to which, as to others of their ancient haunts, 
the Beaver, long nearly extinct in this region, are now returning under the 
efficient protection they are receiving from the New Brunswick Government. 
Our author refers to his travel by this route on page 193 of his book. 

2 The castor glands are not the kidneys (vozgvoms), but special glandular 
pouches situated in the groins. 


280 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


when one of these is sprung a large piece of wood falls across 
their backs and kills them. But there is nothing so interest- 
ing as the hunting in the winter, which is, nevertheless, very 
wearisome and laborious. For the following is necessary ; one 
must break the ice in more than forty or fifty places: must 
cut the dams : must shatter the houses : and must cause the 
waters to run off, in order to see and more easily discover 
the Beavers. These animals make sport of the hunter, scorn 
him, and very often escape his pursuit by slipping from their 
pond through a secret outlet, which they have the instinct 
to leave in their dam in communication with [484] another 
neighbouring pond.' 

I pass here without mention the different kinds of hunting 
of Otters, Bears, Deer, and a number of other animals of 
Gaspesia, because they exhibit nothing of especial importance ; 
and it will be more to the purpose to give the reader some 
knowledge of the different kinds of wild beasts, birds, and 
fish which occur in Gaspesia. One sees there, first of all, 
three kinds of Partridges, of which some have the eye of a 
pheasant, and a plumage mottled with black, with white, with 
gray, and with orange. The others are gray, and I have seen 
a number during the winter which were entirely white? The 
Partridges of Canada perch and roost in trees ; and they eat 
the birch [485] or the fir, which imparts to them a little of its 
bitter taste. Their. stomachs are white and delicate like that 

* Except for some exaggeration in certain points, eg. the height of the 
dams, the carting of earth on the beavers’ tails, and somewhat too con- 
fident assertions about their home habits, this account of the beaver is fairly 
accurate and in accord with other evidence ; and the author shows much self- 
restraint in omitting the marvellous and entertaining tales then current about 
this animal. His account differs in this, as in many other particulars, from 
that given by Denys (Description, Il. 284). Further material on this subject 
is in the notes to the Champlain Societys Denys, 367. 

* These three partridges are readily recognisable ; the first is the Spruce, 
or Canada Grouse, the second is the Common Birch, or Ruffed Grouse, and 
the third is the Ptarmigan, or Willow Grouse, which occasionally crosses 


from Labrador to Gaspé. The account which follows of the Birch Partridge 
is accurate, except that it seems to attribute the “ drumming” to the female. 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 281 


of a capon, and those which eat only birch are excellent, in 
whatsoever manner one prepares them. The hunting of them 
is easy, especially in Spring, when they seek to lay their eggs ; 
because then they make a noise, by beating with their wings, 
and this reveals them to the hunter. And they are so little 
wild that one can drive them like chickens before him ; and 
they even allow themselves to be approached near enough to 
permit one to extend a noose attached to the end of a pole, 
through which they pass the head, and thus render easy this 
method of capture. 

The Canadian Ducks are [486] like those which we have 
in France. There is, however, one different species, which 
we call Canards Bfanchus ;1 these perch upon trees, and their 
plumage is very beautiful because of the pleasing diversity 
of the colours which compose it. 

The Humming-bird,? which some call the Bird of Heaven, 
is of the size of a nut. Its beak is slender and pointed as a 
needle. It lives solely upon the nectar of flowers, like the 
honey flies. Its plumage is of ravishing beauty, notably that 
of the throat, which is adorned with an azure and a dazzling 
red, which one cannot sufficiently admire, especially when it 
is exposed to the sun. Our Gaspesians call it Nirido, and 
[487] it is hunted solely as a curiosity. The guns are loaded 
with sand, because even the smallest shot would be too large 
for killing this tiny bird, which is dried in the oven and in the 
sun, for fear lest decay come in a body which seems wholly 
plumage. 

The Woodpeckers, which we call by this name because 

* The description makes it perfectly plain that this is the beautiful Wood- 
Duck, which is also mentioned under this same name by Diéreville (Voyage, 
212). The name has survived in Quebec, as shown by Clapin’s Dictionnaire 
Canadien-Français. 

* Oiseau mouche in the original; this very beautiful bird, unknown in France, 
attracted the attention of all the early writers, and Lescarbot, Denys, Diéreville 
and others describe it. Its modern Micmac name is Viledow (Rand, English- 


Micmac Dictionary), obviously the same word as our authors Wirido with 
the usual substitution of 7 for Z. 


282 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


they take their food by pricking the trunks of rotten trees, 
are marked by two kinds of plumage. Some are spotted with 
black and white, while others are wholly black, and bear on 
the head a remarkably beautiful crest.! They have extremely 
tough tongues which are as sharp as needles, and with these 
they make [488] holes in the trees large enough to insert the 
fist. 

The Eagles, the Sparrows, the Song Sparrows (whose 
song is not so pleasing by a great deal as those of the nightin- 
gales of Europe), the Canada Goose, the Snow Goose, the 
Ducks, the Swans, the Cormorants, the White-throated Spar- 
rows, the Gull, the Gannet, the Snipe, the Sandpipers, the 
Snow Buntings, the Thrushes, the Robins, the Jays, the 
Ravens, the Dippers, birds entirely white, entirely red, blue, 
yellow, and an infinity of others, are very abundant in Gas- 
pesia, but are unknown in France? An account of them 


1 The black and white woodpeckers are of course the several small species, 
not here distinguished, while the kind that is black with a beautiful crest is 
plainly the Pileated Woodpecker, or Blackcock, which occurs in this region. 
Our author trips in his natural history in supposing that they make holes in 
trees with their tongues; this of course is done with their bills. 

2 The names of these birds in the original are, respectively, azg/es, tifiais, 
rossignols, outarde, ote, canards, cignes, cormorans, siffieurs, goilan, margot, 
beccasses, beccassines, ortolans, grives, nrerles, pies, corbeaux, marionnefs. The 
identity of most of them is rendered plain by the fact that their names are still 
in use either among the French of Canada, as recorded in Professor C. E. 
Dionne’s Catalogue des Oiseaux de la Province de Quebec (Quebec, J. Dussault, 
1889), or else among the Acadians of the Maritime Provinces, according to 
notes sent me by the late Dr. A. C. Smith of Tracadie, N.B. I have discussed 
somewhat fully the identity of them all, with a summary of the evidence in 
doubtful cases, in a paper upon “The Identity of the Animals and Plants 
mentioned by the Early Voyagers to Eastern Canada,” which is expected 
to appear in the Zvansactions of the Royal Society of Canada in 1910, 

Some comment, however, upon several of the names will here be in place. 
The name ##iais I have not been able to identify with certainty, and I can 
only surmise that it is a corruption or form of 77¢7/s, which in France is applied 
to the Hedge Sparrow; I suspect that the word was applied by our unscientific 
author to various small birds of the sparrow-like kinds. The name vosszgno/ 
is used by the French in both Quebec and Acadia for the Song Sparrow, 
though in France it is the name of the Nightingale. It seems strange enough 
that the name of the finest songster of Europe should have been transferred 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 283 


would be useless, since there is nothing about them more 
curious than the names they have been given. 

There occur also among our Gaspesians three kinds of 
Wolves.! The Lynx has a [489] silvery fur, and two little 
tufts, of wholly black fur, on its head. Its flesh is pretty 
good, although it has rather a rank taste. This animal is 
more frightful to the eye than savage. Its skin is very good 
for making furs.? 

The Seal is a kind of fish, with a mottled skin and a 
black and white fur. It bears its young upon land, or upon 
some rocks or other. The mother has the instinct of carrying 
them on her back in order to teach them how to swim when 
they become too wearied in the water. Their feet are very 
short, those in front being paws and those behind fins. They 
do not walk, but creep on the sand, where they sleep and 
disport themselves in the [490] sun, especially when the tide 


to this modest little bird of Canada, whose simple notes would hardly receive 
any attention at all were it not that they are the first to be heard at the 
beginning of spring. But perhaps in this latter fact we find the explanation 
of the transfer of names; the cheery little song which told the first French 
who wintered in Canada that the long winter was now over and the spring 
really at hand, doubtless seemed to them the sweetest song that ever they 
heard, so they gave it the name of the sweetest songster they knew. The 
Sifleur in Canada to-day is the White-throated Sparrow or Peabody Bird; 
the name is very appropriate, and I believe this was its use by our author, 
even though he places it among sea birds. From the latter circumstance it 
might be thought that he meant the Whistler Duck, but he mentions the 
ducks separately and this species is not conspicuous enough to be singled 
out by itself; and besides the order of our author's list means little and 
involves other similar anomalies. Thus, the sarionette, as the persistence 
of the name in Canada and Louisiana proves, is the Dipper, a sea bird which 
our author separates widely from the other sea birds. 

The only other birds mentioned by our author in his book are the E7merillion 
or Falcon (of which on page 164 he gives the Gaspesian name of S7zagnis or 
Koucdedaoui), and Sarcelles, the Teal, noted on page 91. 

1 Two of these three, as the reader will note, are wolves only in their 
French names, not in zoological fact. 

2 A very good description of the Lou servier, as our author calls this 
animal ; would that he had described others as well. 

3 Loup marin, that is, translated, Sea Wolf, as our author, and all the French, 
called the Seals. Of course all the early voyagers rated it among the fish. 


284 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


is low, which is the most suitable and convenient time to 
hunt them. This is very profitable, as much because of their 
oil as for the considerable trade there is in the skins of these 
fish, of which some are large and stout as horses and oxen. 
These seals are called Metauh, to distinguish them from the 
common kinds, which are called Oüaspons.! Their flesh is 
passably good, and the pluck appears to be of as good a taste 
as pork. The other wolves* are very much like ours in 
Europe, excepting that they are not so vicious or cruel. 

The Hares of Canada are [491] very different from those 
of France, and they resemble rabbits. Their flesh, neverthe- 
less, is delicate enough, especially when it is used in a meat 
pie or as a stew. Many have a bitter taste, because of the fir 
which they eat during the winter, though it is very probable 
that they feed on grass in summer. It is a curious feature of 
these animals that their fur changes colour according to the 
seasons of the year. It begins to turn white on the approach 
of winter, and it is wholly white when the land is covered with 
snow. But it loses this whiteness and becomes entirely gray 
in the Spring and during the Summer. 


1 The latter kind of Seal, as the description shows, is the Harbour Seal. 
Its modern Micmac name is W@sfoo (Rand, English-Micmac Dictionary, 228), 
which suggests that our author’s form may be misprinted from Ofaspous. As 
to the other kind, their size, “as large and stout as horses and oxen,” would 
suggest that they were Sea-cows or Walrus, which occurred in parts of 
Gaspesia in our author's day. But the Micmac name for Walrus is very 
different from our author’s //e/auk, while, on the other hand, Rand gives the 
word ‘Wfaakw as a female Hooded Seal (04. cif., 228). As this species does 
occur in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, and moreover is a much larger species 
than the Harbour Seal, it seems likely that it is the one meant by our author, 
whose name is probably misprinted from JZe¢auk. It is, however, also pos- 
sible that he really meant the Walrus, and confused its name with that of the 
Hooded Seal. 

* The Common Gray, or Timber Wolf, formerly occurred in this region, 
and perhaps still lingers in the Gaspé Peninsula. Its range in Acadia is 
discussed in the Bulletin of the Natural History Society of New Brunswick, 
VI., 1908, 30. 

* In a general way our author’s account of the Hares (Ziévres) is accurate. 
But their summer colour is brown, not gray. 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 285 


The Bears, the Wolverene, the Deer, the Foxes, the 
Caribou [492], Martens, Porcupines, Muskrats, Squirrels, &c., 
are as many animals as occur commonly in Gaspesia.! Here 
also are seen prodigious quantities of all kinds of fish, Cod, 
Salmon, Herring, Trout, Bass, Mackerel, Flounders, Shad, 
Sturgeon, Suckers, Pikes, Pond-fish, Eels, Squid, Pickerel, 
Oysters, Smelt, Skate, Whitefish? In a word, one can say 
that the hunting and fishing there are profuse, and that one 


can find, without much difficulty, everything necessary 
for life. 


It is interesting to see there, likewise, the immense number 


* The identity of these animals is too obvious to need comment. Our 
author's name for the Wolverene is guzzguajou, a word whose curious history, 
involving a case of mistaken identity, is traced in my article mentioned in the 
footnote on page 282. Our author also mentions this animal in another con- 
nection at pages 343 and 347 of his book. His Cerf must be applied to the 
Virginia Deer, not to the Wapiti, which the French called Cerf on the Upper 
Saint Lawrence. Caribou, it is of interest to note, is also a native Micmac 
name, first used by Lescarbot in 1609, and soon adopted by the French. 

The only other animal mentioned by our author elsewhere in his book is the 
Nigaiou, or little Moose, at page 119. 

? The names of these fishes in the original are, respectively, morué, 
saumon, harans, truites, bar, maguereau, barbué, aloze, esturgeon, carpes, 
brochets, brémes, anguilles, ancornets, poisson doré, huitres, esplan, rate, potsson 
blanc. The identity of most of these is perfectly plain, since the names are 
still in use, and, moreover, they are discussed fully in my paper mentioned 
insthe note on page 282. Parbuë is the name in France for a kind of Sand 
Dab, and hence was no doubt transferred by our author to the common 
Flounders of the Gaspesian coast. Carpes (Carps) do not occur in this region 
at all, but the name is now applied in Canada to a kind of Sucker (the 
moxostôme doré) abundant in the tributaries of the Lower Saint Lawrence 
(Montpetit, Les Poissons d'Eau Douce, Montreal, 1897, 507). Neither do 
érémes (Breams) occur in this region; but the name is used in Canada for 
the common Pond-fish (Montpetit, of. cit, 512). Poisson doré is the name 
now applied in French Canada to the Pickerel, and hence no doubt was thus 
used by our author. But it is to be remembered, with respect especially to 
such names as érémes, that they may not represent names actually applied 
by the French to particular fish in Gaspesia, but simply names familiar to 
our author from their use in France, and added here from his own supposition 
that such fish occurred in these waters. Oysters, of course, do occur all along 
the coast from Caraquet southward. Another fish mentioned by our author 
elsewhere in his book is fozamon, the Tomcod or Frost Fish, on page 160. 


286 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


of Whales, and especially the terrific combat of this mammoth 
fish with the Swordfish. The latter bears upon its back a 
[493] kind of sword, or harpoon, which serves it as arms for 
offence or defence, and for attacking and defending itself from 
the flippers and the tail of the Whale. It is wonderful to see 
the approaches and the mutual attacks of these two powerful 
enemies, which bellow like bulls when inspired by rage and 
fury. The Swordfish darts itself out of the water and falls 
with all its power upon the Whale, turning over, meanwhile, 
in order to pierce the latter with its harpoon. The Whale 
plunges under the water, and escapes the blows of the Sword- 
fish, which it tries to strike and to beat with its tail and 
flippers ; and the noise is audible more than a league away. 
The sea appears all stirred up by the movements and violent 
efforts of these [494] formidable fish, and it becomes all 
reddened with their blood, which pours profusely from their 
wounds. These sometimes cause their death. Such was the 
case with the whale which we found stranded on the coast 
some fifteen leagues from the river of St. Joseph, surnamed 
Ristigouche. The sand which covered it kept us from seeing 
the fearful blows which it had received from the Swordfish. 
We saw only two or three of these, which seemed very large 
and deep. Although the Whale is a fish of prodigious big- 
ness and strength, nevertheless it cannot overturn nor shatter 
ships with its tail, as some are persuaded a little too easily." 
The Shark, which some call requiem,’ is a [495] very 
dangerous fish, armed with two to three rows of teeth ; it is 


1 Our author’s account of the Whale and Swordfish combats recalls that 
given by Denys (Description, 11. 269), but the two are evidently independent 
though based upon the same current stories of the time. The mention of the 
sword on the back of the Swordfish shows that our author had in mind the 
Orca, or Killer-whale, with its long dorsal fin, rather than the Swordfish. The 
attacks of the two upon the Whales are commonly confused. 

? Le requin, que quelques-uns appellent requiem, in the original. The 
attributes here ascribed to the Shark are of course the conventional ones for 
that fish the world over, and not those of the Gaspesian species. 


THE HUNTING OF THE GASPESIANS 287 


four to five feet long, and proportionately thick. It is very 
dangerous to bathe in the places where this fish ordinarily 
resorts, because it runs after those whom it perceives in the 
water and bites away an arm or a leg, which it eats and 
swallows at one operation. I recall that a poor passenger 
who had thrown himself into the sea for amusement, in order 
to bathe during a period of calm, fine, and serene weather, 
was so unfortunate as to encounter one of these sharks ; it 
did him no injury so long as he was in the water, but so soon 
as those on the ship set to work to save this poor fellow, the 
shark darted [496] upon him, and bit off his leg before he 


was inside the boat, where he died two hours later. 


CHAPTER Reals 
The Feasts, Dances, and Amusements of the Gaspestans 


NATION can hardly be found which has feasts 

more in vogue than have the Indians of New France, 

and especially our Gaspesians, who take much more 

account of the affection and sincerity of a truly 
hearty friendship in the little which they give or receive from 
their friends than in the quantity or the quality of the viands. 
Consequently with a [497] bit of tobacco, or something else 
of little account, they entertain one another just as if they 
were making the greatest feasts in the world. Hence it 
comes about that the most miserable of them (if one indeed 
can say that there are any such in this nation of barbarians 
which does not admit any, or very little, distinction between 
rich and poor), find always in even the little they possess 
the wherewithal to repay their friends in kind, and to give 
feasts as important as those to which they have been 
invited. 

I have made very advantageous use of this great ease with 
which one may satisfy this people, and insinuate oneself into 
their friendship by means of feasts which do not cost much. 

[498] This was when, after an Indian had come to beg me 
to go to baptize a little infant, which died two days after its 
baptism, I remained the rest of the winter* in the Bay of 
Gachpé with these pagans in order to try to gain them to 

1 It seems clear, from the tenor of this passage and of others on pages 501 
and 540, that our author here refers to his first residence with the Indians ; 
and accordingly the incident he now proceeds to describe must have occurred 


in the latter part of the winter of 1675-76. His occupations during the earlier 
part of the same winter are mentioned on page 24 of his book. 
288 


£ 


FEASTS, DANCES, AND AMUSEMENTS 289 


JESUS CHRIST. Monsieur Denys had given our Gaspesians 
some peas and flour, in order that I might entertain the 
camps therewith through the medium of two feasts which I 
had intended to make for them, and which in fact gained me 
permanently the friendship of these barbarians. I made from 
all my flour as many heart-shaped cakes as we were persons, 
and having had them cooked in a kettle with some marrow of 
moose, I arranged them all on a bark dish in such fashion that 
the largest of these hearts, which [499] represented my own, 
concealed and covered the smaller ones, which symbolised 
those of the Indians. I made them the usual speech, which 
must always precede the feasts, saying to them: that Nature 
having given me only one heart, the charity and the zeal 
which I had for their salvation made me hope passionately 
that it would multiply itself to as many as there were Gas- 
pesians there present before my eyes; that I wished likewise 
to embrace therein those who were absent, in order to testify 
to them all equally my esteem and my affection ; that by the 
largest of all these hearts which concealed the others, I wished 
to make them understand that they would lodge for the 
future through affection in mine; that I took them all under 
my protection, in order [500] to procure them all the advan- 
tages that they could reasonably hope from this relation, 
whether in things spiritual or in things temporal ; and that 
finally I had arranged the cakes all together in a single bark 
dish only in order to make them understand that our hearts 
ought never more to separate willingly, but rather to unite 
closely in the indissoluble bonds of Christian charity. This 
little speech was closed by the presentation and distribution 
which I made of all these hearts to each Indian, saying to him 
these words, Tahod nkameramon ignemoulo; nkameramon achkou 
oüiguidex”" My brother, Î give you my heart; you will 

1 The equivalents of these words in modern Micmac, as given in Rand’s 
English-Micmac Dictionaries, are as follows: Yahoé, evidently involves the 


root of Da, meaning “ friend” (page 117), if not simply a form of it ; ~kameramon 
T 


290 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


dwell and will be encamped for the future in my heart.” 
It is [sor] unbelievable how completely gratified these 
barbarians were by my entertainment, which they received 
with all possible joy. The chiefs gave me feasts both 
publicly and individually, in order to testify to me that 
they had begotten me! that is to say, that they had adopted 
and received me into the membership of the Gaspesian 
Indians. They all entreated me to remain with them in 
order to perfect myself in their language, something which 
I granted all the more readily since the request and petition 
which they made of me was in accord with my own 
inclinations. 

Nevertheless, although these barbarians are content with a 
little in their feasts, they do not fail to display sometimes a 
great profusion of viands, especially in [502] the feasts which 
they make in spring in order to rejoice together over the 
happy success of the hunting which they have carried on 
during the winter. They observe no sort of economy in these 
kinds of feasts, in order to testify in this way to their friends 
the joy that they have in their company. The women, the 
children, the young boys who have not yet killed any moose, 


is exactly equivalent to ‘#dmldmuin, meaning “heart” (page 130) ; Zg7emoulo 
is equivalent to zgzimimood’ meaning “to give” (page 121), of course brought 
into the first person singular; achkow seems to represent afchou, meaning 
“forever” (page 101), another form of which appears to be the afche of page 
414 of our authors book ; o#iguidex, which in the repetition of this sentence 
on page 541 is spelled oviguidepcheup, involves the root of Weegijik, meaning 
“to encamp” (page 99), apparently with a second person singular termination 
in one case and the second person plural in the other, more or less misprinted. 
The entire phrase, therefore, would read literally : “ Brother, my heart I give: 
my heart forever you will encamp in.” 

1 This phrase in the original is w’enfantoient, literally “given me birth.” 
The same expression is used by our author at page 531 of his book, and he 
gives a mention of the same ceremony among the Montagnais in his Æzrs/ 
Establishment of the Faith (1. 133). All the evidence shows that enfanter 
implied a kind of new birth, and that thereafter the adopted person was 
looked upon as one actually of the blood of the tribe, and having actual relatives 
among them. 


FEASTS, DANCES, AND AMUSEMENTS 291 


and all of those who are not in condition to go to war against 
the enemy, do not, as a rule, enter into the wigwams where 
there is feasting. They must await the signal which an Indian 
gives, by means of two or three different cries ; by these the 
women know that it is time to come for the remains of the 
portions left by their husbands, upon which they regale 
themselves with their families and friends. 

[503] The manner of giving invitations to the feast is 
without compliment or ceremony, and nobody is invited until 
everything which the host wishes to give them is all ready 
cooked. He who is giving the treat then gives from the door 
of his wigwam the cry for the feast, speaking these words : 
Chigoiitdah, ouikbarino.. ‘Come ye here into my wigwam, for 
I wish to entertain you.” Those to whom these words are 
addressed answer him by three or four cries of “ho, ho, ho, 
ho”; they issue promptly from their own homes with the 
ouragan, enter into the wigwam of the feast, take the first 
place which presents itself, smoke some tobacco from the pipe 
of the chief, and receive without ceremony the portion which 
he who is dividing and distributing the meat tosses them, 
or gives them [504] at the end of a stick. 

The Gaspesians never make a feast of two kinds of meat 
at once. They do not mix, for example, the beaver with 
moose, nor that with bear, or any other animal. They even 
make feasts in which grease and oil are drunk quite pure. 
There are feasts of health, of farewell, of hunting, of peace, 
of war, of thanks. There are eat-all feasts, which are made 


1 The modern equivalent of these Micmac words is not difficult to trace. 
Chigoittdah evidently involves the same roots as the wechkooed’ meaning “to 
come” (Rand, Exglish-Micmac Dictionary, 63), while ouzkbarino involves the 
roots of wegoobalood’, meaning “to make a feast” (of. cit., 107). 

2 In modern Micmac Oolékiin, meaning “a dish” (Rand, Lnelish-Micmac 
Dictionary, 85) obviously the same word with the usual substitution of 7 for Z. 
The word appears frequently in the literature dealing with our Indians, and 
persists in modern Canadian French applied to a little basket of birch bark 
used for holding bread, &c. (Clapin, Dictionnaire Canadien-Français, 231). 


292 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


expressly for securing good hunting ; these are feasts in which 
it is necessary that everything be eaten before anybody goes 
out from the wigwam, and in which it is forbidden to give 
anything, howsoever little, to the dogs under penalty of being 
exposed to great ills.! It is, however, permissible for those 
who cannot finish their portions [505] to present them to 
their companions, each one of whom takes whatever he desires 
thereof. The remainder is thrown upon the fire, whilst 
eulogies are made of him who at this juncture has captured 
the glory and the reputation of having eaten more than the 
others. 

All the feasts begin with speeches, which the host makes 
to those assembled for the purpose of declaring to them the 
subject on account of which he has wished to entertain the 
company ; and they are finished with dances and songs which 
are the usual compliments of our Indians.2 The master of 
the feast does not as a rule eat with the others, because, says 
he, he has not invited them in order to diminish the portion 
of that which he presents to them, the whole being solely 
[506] for them. 

Their songs and their dances are alike unpleasant, because 
they do not observe any regularity or measure except such 
as their caprice may inspire. They have, nevertheless, rather 
good voices as a rule, and especially the women, who chant 
very pleasingly the spiritual canticles which are taught them, 
and in which they make a large part of their devotions 


* Of the Indian feasts Father le Caron wrote in 1624: “There are farewell 
feasts, complimentary feasts, war, peace, death, health, and marriage feasts. 
In their banquets they pass days and nights, especially when they make feasts 
which they call ‘eat all,’ for no one is permitted to leave till he has swallowed 
everything.” (first Establishment of the Faith, 1.222.) Denys, and others of 
our writers, also give much attention to these feasts, which were so prominent 
in Indian life. 

* An oration in praise of him who gave the feast was also customary, and 
a particularly fine example thereof is given in Account of the Customs and 
Manners of the Micmacs, &c.; London, 1758, page 7. 


FEASTS, DANCES, AND AMUSEMENTS 293 


consist." These women do not give the same pleasure when 
they sing in the manner of the Indians, who force from the 
bottoms of their stomachs certain tones of ho, ho, ho, ha, 
ha, ha, hé, hé, hé, ho, ho, ha, he, he, which pass for airs alike 
charming and melodious among our Gaspesians. 

They dance as a rule [507] in a ring, in time to the noise 
which they make by striking with a stick upon a bark plate or 
upon a kettle. They do not hold one another by the hands, 
but all keep their fists closed. The girls cross theirs over one 
another, a little out from the stomach. The men raise theirs 
in the air, and make sundry movements with different postures 
as if they were at war, representing fighting, winning victory, 
and removing the scalps from their enemies. They do not 
jump, but in lieu thereof, they strike the ground, sometimes 
with one foot, sometimes with both together.” 

The special dances of the women and the girls are very 
different from those of the men, for they make some [508] 
horrible contortions in dancing. They draw back and push 


* Our author again mentions the pleasing singing of the Indians at page 
535 of his book. 

The good voices of the Micmacs are mentioned by several writers. One 
of the Jesuit Relations says “some of them, in truth, have very fine voices” 
(Thwaites’ edition, XXVIII. 33), and another uses the phrase “so melodiously 
did the Savages sing” (of. cit, XXX. 141). Our authors contemporary, 
Monseigneur de Saint Valier, heard them sing at Miramichi in 1686, and said 
of them, “ I had the consolation ... of hearing them chant the evening 
and morning prayers in a manner very devout, and, as it seemed to me, pretty 
harmoniously” (translation from Eséat present de l’ Eglise, 89). Somewhat 
later Diéreville wrote: “Their voices are very pleasing when they wish to 
sing well,” and again, “the voices of the women in particular were so sweet 
and touching that I thought I heard angels chanting the praises of God” 
(translation from Voyage, 179). L’Abbé Maillard says: “The majority of 
the Indian woman have very pleasing and very soft voices, which they know 
remarkably well how to keep in tune in singing” (Translation from Letter 
in Les Soirées Canadiennes, I11., 1863, 355). And still later Gamaliel Smethurst 
who was among them in 1761, under conditions not predisposing him in their 
favour, said, “they sing very well” (Narrative reprinted in the Collections 
of the New Brunswick Historical Society, 11. 381). 

? Another interesting account of the Micmac dances is given by Diéreville, 
Voyage, 179, 181. 


294 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


out the arms, the hands, and the whole body, in a manner 
altogether hideous, looking intently on the earth as if they 
would draw out something therefrom by the very strength 
and force of their contortions. This they continue until they 
are all of a perspiration. They do not force from the bottoms 
of their stomachs, as do the men, those hues and cries of 
ho, ho, of ha, ha, of hé, hé; but their only sound is made 
with their lips, and is a certain hissing like a serpent. This 
is the usual tune of their dance, which can properly be desig- 
nated an innocent Indian racket. 

Besides these dances and feasts, they have as their common 
amusements the games of Leldestaganne and of the Chagat.* 
[509] which they play with little black and white bones. 
That person wins the game who makes them turn out all 
white or all black as many times as they have agreed. They 


1 The game of Le/destaganne has already been mentioned by our author 
in another connection at page 318 (where, however, he misspells it Lede/- 
staganne), and at page 324. It is exactly the game still played by the Micmacs, 
and called by them a/festakun (Altéstékiin, “Indian Dice,” Rand, English- 
Micmac Dictionary, 82). It is fully described by S. Hagar in the American 
Anthropologist, VI1I., 1895, 31), and his description is repeated, with illustra- 
tions and additional matter, in S. Culin’s fine monograph on the “Games of 
the North American Indians” in the Twenty-fourth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 1907,74. It is a gambling game, played 
with six flat round dice of caribou bone, plain on one side (“white” of our 
author) and ornamented on the other (“black” of our author), The dice are 
bounced in a flat wooden dish about a foot in diameter, and the nearer one 
can make them fall all plain sides or all marked sides up the higher is the 
count, which is kept by a system of special sticks. This game is played by 
the Passamaquoddy Indians, and is fully described by Mrs. Wallace Brown 
in the Zransactions of the Royal Society of Canada, V1., 1888, ii. 41 ; and she 
gives a vivid account of its prominence in Indian life and of the intense 
interest it often excited. Its prominence in Micmac life receives curious 
illustration in the tradition mentioned by our author at page 318 of his book. 
Our authors mention of the game not only fixes its antiquity, but also shows 
the ancient form of its name. 

Of the game of CZagat 1 can find no trace. It is not mentionedin Culin’s 
monograph above cited. Our author uses the name in a way to imply that 
it and Leldestaganne are played with the same implements, and hence it is 
probably only a minor variant of the greater game. 


FEASTS, DANCES, AND AMUSEMENTS 295 


are very faithful in paying whatever they have lost at the 
game, without quarrelling or expressing the least word of 
impatience ; because, say they, they play only for diversion, 
and to enjoy themselves with their friends. There are also 
several other kinds of games and amusements among our 
Indians, but they are of so little account that they do not 
merit that any further mention of them should here be 
made. 


[510] CHAPTERASX 
On the Remedies, Diseases, and Death of the Gaspesians 


HEY are all by nature physicians, apothecaries, and 

doctors, by virtue of the knowledge and experience 

they have of certain herbs, which they use success- 
fully to cure ills that seem to us incurable. 

It is a fact that our Gaspesians generally enjoy perfect 
health right up to a fine old age, for they are not subject to 
several of the maladies which afflict us in France, such as 
gout, gravel, scrofula, itch, &c.! This is either because they 
are begotten by parents [511] who are healthy and active, with 
a humour and blood which are well tempered, or else because 
they live, as we have described, in perfect harmony and con- 
cord, without lawsuits and without quarrelling for the goods 
of this world. Consequently they never lose their repose and 
their habitual tranquillity. 

They prevent discomforts and diseases by the use of 
certain emetics, made from a root which is closely like that of 
chicory, or from certain seeds which they gather on the trees, 
and which they steep ten or twelve hours in a dish of bark 
filled with water or with broth.2 The sweat-house, however, 


* The good health of the Indians is also mentioned by our author at 
page 394 of his book. 

* In all probability, as I am told by my friend, Professor Henry Kraemer 
of Philadelphia, an authority upon pharmacognosy, this root, closely like that 
of chicory, was that of a species of Milkweed (Asclefias), several of which are 
known to furnish emetics. The identity of the seeds is not so clear. They 
may have been those of the Leatherwood (Dirca palustris) the bark of which, 
and therefore probably the seeds, is known to yield an emetic ; but they were 
more likely those of the Black Alder (J/ex verticillata), the berries of which 
probably share the emetic property known to exist strongly in those of other 


species of the same genus. 
296 


REMEDIES, DISEASES, AND DEATH 297 


is the great remedy of the Gaspesians ; and it can be stated as 
a fact that a number of the French have also [512] found 
therein a cure for chronic inflammations and sufferings which 
seem incurable in France. The sweat-house is a kind of a hot 
room, built in the form of a little wigwam covered with bark, 
or with skins of beaver and moose, and so arranged that it has 
no opening whatever. In the middle thereof the Indians place 
some hot stones, which heat those inside so much that the 
water soon starts from all parts of their bodies. They throw 
water upon those hot stones, whence the steam rises to the 
top of the wigwam, then it falls upon their backs, much like a 
hot and burning rain. This continues until some of them, 
unable to endure this heat, are obliged to rush out as quickly 
as they can. 

[513] This proceeding, which serves to torment some of 
them, is nevertheless a matter of amusement to others, who 
take a particular pleasure in throwing water from time to time 
upon the stones, in order to see who will have most endur- 
ance. They even sing and joke among themselves, giving 
vent to their usual whoops. Then, rushing quickly from this 
wigwam, they throw themselves into the river in order to cool 
themselves. This would, without doubt, cause serious illness, 
and even death itself, to people less robust than our Gas- 
pesians, who set to eating. with unequalled avidity immediately 
after they have issued from the sweat-house and the 
river.” 

They are great lovers of blood-letting ; they even open 
[514] their veins themselves with flint stones or the points of 
their knives. If any swelling makes its appearance, either on 
arm or leg, they lance the places where the evil is, and they 
make several incisions with the same instruments in order 


? This use of the sweat-house was very widespread among the American 
Indians, and is mentioned by many early writers. A detailed and interesting 
account thereof is given by Denys (Description, 11. 394), and Diéreville also 
describes it (Voyage, 184) with some differences of detail. 


298 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


more readily to suck out the foul blood, and to remove all its 
corruption. 

The balsam of the fir, which some call turpentine, and 
which is a kind of sovereign balm for every kind of sore and for 
wounds of axe, knife, or gun, is the first and most usual remedy 
which our Gaspesians employ, and with success, in making 
their very fine cures. Since this balsam is a little too irritat- 
ing to the [515] patients, they have the ingenuity to temper 
its activity by masticating the pellicle which is found attached 
to the fir after they have removed the outer bark. They spit 
the water which comes from it upon the affected part, and 
make of the remainder a kind of a poultice, which alleviates 
the evil and cures the wounded man in a very short 
time. 

They have, moreover, a quantity of roots and herbs which 
are unknown to us in Europe, but whose virtues and pro- 
perties the Indians know wonderfully well, so that they can 
make use of them in time of need. 

The Gaspesians, all of them together, men, women, 
girls, and boys, use tobacco.1 They consider, esteem, and 
regard it as a kind of manna which has come to them 
[516] from Heaven, since Papkootparout gave the first use 
thereof to the Gaspesian people, as we have noted in the 
chapter on their belief concerning the immortality of the soul.” 
In fact tobacco, which they call samahoé,? seems to them abso- 
lutely essential to enable them to endure the misfortunes of 
human life. It diverts them in their voyages, gives them 
wisdom in their councils, decides upon peace and war; it 
satisfies their hunger, serving both for drink and food ; and 
when any one is dangerously ill, they still hope to see the sick 
person again in his original health provided that he can still 


* The words in the original are Arennent au tabac, which in modern parlance 
would mean “take snuff.” Yet it seems very plain that our author means 
simply that they smoked tobacco. 

* In Chapter XII. and especially page 319. 

* In modern Micmac Zamawa (Rand, English-Micmac Dictionary, 266). 


REMEDIES, DISEASES, AND DEATH 299 


smoke tobacco, while the contrary is a sure indication that 
he will die. 

[517] If the herbs, the decoctions, and the usual remedies 
are not sufficiently efficacious to cure the Gaspesians, the friends 
of those who are ill do not hesitate to call in the aid of the 
Bouhine, that is to say the Juggler, who blows all over them, 
and especially upon the affected part, in order to chase out the 
germ, or the Devil, which is tormenting him. He makes the 
usual invocations, contortions, and cries, in the manner we 
have already described in speaking of the superstitions of these 
Indians.! 

There is no one, however, more to be pitied than the sick 
persons, who endure without complaint the hubbub, the noise, 
and the fuss of the juggler and of those in the wigwam. It 
seems indeed that our Gaspesians, [518] who in other respects 
seem sufficiently humane and kindly, are lacking in regard to 
charity and consideration for their sick. It can in fact be said 
that they do not know how to take care of them, nor how to 
prepare food which would be good for them ; they give them 
indifferently everything which they desire, both to drink and 
to eat, and whenever they ask it. They take the sick persons 
along, and carry or embark them with themselves on their 
voyages when there is any appearance of recovery. But if 
the recovery of the sick man is wholly despaired of, so that 
he can no more eat, drink, nor smoke, they sometimes break 
his head, as much to relieve the suffering he endures as to 
save themselves [519] the trouble which they have in taking 
him everywhere with them. 

Nor have they any better idea what it means to comfort 
a poor invalid, and from the moment when he no longer 
eats or smokes any more tobacco, or when he loses speech, 
they abandon him entirely, and never speak to him a single 
word of tenderness or of comfort. This is because these 


1 In Chapter XIII. beginning at page 329, where the jugglers are some- 
what fully discussed. 


300 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


barbarians think it an altogether useless trouble to speak 
to a person who cannot reply, and who is preparing for the 
voyage to join his compatriots and his ancestors in the Land 
of Souls. Hence it comes about that very often persons die 
without any of those in the wigwam taking any notice of 
them, though these preserve, nevertheless [520] during all 
the time of the agony, a profound silence, and show in their 
look of consternation the affliction and grief which they feel 
at this sorrowful separation. 

When the dying person has drawn his last breath, the 
relatives and friends of the deceased cover his body with a 
fine skin of elk, or a robe of beaver. In this he is enshrouded 
and bound with cords of leather or bark in such a manner 
that the chin touches the knees and the feet the back.t Hence 
it comes about that their graves are quite round, of the form 
of a well, and four to five feet deep. Meanwhile the leading 
person and the chiefs give directions that the bark of the 
wigwam of the dead man be struck, [521] the words Oxé, Oué, 
Oué, being said for the purpose of making the soul come 
forth. Then certain young Indians are appointed to go and 
announce to all the people, and even to the French settle- 
ments, the death of their relatives and friends. These de- 
puties approach the wigwams to which they are sent, climb 
into a tree, and cry out three times with all their strength 
that such an Indian is dead. After this they approach, and 
give to those whom they find an account of the circumstances 
of the illness and of the death of their friend, inviting them 
to assist in his funeral, which is celebrated in the following 
fashion. 

Everybody having assembled at the wigwam of the de- 


* This method of placing the body for burial was in wide use among our 
Indians. It was determined by analogy with the position the body occupied 
just before coming into the world, in its mother’s womb. Circular Micmac 
graves, of aboriginal age have been found at Tracadie, New Brunswick, by the 
late Dr. A. C. Smith, as he has informed me. 


REMEDIES, DISEASES, AND DEATH 301 


ceased, the body is carried to the general burial-place of the 
[522] nation. It is placed in the grave and covered with bark 
and with the finest skins. It is adorned also with branches 
of fir and sprigs of cedar, and finally they add thereto every- 
thing which the deceased has been accustomed to use. If it 
was a man, they add his bow, arrows, spear, club, gun, powder, 
lead, porringer, kettle, snowshoes, &c.; if it was a woman, 
her collar for use in dragging the sled or in carrying wood, her 
axe, knife, blanket, necklaces of wampum and of beads, and 
her tools used for ornamenting and painting the clothes, as 
well as the needles for sewing the canoes and for lacing. the 
snowshoes. The grave is then filled with earth, and upon it 
is placed a quantity of logs [523] elevated three or four feet 
in the form of a mausoleum, upon which appears a fine cross, 
that is, if the deceased is one of our Cross-bearer Gaspesians. 
The burial is made in silence, whilst the chief and the old 
men form a circle around the grave, and the women weep 
and make mournful cries. These cease at the command of 
the chief, who invites all the Gaspesians to the feast of death, 
at which he sets forth in his address the good qualities and 
the most notable deeds of the deceased. He even impresses 
upon all the assembly, by words as touching as they are 
forceful, the uncertainty of human life, and the necessity they 
are under of dying in order to join in the Land of Souls 
[524] their friends and relatives, whom they now are recalling 
to memory. He stops a moment, then suddenly assumes an 
expression more bright and less sad, and orders the distribu- 
tion of the things prepared for the feast, which is followed 
by the usual dances and songs.’ The relatives and the friends 
of the deceased, however, go into mourning, that is to say, 
they smear their faces with black, and cut the end of their 
hair ; it is not permissible for them to wear this in tresses, 
nor to adorn it with strings of beadwork and of wampum 


1 An account of a particular funeral oration is given by our author at 
page 261 of his book. 


302 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


during the period that they are in mourning, which lasts a 
year altogether. 

If an Indian dies during the winter at some place remote 
from the common burial-place of his ancestors, [525] those of 
his wigwam enwrap him with much care in barks painted red 
and black, place him upon the branches of some tree on the 
bank of a river, and build around him with logs a kind of 
little fort, for fear lest he be torn by wild beasts or birds of 
prey. In the spring the chief sends the young men to fetch 
the body, and it is received with the same ceremonies which 
have just been described.’ 

Our Gaspesians have never burned the bodies of their 
dead, as did our ancient Gauls, who burned with theirs 
everything these had cared for, even to their papers and their 
obligations, perhaps with the [526] expectation that they 
would take proceedings, pay, and demand their debts in the 
other world. I have learned only this from our Indians, that 
the chiefs of their nation formerly entrusted the bodies of the 
dead to certain old men, who carried them sacredly to a wig- 
wam built on purpose in the midst of the woods, where they 
remained for a month or six weeks. They opened the head 
and the belly of the dead person, and removed therefrom the 
brain and the entrails ; they removed the skin from the body, 
cut the flesh into pieces, and, having dried it in the smoke or 
in the sun, they placed it at the foot of the dead man, to 
whom they gave back his skin, which they fitted on very 
much as if the flesh had not been removed. 

[527] It is only a very short time ago that, in the Isle of 
Tisniguet,’ a noted place and an ancient cemetery of the Gas- 


* The mortuary customs of the Micmacs, with variations in detail, are 
described by all of our writers from Champlain onwards. Denys has much 
to say of them (Description, 11. 448). 

* Now called Heron Island. It lies in the south-western part of Bay 
Chaleur. Its identity is made certain by Father Jumeau’s map (at page 11 in 
this book), and by the fact, which I personally know, that the Micmacs call 
it by this name, in the form Tesanegek, or Tesneguk, to this day. Iam informed 


REMEDIES, DISEASES, AND DEATH 303 


pesians of Ristigouche, we found in the woods a grave built 
in the form of a box, containing a quantity of skins of beavers 
and of moose, some arrows, bows, wampum, beadwork, and 
other trinkets. These had been buried by the Indians with 
the dead person, in the thought which possessed them, that 
the spirits of all these articles would bear him company and 
do him service in the Land of Souls. 


by Mr. J. A. D. Robertson, the Light-keeper on the Island, that an Indian 
camping ground occurs at the west end of the Island, but no burial-place of 
the Indians is known to any of the residents. 


[528] CHAPTER XXI 


First Return of the Author to France, and the Speech that the 
Chief of the Gaspesians made to Him on his Departure. 


OR six consecutive years I had cultivated the Gaspesian 
mission, which obedience had committed to my care, 
when the Reverend Father Valentin le Roux,’ our 

Provincial Commissary and Superior, who devoted all his 
attention and employed with success the ardours of his zeal 
for the glory of God, the service of the colony, and the pro- 
gress of our missions, sent me to France.2 This he did 
because he recognised perfectly well the absolute necessity 
[529] we were under for having an hospice at Quebec for the 
comfort of our missionaries. Also he was strongly solicited 
by the principal residents of Mont-Roial to establish in that 
beautiful isle, at the will and pleasure and with the consent 
of Messieurs of the Seminary of Saint Sulpice, who are the 
seigneurs and proprietors of it, a House of Recollects. And 
besides, he wished to seek possible methods of rendering fixed 
and sedentary the missions which we had among the French 
and the Indians, in order that we might humanise these 
peoples, settle them with us, employ them at the cultivation 
' Father Valentin le Roux (or Leroux), of whom there is important mention 
earlier in our author’s book (page 279), came to Canada, as Commissaire 
Provincial of the Recollects, in 1677, succeeding Father Potentien Ozon, and 
remained in that capacity until 1681. He died in Paris in 1708, aged sixty-six 
years. (Data supplied by Fathers Hugolin and Odoric.) 
_* This journey was made in the year 1680, as shown by data given ina 
note on page 321 of this volume (compare also the Introduction, page 7). 
It must have been in the summer that our author left Isle Percée, since he 


speaks, three pages later (532), of the salmon fishery as then in progress. This 
fishery of course is made in spring and summer, not in autumn. 
304 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 305 


of the land, bring them into submission to our laws and cus- 
toms, and make true Christians of them after having made 
them well-mannered, [530] law-abiding, and tractable men. 
For these reasons Father le Roux considered it suitable to 
send the Reverend Father Exuper de Thunes! and myself into 
France with letters to the very Reverend Father Germain 
Allart, since Bishop of Vences, in order to obtain from the 
King, and from Messieurs of Saint Sulpice, the substance of 
the petition and of the instructions which he placed in our 
hands. 

We embarked for this purpose in the vessel named the 
Sainte-Anne, and we arrived safely at Isle Percée, after seven 
weeks * of a vexatious and arduous navigation, caused by three 
dreadful tempests, of which the last came near to making us 
founder among the Sept Isles. 

As I was wholly convinced of the sincere affection [531] 
which the Gaspesians had for me, and as they supposed that I 
was once more to spend the winter with them in the woods, 
I believed that I ought to entrust the secret, and to make the 
announcement of my intention to return to France, to that 
one of the Indians who called himself my father, and of whom 
I called myself the son, since the time when he had “ given 
me birth” in the midst of the usual feasts of the Gaspesian 
nation with the corresponding ceremony.’ It would be really 
difficult for me to express to you the consternation which the 


1 Father de Thunes is mentioned earlier in our author’s book, at page 22. 
After his return to Canada he became, in 1683, vicaire of the monastery of the 
Recollects at Quebec and in 1684 Commissaire Provincial. He returned to 
France in 1685 and died in 1692. (Data supplied by Fathers Hugolin and 
Odoric.) Our author eulogises him in his other book (Premier Etablissement 
de la Foy). 

2 It seems hardly credible that they were seven weeks on the way from 
Quebec to Isle Percée; yet that is the statement of the text. It is not a 
misprint or an author’s slip for seven days, for that length of time would 
be in no wise remarkable, as the length of this voyage evidently was in the 
mind of the author. 

3 A matter mentioned earlier, on page 501 of our author’s book. 

U 


306 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


news caused in the mind of this barbarian, who, by the change 
in his colour, and by the grief and sadness which appeared all 
at once in his countenance, soon made me know that he was 
keenly touched by [532] the resolution in which I appeared 
to him to be, of embarking in the first ships of our fishermen. 
He left me gruffly, contrary to his habit, and entered into the 
woods, perhaps to conceal the tears which commenced to flow 
from his eyes. He came out thence some time after, and 
thought well to send one of his children, with two or three 
young Indians, to carry the news of my departure to the Gas- 
pesians who were at the salmon fishery, and to invite them 
all to assemble at once with him in order to bid me adieu. 
He ordered these deputies not to approach their wigwams 
except with the same ceremonies which they invariably observe 
when they go to announce the death [533] of some one of 
their prominent persons,' because they considered that I was 
going to die, so far as they were concerned, and they would 
never see me again. 

The promptitude with which all these Indians, baptized and 
non-baptized, assembled at Isle Percée, added to the affection 
which these barbarians testified to me, in imploring me, all of 
them together, not to abandon them, made me waver some 
time in the resolution I had taken to depart ; and I confess to 
you frankly, that as my own heart was keenly touched with 
compassion, it was certainly nothing other than the merits of 
obedience, ordering me to embark in the first fishing vessels for 
the good of our missions, which [534] succeeded in Ro 
me to go back to France. 

The little band of our Gaspesians whom I had baptized 
came at early morning to the Chapel, some to be confessed, 
others to have themselves instructed, several in order to ask 
me for the Oukateguennes Kignamatinoër? (some instructive 


? This ceremony is described by our author at page 521 of his book. 
* This Micmac name for the instructive papers prepared by our author is 
explained in a note under page 130 of his book (page 126 of this volume). 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 307 


papers for praying to God), and all to hear the Holy Mass, 
and my speech. It is thus that they called the exhortation 
which 1 made to them for the purpose of encouraging them 
to practise faithfully that which I had taught them. The 
words of which Samuel made use in old time, when he retired 
from the leadership of the people of Israel in giving them a 
King, and those of the Apostle, when, on his departure for 
Jerusalem, he [535] called upon Heaven and Earth to witness 
to the zeal which he had taken to announce to the Ephesians 
the Gospel of the Lord, were nearly the same as those of 
which I made use to good effect in taking leave of my 
Indians, who all promised to remain faithful to God. 1 
embraced them tenderly after my thank-offering, during 
which the men and the women intoned and chanted alter- 
nately the spiritual canticles which I had taught them, with 
a harmony of voice so sweet and so pleasing! that our French 
were sensibly edified thereby. 

As I had been given some fathoms of Brazilian tobacco, 
and since I still possessed about a dozen [536] little mirrors, 
knives, needles, and other trifles, which they esteem as much 
as we do gold and silver, I took much pleasure in distributing 
these to them, imploring them affectionately to receive the 
things as the faithful and sincere pledges of my friendship. 
Three sailors, who came to our chapel on behalf of their 
captain in order to carry our little baggage into their ship, 
were about to put an end to our conversation, when the Chief 
of our Gaspesians begged me with much earnestness not to 
permit these men to render me this service, because the 
Indians wished to have the honour and the glory of it, 
inw order, said “he “to ‘me; to’ demonstrate ‘to’ ‘all’ the 
French how much [537] esteem and affection they had for 
me. He named at once six young hunters, whom they 


1 Our author has earlier mentioned the pleasing voices of the Indians, on 
page 506 of his book. 


308 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


call Zarbasou? ; and although everything in my possession 
amounted only to a little mattress, a blanket, and a casket 
which contained the ornaments of our portable chapel, they 
divided it nevertheless ostentatiously between three different 
canoes, and in these they promptly embarked in order to 
carry it to the vessel which was ready to set sail. 

We departed from the chapel with diverse feelings of grief, 
because in fact I was no less affected in leaving them than they 
testified they were in losing me. It was necessary nevertheless 
that we should part [538], so that I might join our French who 
were waiting for me to go on board, and I was extremely sur- 
prised when, whilst taking leave of Messieurs the Captains 
who were remaining at Isle Percée, the Chief of our Gaspesians 
parted the crowd, approached me, and appeared in the midst 
of the assembly with a face all dismayed with grief and sad- 
ness. He raised his eyes towards Heaven and lowered them 
towards the earth several times, and with sighs pronounced 
these words, Akaia, akaia,* which indicate ordinarily the bitter- 
ness and the displeasure which they have in their hearts. He 
took me by the hand, and regarding me fixedly with eyes 
ready to burst into tears, he addressed me in these very 
words— 

Well then, my son, the [539] resolution has been taken ; 
thou wishest to abandon us and return to France. For there 
lies the great wooden canoe” (pointing out to me the ship 
in which I was to embark) “which is going to steal thee 
from the Gaspesians in order to take thee to thine own land, 
to thy relatives and thy friends. Ah, my son, if thou couldst 
see my heart at present, thou wouldst see that it weeps tears 
of blood, at the very time that my eyes are weeping tears of 

1 This word is without doubt the same as the modern Micmac U/badoo, 


meaning “a big boy ; a bachelor” (Rand, A/zcmac Reader, 27), with the usual 
substitution of 7 for 7, and, apparently, with a misprint of s for din our author’s 
form. 

? These words mean Alas! alas! Compare their explanation earlier under 
page 148 of our author’s book (page 133 of this volume). 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 309 


water, so much is it affected by this cruel separation.” He 
stopped short, and said not a word, in accordance with the 
custom and method of the Indians, who act this way, either 
for the sake of reflecting upon that which they have to say, or 
else in order to give leisure and time to their listeners to 
examine and to approve or [540] reject that which they have 
advanced. “I say, what now, my son?” added he, “Is it 
possible that thou hast lost so soon the recollection of the 
feast which thou gavest us once at Gaspé, the first time that 
thou camest to live in our wigwams, when, having formed, 
with flour kneaded in the fat and marrow of moose, as many 
hearts of paste as we were of Gaspesians, thou arrangedst them 
in the same bark plate, desiring to persuade us that the largest 
of these hearts, which covered and concealed all the others, 
was the representation of thine own, whose zeal and charity 
enclosed within itself all the hearts of the Indians, neither 
more nor less than mothers enclose their children in their 
wombs ?* Thou wast [541] sorry, thou saidst, that nature 
had given thee but a single one to divide, but this thou didst 
wish to multiply as much as lay in thy power, through the 
distribution that thou madest to us of these hearts of paste 
while speaking to each one of us individually these loving 
words : Tahoé nkamera mon ignemoulo: ‘My brother, I give 
thee my heart ;’ “kameramon achkou oitiguidepcheup ;* ‘you 
will encamp, you will lodge, and you will dwell for the future 
in my heart, which desires to become like yours, through the 
union of a mutual and reciprocal friendship, wholly Indian 
and wholly Gaspesian.’ Scarcely hadst thou finished thy 
speech, which succeeded in gaining for thee the hearts of 
Gaspesia, when all began to talk of dances and of feasts [542] 
to be made for the purpose of expressing to thee the keen joy 


1 This feast was described by our author at page 498 of his book. 

2 These words are a repetition, with variations, of those given by our author 
on page 500 of his book, where their meaning is explained in a note (page 289 
of this volume). | 


310 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


that we had in the gift which thou hadst made us ; and, amidst 
the universal acclamations of all our wigwams, each one en- 
deavoured to express through the songs which were chanted 
to thy praise the good fortune that he had in possessing the 
heart of the Patriarch. Tell me then now, is this heart no 
more the same to-day as of yore? Has it then become wholly 
French, and is it no more at all Gaspesian ? Or, indeed, does 
it wish to throw forth the Indians for ever, after having 
welcomed and tenderly loved them?” He stopped for the 
second time. “If some one of us,” he said to me, continuing 
in a louder and more imperious tone of voice, “has caused 
thee any [543] displeasure, which perhaps obliges thee to 
leave us, dost thou not know my son, that I am thy father, 
and the Chief of the Gaspesian nation? And as I am thy 
father, thou canst not be ignorant thus far of the sincerity of 
my friendship. I assure thee that I will even love thee always 
as tenderly as one of my own children. As I am Chief of 
the Indians, thou knowest well that I have the power and the 
means at hand to have the guilty person punished if thou 
wilt denounce him to me. Or, if thou hast the intention to 
conceal him, in agreement with the maxims and the rules of 
the charity that thou hast taught us, take, my son, these robes 
of beaver, of otter, and of marten which we willingly offer 
thee for the purpose of wiping away and effacing the annoy- 
ance which [544] has been caused thee, and the indignation 
which thou mayest have conceived against us.” 

He caused in fact some of these furs to be thrown at my 
feet by two young Indians, but seeing that I refused these 
presents he said—“It is true that thou hast always scorned 
them. The little value thou hast placed upon them, whilst 
the French seek them with so much eagerness, has long made 
us know that thou desirest nothing in the world but the 
salvation of our souls, and that we were too poor, and would 
never be rich enough to repay worthily the troubles and the 
labours which thou devotest to the effort to make us live like 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 311 


true Christians. But if the little we possess has not enough 
attraction to lead [545] thee to remain among us, it is necessary 
my son, that I open to thee my heart; and I must ask of 
thee to-day, in presence of the Sun which shines upon us— 
must we believe that which thou hast taught us, or need we 
not believe it? Answer now and speak.”’ 

You will please take note, that the Indians never interrupt 
the one who is speaking, and they condemn, with reason, 
those dialogues, and those indiscreet and irregular conversa- 
tions, where each one of the company wishes to give his ideas 
without having the patience to listen to those of the others. 
It is, accordingly, for this reason that they compare us to 
ducks and geese, which cry out, say they, and which talk 
all together like the French. It is necessary [546] to wait 
until they have finished all that they have to say, and until 
they requiré you to answer them. Thus did this speaker, 
who expected me to answer. 

In a few words I testified to him that I had only taught 
them that which the Son of God had taught to all Christians, 
and that therefore it was not enough merely to believe him 
through the respectful submission which one ought to have 
for his commandments, but that also it was necessary to 
observe them religiously, and even to die if necessary for the 
truth and defence of his Holy Gospel. 

“If it is thus,” replied the Indian, “one of two things 
is true. Either thou art a liar, or thou art not a good 
Christian. Ouce choiten tahoé." Thou art a liar, [547] my 
brother, if everything thou hast taught us is not true. Or 
thou art not a good Christian, because thou dost not observe, 
as is needful, the commandments of JESUS. For in fact, and 


1 The equivalent of this expression in modern Micmac is fairly plain. Rand 
gives Owsoodgiin, as meaning “a lie,” and Kesmitkwon' as a particularly em- 
phatic word for “liar” (English-Micmac Dictionary, 157). Ouce chotien seems 
to involve the first part of the former word, and the last part of the latter. 
Tahoé means “ friend,’ as explained earlier under page 477 (page 277 of this 
volume). 


312 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


I wish every one to hear me, thou hast said to our children 
that they were bound, under penalty of being burned in 
Hell, to honour their fathers and their mothers, and that 
it was a monstrous crime to abandon their parents, and to 
refuse them the aid which they had a right to expect from 
their children in their need. Thy instructions and the 
commandment of God which says, Koutche, kitche chibar, 
chaktou, baguisto skiginouidex,' ‘ Honour and fear thy father and 
thy mother and thou shalt live long,’ have kept my eldest 
son in my wigwam, who, nevertheless, [548] wanted to 
abandon me in the middle of winter, in our greatest need. 
He has killed a great number of moose, he has made thee 
fare well and has given thee abundantly of the grease to 
eat, and of the oil of bear to drink in our feasts, as much 
of it as thou hast been able to desire. Frenchman! here 
is another argument; my eldest son has remained with 
his father and mother because of the respect which he had 
for the commandment of JESUS, and the friendship which 
he bore for the Patriarch. Do then now, after his example, 
for me, for my wife, and for him, that which he has done 
so generously for thee. Thou callest me thy father; my 
wife, saidst thou to all the Indians, was thy mother; ever 
since we both had given thee birth? in our [549] wigwams, 
my children were thy brothers and thy children. Well now! 
is it then a good deed for a child to leave his father, his 
1 The equivalents of these words (which occur again two pages later), in 
modern Micmac, as nearly as I can trace them in Rand’s Exg/ish-Micmac 
Dictionary, are as follows: outche is obviously Zooch, meaning “thy father” 
(107), and &ztche with the preceding e is the same as z#ech’, meaning “thy 
mother” (173); chzbar evidently is ckepälk" (with the usual change of 7 to 7) 
meaning “to fear” (107); chakfouw seems to involve a root of djikpumae, 
meaning “honourable” (133); daguzsto seems related to Zegedowse, meaning 
“to live long” (161); while s#iginouidex I cannot identify more nearly than 
to suggest that it is connected with the owzguzdex, meaning “to encamp,” of 
the expression on page 500 of our author’s book. The entire phrase would 
then read, “Thy father, thy mother, fear, honour ; long wilt thou encamp.” 


? A matter which is explained earlier in a note on page 290 of the present 
volume. 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 318 


mother, his brothers, and his sisters? Is it thus that thou 
despisest the commandment of God which says, Kousche, 
kitche chibar, chaktou, baguisto skinouidex? If it is true that 
the children who honour their parents live long, art thou 
not in fear of perishing in the great lake, and of suffering 
shipwreck in these salt waters after having abandoned us 
in the need that we have for thine aid? Alas, my son,” 
added this Indian, with tears in his eyes, “if some one of 
us comes to die in the woods, who will take care to show 
us the road to Heaven, and to [550] aid us to die aright? 
Was it then needful to take so much trouble to instruct 
us, as thou hast done up to the present, only to leave us 
in an evident peril of dying without the sacraments which 
thou hast administered to my brother, my uncle, and several 
of our dying old men? If thy heart remains still insen- 
sible to everything I have said, learn, my son, that mine 
sheds and weeps tears of blood in abundance so great that 
it chokes my utterance.” It was thus that he finished his 
speech, and he then gave me the opportunity to declare 
my feelings to him. 

All of the company was as much surprised as myself by 
such a discourse, which I had not expected, and they were 
uneasy to know [551] what I ‘would answer this poor Indian, 
who pretended to be my father. I made him understand and 
told him that my heart was shedding more tears of blood 
than his own, because it alone by itself was more sensible 
of our common separation than all the hearts of the Indians 
together : that I had never received any displeasure from the 
Gaspesian nation, which had always strongly bound me, by 
the friendly acts and the good they had done me, to remain 
with them, and to prefer their mission, as I should always 
if occasion were to present itself, above all those which could 
be given me in New France; that I recognised him still as 

my father as much as ever and more, and that I begged him 
also with all [552] my heart, to consider me ever as his son: 


314 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


that they must observe religiously everything which I had 
taught them as to the duty of children towards their fathers 
and mothers, expressed in the fourth commandment of God, 
Koutche, kitche chibar, chaktou, €Sc.; that far from practising 
the contrary in respect to them, I was only returning to 
France for the purpose of putting it more effectively into 
practice, since I was going in order to obey God in the 
person of my Superior, who held with me the place of a 
father, and in the design of persuading some of my brothers 
to come and instruct them ; and that I was not abandoning 
them in their need without succour, since I was leaving them 
another myself in the person [553] of Reverend Father 
Claude Moreau,' who was extremely zealous for their sal- 
vation. I added that to everything he had said to me I had 
listened quietly, though more as a result of his friendship 
than of the outrageous reproach which he had wished to 
make me after having loved them so tenderly, but that in 
fact I could not forbear to testify to him that my heart had 
been touched to the quick when he asked me whether it 
was no longer Gaspesian, and if it wished to throw forth 
the Indians for ever. “Thou deceivest thyself, my father,” 
said I in a rather severe tone of voice, “my heart is more 

* Father Moreau is mentioned also earlier in our author’s book (pages 145, 182). 
He was evidently not at Isle Percée at this time, for according to documents 
cited in Raymond’s History of the River St. John (St. John, 1905), page 140, 
he was on the Saint John on July 7 of that year (1680). He was also on that 
river in May and June of the next year (1681), and it would seem likely there- 
fore that he simply visited the Gaspesians during the winter of 1680-81. 
Fathers Hugolin and Odoric inform me that he had been empowered by 
the Bishop of Quebec to serve as missionary on the River Saint John, on 
the same day that Father le Clercq was granted this privilege for Isle Percée 
(Archives of the Bishop's Palace, Quebec, Reg. A., fol. 92). There is mention 
of his labours on the Saint John, though apparently with some error as to 
the dates, in lAbbe Casgrain’s Les Su/piciens et les Prétres des Misstons 
Etrangères en Acadie (Quebec, 1897, I. 213, 26, 49). His service among the 
Micmacs is mentioned in the note on page 132 of this volume. He died at 
Nemours in France, 14th October 1703, aged sixty-six years, and forty-nine in 


religion. (Zadle générale des Recollets de St. Denys, MS, mentioned on page 10 
of this volume). 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 315 


Gaspesian than ever, and at the very time that thou imaginest 
it is shrinking, it is becoming larger from day to day that 
it may embrace and [554] receive within it all those of thy 
nation. It would wish, this heart, to multiply itself so as 
to be found in every place where the Gaspesians resort, in 
order to instruct them; and I assure thee that I return to 
France only with the intention in mind of doing on my 
return, through the help of our missionaries, that which it 
was impossible for me to accomplish all by myself. Then 
thou wilt confess that my heart is much larger than thou 
thinkest, and that, far from casting forth and rejecting the 
Indians, it would cease to live if it were for a moment with- 
out affection for the Gaspesians.” 

“If it is thus,” answered in the same instant a certain 
Nemidoiiades, “it is necessary that I go to France with the 
Patriarch. He is right, he has sense, and [555] we have 
not so much of it as he. He only seeks our salvation. But 
I wish that we embark ourselves in different ships, in order 
that if one of us comes to perish the other can save himself, 
in order to carry the news thereof, something which would 
be impossible if we both were shipwrecked in. the same 
vessel.” He was going to say something else when the 
captain notified us that it was time to start. 

Our Indians remained on the shore of the sea during 
our embarkation, and I declare to you that I had keen 
distress when, with a telescope, I viewed our poor Gaspesians, 
who remained constantly in the same place where I had 
left them until [556] our ship rounded the Pointe au Loup- 
marin on the Isle de Bonaventure, which we left between us 
and the main land, and deprived me of the satisfaction of 
seeing them, and of being seen by them. 

The voyage was alike short and fortunate, so that we 
arrived at Honfleur thirty days after our departure from Isle 
Percée. Then we took the route to Paris, where the Very 
Reverend Father Germain Allart, and the Very Reverend 


316 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Father Potentien Ozon,! the Provincial at that time of the 
Recollects of Artois, managed with so much success the 
affairs of our missions that the former obtained from the 
King the establishment of the Hospice which we now 
have at Quebec, and the latter obtained letters of recom- 
mendation [557] from Monsieur Tronçon, Superior of 
Messieurs of the Seminary of Saint Sulpice, to Monsieur 
d’Ollier, Superior of Messieurs of the Seminary of Mont- 
Rojal in Canada, in virtue of which my said Sieur d’Ollier 
had the goodness to grant us generously a space of land 
on the border of the river, with power to build there a 
mission house, with the consent of Monseigneur the Bishop, 
for the spiritual consolation of the residents of Mont-Roial. 
Whilst these reverend Fathers were working in concert 
to obtain these new establishments, obedience permitted me 
to return to our dear Province of Artois, where everybody, 
so to say, relatives, friends, religious [558] and seculars, 
exerted their efforts in order to prevent, and to make me 
abandon, the intention I had formed of returning to Canada. 
Perhaps I should have yielded to the entreaties of these 
persons, who sought in my residence in France only their 
own personal satisfaction, if the very Reverend Father 
Potentien Ozon, who had twice gone to this new world in 
the capacity of Commissioner and Superior of our Canadian 
missions, had not dissipated all of these obstacles by one of 
his letters. He informed me that all the difficulties I had 
laid before him were unreasonable, and that it was not a 
question of ascertaining the will of God upon an affair in 
which it seemed perfectly evident in the will of the Superiors 
of the [559] two Provinces of Saint Denis and Saint Antoine, 
but rather of executing it as soon as possible, inasmuch as 


1 Father Ozon had been Commissaire Provincial of the Recollects in 
Canada in 1675 and in 1676-77, which will explain his interest in this matter. 
He is also mentioned earlier in our author’s book, at page 22. Our author 
eulogises him in his other book (Premier Etablissement de la Foy). 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 317 


Monseigneur the Bishop of Quebec and the Reverend Father 
Valentin le Roux, Superior of our missions, were insisting 
on my return to Canada. 

Nothing further was needed to decide me to make a 
sacrifice of all the reluctance which I could have in leaving 
a second time our dear Province. Wholly convinced that 
the spirit of the Lord resided in this great servant of God, 
I received his letter and his advice as the decision of my 
lot, and, in order not to be exposed longer to the assaults 
which the natural friendship of relatives and friends constantly 
directed against me [560] for the sake of inducing me to 
remain in the country, I left Bapaume and went to Arras, 
to make there my annual retreat and to prepare myself for 
the second voyage I was to make into New France. It seems 
that God approved of my sacrifice, since the one of our 
religious who up to that time had been opposed to my 
return, found himself, eight days after my departure, com- 
pletely changed ; and he begged so earnestly to come with 
me to Canada, that the Superiors yielded to his insistent 
prayers. This news was so much the more pleasing to me 
since I was convinced of the ability and the virtue of this 
religious, and of the great good he would do. This, indeed, 
he has done in the French [561] and Iroquois Missions, 
where he has laboured during six years with a singular 
edification. 

I wrote at once to our Superiors concerning the matter, 
and informed them of the resolution of the Reverend Father 
Francois Wasson, who wished to go with me to Canada. 
Indeed we set out immediately from Bapaume for Paris, 
where JI had the honour to receive the visit of Monsieur 
Macé, a very worthy ecclesiastic of Saint Sulpice, a man of 
supreme virtue and of a truly apostolic zeal for the mission 
of New France, who begged me urgently to take with me 
two Hospitaliere nuns of Beaufort in Vallée, whom Mon- 
seigneur d’Angers wished to confide to my care as far as 


318 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


Quebec. However unworthy [562] I thought myself of 
the care and guidance of these two holy women, he made 
me, nevertheless, consent to his request, and he did not 
leave our residence until he had obtained our promise that 
we would go to the convent of these good nuns and give 
them notice of the time at which they ought to go to La 
Rochelle in order to embark in the first ships. Thus, every- 
thing being arranged, we set out from Paris and arrived 
happily, about the Feast of Pentecost, at the Hospitalieres 
of Beaufort en Vallée. The Reverend Mother des Roseaux, 
whom Mademoiselle de Melun, so celebrated through the 
practice of the most eminent virtues of Christianity, had 
placed in this holy Monastery, [563] had become its Superior. 
Animated by the examples of piety of her saintly mistress, 
and burning with this same fire of charity for her neighbour 
which consumed the heart of that great princess, she made 
a sacrifice for the poor invalids of Mont-Roial of her two 
dear and beloved daughters, the Sisters Gallard and Mon- 
musseau, the first the daughter of a councillor of Angers, 
the second of a famous merchant. As these two nuns were 
of assured virtue, and fortified by the spirit of God which 
was conducting them into Canada, it seemed accordingly 
as if they only issued from the cloister in order to give 
shining evidences of it, whether during the sojourn they 
made at La Rochelle, where Monseigneur the Bishop [564] 
received them as true spouses of JESUS CHRIST, or during 
the voyage, which our Lord rendered very fortunate through 
the prayers and sanctity of these religious souls, who made 
their mental orisons and their spiritual readings, and recited 
their office in common, as if the ship had become for them 
another convent of Beaufort en Vallée. They seemed 
oblivious to all the discomforts which are usual on the sea, 
but they were unable to keep from shuddering and trembling, 
as chaste souls, when they feared that we were in danger 
of being soon attacked by a Turkish ship, which came down 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 319 


full sail upon us, either to capture our ship [565] or to send 
her to the bottom. The cannon which were made ready, 
the muskets, the pikes, the powder, and the lead which were 
distributed to all the passengers with some precipitation, 
did not affright them. Uncertain what would happen if 
the Turks, who were visibly approaching us, made themselves 
masters of the ship, they feared only for their purity ; and, 
bravely preferring death to the loss of this precious treasure, 
which ran risk of being exposed to the insults and the violence 
of these enemies of the Christian name, they threw them- 
selves upon their knees to implore the aid of Heaven, and 
begged me, with an extraordinary fervour of spirit, to approve 
the resolution which they [566] had formed, of throwing 
themselves into the sea so soon as the Turks mounted into 
the vessel. For they preferred, said they, to abandon them- 
selves to the loving care of Providence, and to die a thousand 
times rather than to fall into the hands of these Turks and 
be sullied by their brutality, Heaven, however, was content 
with their good will. Everything was put into condition 
to resist the Turkish ship, which approached within cannon 
shot of our vessel ; and as she was a much better sailer than 
we, it was decided to await her and to place ourselves in 
condition to attack her and to defend ourselves. This 
firmness, and the resolution which we displayed in wishing 
to fight the enemy, struck terror into these barbarians ; [567] 
and they, supposing that we had a much larger crew than 
appeared on the deck, feared for the success of a combat 
in which they began to lose hope of conquering and 
triumphing. They thought best not to risk it, changed 
their tack, passed in rear of our vessel, and contented them- 
selves with making threats against us, to which answer 
was made with a vigour not at all inferior to their 
insults. When these infidels were so distant that their 
vessel was lost to our view, we chanted the Te Deum as 
a thanksgiving. This happy success was attributed to the 


320 NEW RELATION OF GASPESIA 


merits and the fervent prayers of these good nuns [568] 
whom Heaven consoled in the continuation of the voyage 
by a journey as fortunate as they could hope for, and which 
brought us to the mouth of the River Saint Lawrence thirty 
days after our departure from La Rochelle. 

The wind being from day to day very favourable, we 
soon cast anchor opposite Quebec, to which I betook myself 
in a canoe in order to inform Monseigneur de Laval, First 
Bishop of Quebec, and Messieurs his Grand Vicars, of the 
happy arrival of our two Hospitaliere nuns, who had bravely 
exposed their lives to the perils of the sea in order to con- 
secrate themselves wholly to the service of the sick of 
Mont-Roial, [569] in the convent and hospital founded by 
the charity and the liberality of Madame de Bullion. They 
were received with all possible good welcome and respect. 
They were conducted to the Ursulines of Quebec, and 
some days after to Mont-Roial, by Monsieur Soüart, their 
director, a great servant of God, whose memory will always 
be blessed in New France through the renown of his virtue 
which he radiated there during forty years of missionary 
labour up to a happy old age. 

The Reverend Father Valentin le Roux, who lost no 
opportunity to promote the establishment of our missions, 
intended that Father Francois [570] Wasson should continue 
the mission which we had among the Iroquois, where this 
good religious has lived for a space of six years, both in 
time of peace, and also during the war we have had with 
those barbarians, to whose insults this zealous missionary 
was continually exposed. The Reverend Father Superior 
ordered me also to ascend with him, and to serve as chaplain 
to Monseigneur the Comte de Frontenac, Governor-General 
of New France, as far as Mont-Roïal, in order to arrange 
with Monsieur d’Ollier, Superior of the Seminary and 
Seigneur of the Island of Mont-Roïal, for a piece of land, 
which he generously granted us after having [571] read 


RETURN OF AUTHOR TO FRANCE 321 


the letter which I presented to him on behalf of Monsieur 
Tronçon. On his own account he gave us four arpents of 
land situated on the margin of the river, near the Chapel of 
the Holy Virgin and opposite a little elevation on which 
a mill was built, in a place convenient and very suitable for 
the landing of canoes and boats. Of this he sent the deed 
of grant to the Reverend Father Valentin le Roux, as soon 
as I had returned to Quebec.! This was two days before 
my departure for my mission of our Gaspesians, where 
he who called himself my father, and his family, received 
me with the heartiest possible welcome. I omit here the 
circumstances [572] of this second mission, which I reserve 
for the First Establishment of the Faith in New France.’ 


1 The deed of gift, containing particulars in full accord with those in our 
author’s narrative, is printed, along with some related documents, by Réveillaud 
in Le Tac’s Histoire Chronologigue, 220. Its date is October 26, 1681, the 
correctness of which, as to year at least, is attested by the other documents 
above mentioned. Our author, therefore, returned from France in the summer 
of 1681, leaving France, as he shows on page 562, not long after Pentecost. 
He does not say positively when he went to France, but it is quite evident that 
he could not have left Canada on a fishing vessel that spring in time to finish 
his business in France and start to return about Pentecost; and he must 
therefore have gone from Quebec to France sometime in 1680, 

It may be of interest to add that the land thus granted the Recollects was 
never actually occupied by them, as I am informed by Fathers Hugolin and 
Odoric. For when, in 1692, they began their establishment at Montreal it was 
upon another location. 

2 Yet there is no mention of this second mission in that book, for the 
reasons, no doubt, which are given on page 21 of the Introduction to the 
present volume. 


THE END 


From the Press of Laurent Rondet. 





NO UVELEE 


RREMEANTE RON 
DE LA 


eS PEST E 
OUP CON TIENT 


Les Mœurs & la Religion des Sau- 
vages Gaspesiens Porte - Croix, 
adorateurs du Soleil, & d’autres 
Peuples de l’Amerique Septen- 
trionale, dite le Canada. 


DEDIE’E A MADAME LA 


PRINCESSE D’EPINOy, 


Par le Pere CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ, 
Missionnaire Recollet de la Province de 
Saint Antoine de Pade en Artois, 
Gardien du Convent de Lens. 


A PARIS, 
Chez AMABLE AUROY, ruë Saint 
Jacques, a ’ Image S. Jerome, attenant 
la Fontaine S. Severin. 


M. DC. XCI. 
AVEC PRIVILEGE DU ROY. 















ie “OT 


LE A rte iL ss À ask sn FA 

5 tat) « oe. inal SOS 
a NE ps D HE HE M LR ) ay sae 
MR ete ‘tel reaver hes ae 1 





nl . eine bier a. oe shal? ‘s ae ooh i as 
vue? gs « SA iy | . +: Al : ve ; 
nus M £1 ADAM A à 1104) 


ee ae sont sy TS 
| 


ee rye - | . C | 4 a 
151008 ete es lege eee Se 


© 

co 
ae 
TR 


| A | wy anaes NY An. ae Aran nd 
y ys È ‘ e . hs ene: a it à. Val: Se 


re À 
Fe 


A MADAME LA PRINCESSE 
D’EPINOY. 


MADAME, 


E soiez pas surprise, si je prens la liberté de vous presenter, &F de 

donner au Public, sous les auspices [ii] favorables de vôtre illustre 

Nom, la Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie; puisqw’elle vous est dité 

legitimement, & qu’il est également de son devoir & de sa recon- 

noissance, de vous offrir, par Pun de ses Missionnatres, ce qu’elle à de plus religieux 

devant Dieu, $ de considerable devant les hommes, pour s’acquiter aujourd hui des 

étroites obligations dont elle est redevable depuis plus d'un siecle, à la pieté de vos 

Ancêtres, d’avoir été soûmise aux Loix de PEglise, © du plus grand Monarque de 

PUnivers, par les appli- [iii] cations de leur zele pour le service de PEtat © de la 
Religion. 

En effet, Mavame, la verité de P Histoire nous apprend, que Monsieur Philippe 
Chabot, Comte de Buransais © de Chargny, Seigneur de Brion, © Grand Amiral 
de France, qui vivoit plein d'honneur ES de gloire sous le Regne de François Premier ; 
voulant fraïer les routes aux Predicateurs de la Foy, dans un Païs où elle n’avoit 
jamais été annoncée, donna genereusement à Jacques Cartier avec ses Commissions, 
trois [iv] navires équipez à ses frais © dépens, munis de tout ce qui étoit necessaire 
pour en faciliter les premieres découvertes, &S;jetter les fondemens de cette florissante 
Colonie de la Nouvelle France, que l’on voit aujourd’hui si bien établie dans le 
Canada; €3 transpirant dans le cœur de ce fameux Pilote, une partie de cette 
noble ardeur, si commune €9 si naturelle à tous ceux de vôtre Maison, d’amplifier 
ES d'étendre la gloire de Jesus-Curisr € de nos Rois, il luy commanda d’y arborer 
la Croix, les Fleurs-de-lys, & cette ce [v] lebre Inscription, qui acquit à la Monarchie 
Françoise plus de deux mille lieuës de ces vastes Contrées, l'année 1535. le sixiéme 
Fuillet, qu'elle parut pour la premiere fois dans la Gaspesie, ES peu de jours aprés 
sur les rivages ES les côtes du Fleuve de Saint Laurent, en ces termes: Franciscus 
Primus, Dei gratia, Rex Francorum, regnat. 

C’est ainsi, Mapame, que toute la France est redevable a votre auguste Matson, 
de la conquête de ce nouveau Monde, & que par un effet singulier de la [vi] divine 
Providence, nos Sauvages Gaspesiens virent, avec autant de joie que de surprise, 
dans leur Païs, une Croix semblable à celle qu’ils adoroïent sans la connoître : Ils 
la figuroient &9 la portoient religieusement dessus leur chair € dessus leurs habits ; 
elle presidoit dans leurs Conseils, dans leurs Voïages, © dans les A ffaires les plus 
importantes de la Nation: leurs Cimetieres paroissoient plûtôt Chrétiens, que 
Barbares, par le nombre de Croix qu’ils faisoient mettre dessus leurs tombeaux ; 
om un mot, ’é-[vii] soient, Maname, des Atheniens d'un nouveau Monde, qui rendoïent 

325 


326 EPITRE 


leur hommage &3 leur adoration à la Croix d’un Dieu qui leur étoit inconnu, dans 
le tems même que les Princes d'Epinoy © de Melun entreprenotent genereusement 
les voiages les plus celebres de la Terre-Sainte, avec Saint Loüis © nos autres Rots 
de France, pour la retirer de Popprobre ou elle étoit parmi ces Nations Infideles, 
ES la faire adorer par tout le Monde. 

Animez de l'esprit de Saint Paul, ces Grands Hommes, [viii] MADAME, ne vou- 
lient point, avec cet Apôtre de Jesus-Curisr, d’autre gloire, que celle qu’ils recherch- 
oient avec empressement dans la Croix du Fils de Dieu : &S ne comptant pour rien 
ni le grand nombre des Victoires qu’ils avoient remportées sur les Ennemis de la For, 
ni ces faits d’ Armes heroiques qui leur acquirent le surnom de Charpentiers, à cause 
de la force victorieuse de leur bras, € de la pesanteur de leurs coups 3 ts se faisoient 
principalement honneur de se croiser avec les plus Braves du [ix] Roïaume > portoient 
publiquement ce sacré Signe de nôtre Salut, comme la marque éclatante de leur 
Christianisme ; faisoient leur Testament, © disposoient de leur Matson avant leur 
départ pour la Conquête de la Terre-Sainte, dans le dessein d’y être Martyrs, ou d'y 
faire regner Jesus-Curist ; c’étoient des Heli, qui mouroient à tout moment de 
regret, de voir cet Arche dalliance en la puissance de ces Philistins indomptables ; 
ES ils vouloient enfin, qu’elle fût gravée dessus leur Mausolée, avec les Armes de 
votre [x] Maison, pour marquer à toute la Posterité, qu'ils se mettoient encore aprés 
la mort sous la protection de la Croix du Fils de Dieu, dont ils avoient durant la vie 
soûtenu les interéts, avec tant de zele © de glotre. 

Fe passerois, Mapamg, les bornes d’une Epître, &3 je reconnois avec plaisir qu’il 
me faudroit de gros volumes, si je voulois rappeller ici la memoire glorieuse 9 
triomphante de ces Illustres Heros : l'antiquité de leur Noblesse, plus ancienne même 
que la naissance du Christia- [xi] nisme dans nôtre France, au rapport de Gregoire 
de Tours, qui la fait descendre de ce fameux Aurelian, lequel ménagea le Mariage 
de Sainte Clotilde &9 du Roi Clovis, avec tant de sagesse, de conduite © de prudence, 
que ce grand Prince luy donna pour récompense de cet important service, la Comté 
de Melun avec ses dépendances : ces pompeuses SF magnifiques Alliances de vôtre 
Maison, avec les Têtes couronnées, © ce qu’il y a de plus Noble © d’Auguste dans 
PEurope : la profonde érudition d'un si[xü] grand nombre de sçavans Prelats, dont 
les Lumieres Orthodoxes ont illustré PEglise de Jesus-Curist, & dissipé les tenebres 
ES Les erreurs qui vouloient la perdre, ou la corrompre : la Vertu austere © la 
Satnteté de tant d’ Abbesses, qui ont fondé, reformé 5 santifié les Cloîtres : cette 
Pieté & cette Misericorde s1 naturelle 85 si visible, par la fondation de tant de 
Convents, d’Eglises, de Chapelles, d’Oratoires &5 d'Hôpitaux, dotez des biens de 
vos Ancêtres, € soûtenus, MADAME, de vos pro- [xiii] pres Liberalitez, a Bethune, a 
la Bassée, à Abbeville, à Baugé, & dans plusieurs autres endroits du Roïaume. 

Te serois infini, Mapame, ES j'ose même dire, avec toute la franchise © la 
candeur que me donne mon Païs natal, il seroit inutil de faire ici le détail des Actions 
&F des Vertus heroiques de vos Illustres Predecesseurs ; puisqu'il semble que la 
Nature &F la Grace aient heureusement concouru, pour reiinir en vôtre Personne, 
tout ce que l’une € Pautre leur [xiv] avoit donné de Noblesse, de Vivacité @ esprit, 
de Conduite, de Sagesse, de Courage, de Vertu, de Pieté, de Foi &5 de Religion, qui 
paroissent aujourd’hui avec tant d'éclat dans vôtre Illustre Personne, que vous ne 
vous attirez pas moins de Benedictions, que Mademoiselle de Melun vôtre Sœur en 
a recüës, en vivant ES en mourant en odeur de Sainteté, dans la pratique des V ertus 
les plus éminentes du Christianisme, sur lesquelles vous prenez plaisir de regler & 
de former [xv] toutes les Actions de vôtre vie. 


EPITRE 327 


En sorte que s’il m’étoit permis de faire un défi semblable à celuy du Sage, parlant 
de la Femme Forte, ce seroit, MADAME, pour en trouver une qui pit imiter sur 
Vous, cette grandeur d Ame €5 de Zele, qui vous attache inviolablement aux interéts 
de Dieu, de la Religion &$ de PEtat; cette élevation ES cette étenduë de Genie 
universel, qui ne vous laisse rien penser que de noble : cette Charité sans borne, qui 
rend vôtre cœur [xvi] sensible aux miseres d'autrui ; ouvre vos mains aux liberalitez 
ES aux profusions de vos grandes richesses, pour les soiilager ; fait de votre Maison 
Pazile €9 le refuge des affigez ; plaide auprés du Rot & des Ministres, en faveur 
des miserables ; rend vôtre abord facile © aisé aux Grands & aux Petits ; vous 
porte à faire du bien à tout le Monde ; vous inspire cette Humilité sans bassesse, 
ES cette sainte Fierté sans orgüeil ; €5 vous donne enfin un Cœur selon le Cœur de 
Dieu, qui vous merite aujourd’hui, avec tant [xvii] de justice, l'estime du plus Grand 
des Monarques, 3 la veneration de la Cour. 

Que vôtre modestie, MADAME, ne s’en offense pas: ennemie de la flaterie © de 
la vanité, Pon scait que vous ne fondex votre Grandeur, que sur ce qui peut vous 
rendre agreable à celuy qui n’éleve une ame aussi Chrétienne que la vôtre, qu’autant 
qu’elle S'aneantit en sa presence ; mais enfin, quand je voudrois, pour vous complaire, 
passer sous silence le peu que je viens de dire de tous ces rares Avantages de Nature 
[xviii] €9 de Grace que vous possedez, ils nen seroient pas moins connus de toute la 
Terre, par les réjallissemens € les impressions sensibles que vous en faites dans le cœur 
ES dans l'esprit de Messieurs les Princes vos Enfans, qui se sont distinguez dans leur 
premiere Campagne, avec tant de Valeur, d'Intrepidité, de Conduite ES de Sagesse, 
que le Roi a bien voulu confier à la bravoure de Monsieur le Prince d'Epinoy, à 
Pâge de dixbuit ans, le Regiment de Picardie, & gratifier Monsieur son Frere, 
d'une Com-[xix] pagnie de Cavalerie, pour reconnoître &S animer la Valeur de ces 
deux jeunes Heros, qui donnent de si belles esperances à tous les braves du Roïaume. 

Dignes du choix de Lois Le Gran, € saintement animez de ce zele tout de 
feu de leurs Genereux Ancétres, pour la Religion ‘9 PEtat, on les a vi courir à la 
Gloire, &3 suivre Monseigneur en Allemagne, pour soûtentr les mêmes interêis : ils 
se partagent aujourd hui en Flandre & sur le Rhin, afin d’être par tout les Défenseurs 
[xx] des Autels, 9 faire revivre avec la memoire, le Courage &9 le Zele des Guil- 
laumes, des Adams de Melun, &5 des autres Heros du Christianisme, qui ont arrété 
les progrez des Infideles, dompté la rebellion des Heretiques, ES vaincu par tout 
les Ennemis de la France. 

Penetré donc que je suis, des sentimens d'un profond respect pour la Vertu d'une 
Mere si Glorieuse, € charmé du Zele €ÿ de la Generosité des Enfans st dignes de 
leur Naissance ; que dois-je faire, MADAME, aprés avoir pris la confiance de [xxi] vous 
dedier la Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie, pour la donner au Public sous vos 
auspices ? sinon d'offrir à Dieu mes Prieres, mes Vœux © mes Sacrifices, pour le 
conjurer instament de verser avec abondance sur vôtre Illustre Personne, la plenitude 
de ses Benedictions, 5 de conserver Messieurs les Princes vos Enfans, dans les 
dangers, les perils, €9 les hazards de la Guerre, où lintrepidité de leur Courage, 
secondé @un veritable zele de Religion, les expose à tout moment, pour la Catholicité, 
ES le Service du [xxii] premier, du plus Auguste, © du plus Religieux Monarque 
du Christianisme. 

Fe me trouve, Mapamr, d'autant plus obligé à ces justes devoirs, qu'aïant 
Phonneur d’être non-seulement Gardien des Recollets de Lens, qui ont le bonheur 
d'annoncer PEvangile de Jesus-Curisr à vos Peuples de la Principauté d'Epinoy, 
mais encore Superieur d’une Communauté aussi reguliere, &F aussi xelée pour la 


328 EPITRE 


perfection Religieuse, que celle de vos Filles de la Bassée, dont vous êtes la Fonda- 
trice ; avec [xxiii] nous devons tous ensemble reconnoître devant Dieu, aux pieds de 
ses Autels, les puissantes obligations que nous vous avons, ES à toute vôtre Illustre 
Famille ; dans Pesperance que vôtre bonté voudra bien recevoir ce petit essai de 
PHistoire de la Gaspesie, aussi favorablement qu'elle m’a reçù moi-même, lorsque 
j'ai eu l'honneur, à mon arrivée à Paris, de vous témoigner, comme je fais encore à 
present, avec tout le respect qu’il m’est possible, que je suis ES [xxiv] serai toute ma 
vie, par inclination &3 par obligation, 


MADAME, 
Votre tres-humble &§ tres-obeissant Serviteur. 


Frere CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ, 


Missionaire Recollet de la Province d'Artois, 
& Gardien du Convent de Lens. 


[xv]  Æxtrait du Privilege du Roi. 


AR Grace & Privilege du Roi, donné à Paris le 30. Decembre 1690. 
signé, par le Roi en son Conseil, Menzsrret; Il est permis au R. P. 
CHRESTIEN LE CLERcQ Missionnaire Recollet, Gardien du Convent de 
Lens en Artois, de faire imprimer par qui bon luy semblera, un Livre 
intitulé Nouvelle Relation de la Gaspesie, qui contient les Meurs 3 la Religion 
des Sauvages Gaspesiens Porte Croix, adorateurs du Soleil, £$ autres Peuples de 
PAmerique Septentrionale, dite le Canada, durant le tems & espace de huit années 
consecutives, à compter du jour que led. Livre sera achevé d’imprimer pour la 
premiere fois : Et défenses à tous Imprimeurs & Libraires [xxvi] de l’imprimer, 
vendre & debiter, sous quelque pretexte que ce soit, même d’impression étrangere, 
ou autrement, sans le consentement dudit Exposant, ou de ses aïans cause ; à peine 
de quinze cens livres d’amende, païables par chacun des contrevenans, confisca- 
tion des éxemplaires, & de tous dépens, dommages & interêts, comme il est plus 
amplement porté par ledit Privilege. 

Registré sur le Livre de la Communauté des Libraires &5 Imprimeurs de Paris, 
le 5. Fanvier 1691. suivant l’Arrêt du Parlement du 8. Avril 1653. ES celuy du 
Conseil Privé du Roi, du 27. Février 1665. 

Signé, AuBoÜYN, Syndic. 


Ledit Reverend Pere a cedé son Privilege 4 Amaste Auroy Marchand 


Libraire. 
Achevé d'imprimer pour la premiere fois, le vingtiéme Avril 1691. 


329 




















fi eee UT PPT 4 1 A MAT 4 A mi 






¥ i 
ve alee Vier vot eee re. Le 
Ag: > 5 KPO ai he ie cs AA 
a aa RH ne ee 
; pea ee tr 
} Ve È cA Ee 
+ ; a De ra A À ui 1 ‘i 


Pia | Va L : we 
Le LME Mi à 
NA ae ; RER inca ae ake 
3 a a Mu , * ¥ r ne ae x iris ans neem 
Ne à . 1004 ER ANA 


: ihe y ee É AU Bi te ina Fa - 
¢Pigies a 4 Sri Tia? i \ecgts 
cone 
M We eg ARE I ; 
4 ey ie > 





rh ie Amd ASP. ti cae ‘er my vas Be <a ds 5 

Len mir he | it. + Avene Ptah 2 ten rés Ne 

: faye METIR: pts dites ai o wth ae 

se tg de Fagg x Godt 24% ey eae ee ARE 

dis i A EE ‘i adda) ‘phases 

DRE nest Fe) mn 

rt tés sl oy ne Si dats hak ait poe AU + ana 

Le test da He non fe. el et AMENER 

fheaes a ho, Mire ae oe 

er. Ve Stet ete, Nb A à ie na ll 
igs ie hi Poser cee ul ere 


7 Vs nu PT EST 0 ey Sica Sy at We ie DR 
. “ uy RS: UE" or PU 4 ra ie HET JR : “4 
LU Le : oe oh ee 
4 V co F HART vow, a 
7 i .* i tee at Rage nt pe ‘ shot Pret al à a) ss wee a 
Dur ee a ¥ or oy 4 a gts: w hgh angel a er oaks, | neg i 
i Eu the < a | 
es » Oy : ‘f + RE 
ee pith EE ie CS 
a L ME EN tly, bine & fe 4 HN don Hee a À 
> bs 


peek ote lines dax SE ar. re 


< 





t] NOUVELLE RELATION DE LA 
GASPESIE. 


CHAPITRE PREMIER. 


De la Gaspesie en general. 


A Gaspesie ou Gaspé, d’où nos Sauvages tirent leur origine & leur nom de 
Gaspesiens, n’a pas seulement été fameuse & remarquable parmi les 
Nations de l’Amerique Septen- [2] trionale; soit par la demeure 
ancienne & ordinaire que les premiers Chefs & les Capitaines, qui sont 
les Rois & les Souverains de ces Peuples, y ont établië pendant le cours de 
plusieurs siecles, comme le Siege de leur Empire, & d’un Gouvernement tel qu’il 
se peut trouver dans le Canada, parmi les Barbares de la Nouvelle France; soit aussi 
pas les guerres sanglantes, & la fureur de leurs armes victorieuses & triomphantes, 
qu’ils ont autrefois portées jusques chez les Esximaux, & les autres Sauvages 
qui demeurent le long des côtes du grand fleuve de Saint Laurent: Mais elle 
est encore tres considerable parmi nous, tant par la pêche de Moruë que l’on 
y fait tous les ans, que par la mine de [3] Plomb qu’on y a découvert depuis quel- 
ques années, laquelle toutefois on a été malheureusement obligé d’abandonner, 
aprés y avoir fait une tres-grande dépense ; cette mine n’aïant pas été jugée assez 
abondante pour en retirer le profit & les avantages qu’on en esperoit : peut-être, 
à ce que j’en ay pû juger lorsque j’étois sur les lieux, parce que les Mineurs que 
Von y avoit envoiez de France, ont voulu trouver sur le haut, le pillon qu’ils 
eussent pû trouver beaucoup plus facilement au bas du rocher qui cache ce 
métail, dont l’espece approche davantage, ou pour le moins autant de l’étain, 
que du plomb. 

Ce lieu donc, qui est proprement ce que nous appel- [4] lons Gaspesie, ou 
autrement Gaspé, est un Pais plein de montagnes, de bois & de rochers, dont la 
terre est tout-à-fait sterile & ingrate : en un mot, c’est une Baye qui est à l’em- 
bouchure du fleuve de Saint Laurent, à la hauteur de quarante-huit degrez, 
sur quatre à cinq lieuës de largeur, & six à sept de profondeur, qui se termine par 
un tres-beau bassin & trois rivieres fort poissonneuses, lesquelles se divisent 
bien avant dans les terres. Elle n’est éloignée que de sept lieuës de l’Isle Percée, 
qui n’est pas, comme quelques-uns se l’imaginent, une Isle capable de loger 
des Habitans; puisque ce n’est qu’un rocher fort rude, escarpé de toutes parts, 
d’une hauteur extraordinaire, & d’une élevation surprenante. Il est [5] même 
tellement percé dans trois ou quatre endroits differens, que les chaloupes passent 
toutes mâtées & à pleine voile par la principale de ses ouvertures: Cest de-là 
qu’il tire son nom de l’Isle Percée, quoique ce ne soit veritablement qu’une 
Peninsule ou Presqu’isle, dont on peut faire aisément le circuit à pied, lorsque 

331 


332 NOUVELLE RELATION 


la marée est basse, & n’aïant la ressemblance d’une Isle qu’à marée haute. Elle 
n’est separée de la Terre ferme, que de deux à trois arpens de terre : il semble 
même qu’elle y ait été jointe autrefois, & qu’elle n’en ait été divisée que par les 
orages & les tempêtes de la mer. 

Nous y avons une Mission assez considerable ; d’où j’apprens avec bien de 
la douleur [6] par un de nos Missionnaires, le Reverend Pere Emanuel Jumeau, qui 
est de retour du Canada, dans le tems méme qu’on imprime cette Histoire, que 
l’Hospice & l'Eglise que nous y avions fait bâtir, & que les Sauvages les plus 
barbares de la Nouvelle France avoient en singuliere veneration, n’ont pas été 
à l’abri de la fureur & de la rage des Anglois, Hollandois & François renegats, 
qui ont tout reduit en cendres, avec des circonstances capables de faire fremir 
d'horreur l’Enfer même. Voici le contenu de la Lettre que ce bon Religieux 
m’écrit de l’Isle Dieu, du quinziéme d’Octobre mil six cens quatre-vingt-dix. 


[7] Mon Reverend Pere,—Ie passe sous silence le détail affligeant du naufrage 
que nous fîmes l'année passée, dans une nuit affreuse, le vingt-troisiéme de Novembre, 
contre le Cap des Rosiers, à quinze lieues de PIsle Percée, 9 du malheur que nous 
avons eu celle-cy, d’avoir été pris par un Armateur de Flessingue, a cinquante lieues 
de la Rochelle, pour vous faire part de la douleur qui seule m’occupe entierement 
à present, ES qui, je m’assûre, ne vous affligera pas moins que moy, puisque Pay été 
le témoin des peines que vous vous êtes données pour Pétablissement de notre Mission 
de PIsle Percée, 8 du Zele avec lequel vous y avez procuré la gloire de Dieu, & le 
salut des[8] ames. Il semble que notre Seigneur w ait voulu me conserver la vie dans le 
naufrage, que pour être aussi le témoin de la ruine totale ES de Pentiere desolation 
de ce lieu ; afin de vous en faire moy-même la relation, qui donnera assez à connoître 
à tout le monde, jusqu’à quel excez d’impieté © de fureur l’Heresie peut monter, 
quand une fois elle se trouve en état de tout entreprendre À de tout éxecuter par le 
ministere de ses adherants. C’est peu de vous dire, qu'au commencement du mois 
d'Août dernier, deux fregates Angloises parurent sous le Pavillon de France, à la 
rade de l'Isle de Bonaventure, 3 par ce stratagéme se.saisirent aisement de cing 
navires Pécheurs, dont les Capitaines &9 les équipages, quai éto1ent alors entierement 
occupez à la pêche, furent tous [9] obligez de se sauver à Quebec ; parce qu'ils 
nw étoient pas en état de se défendre, ni de resister a tant de Nations liguées contre-eux. 
Ensuite, ces ennemis jurez de l'Etat ES de la Religion aïant tenté une descente à 
terre, qui leur reüssit comme ils le souhaitoient, ils y sejournerent pendant huit jours 
tous entiers, où ils commirent cent impietez, avec tous les desordres imaginables ; mais 
entre autres choses ils pillerent, ravagerent &9 brülerent les maisons des Habitans, 
qui sont bien au nombre de huit ou dix Familles, & qui pour la pluspart s’étoient 
déja refugiez dans les bois avec precipitation, pour éviter la rencontre © la cruauté 
de ces impitotables Heretiques, qui faisoient un horrible carnage, {9 mettoient tout 
G feutS a sang. Le fremis d'horreur au sim- [10] ple souvenir des impietez & des 
sacrileges que ces scelerats commirent dans nôtre Eglise, qui leur servoit de corps de- 
garde, © de lieu de débauche ; lesquels animez du même esprit que les Iconoclastes, 
briserent € foulerent aux pieds nos Images, contre lesquelles ils fulminoient mille 
imprecations, avec des invectives &5 des injures, comme si elles eussent été vivantes. 
Les tableaux de la sainte Vierge & de saint Pierre ne furent pas éxemts de leur furie, 
ni de leurs emportemens ; puisque tous deux furent criblez de plus de cent cinquante 
coups de fuxzil, que ces malheureux lachoïent, à chaque fois qu’ils prononçoient par 
moquerie ES par derision ces mots des Litanies: Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis: 


DE LA GASPESIE 333 


Sancte Petre, ora pro nobis. Pas une Croix n’échapa à leur [11] fureur, à la reserve 
de celle que j’avois autrefois plantée sur la Table à Rolland, qui pour être sur une 
montagne de trop difficile accez, subsiste encore à present toute seule, comme le 
monument sacré de nôtre Christianisme. Les sacrileges de Baltazar, qui prophana 
autrefois, au milieu d’un festin, les vases sacrez du Temple de Ierusalem, en y faisant 
boire ses Courtisans ES ses Concubines, furent les mêmes que commirent ces Heretiques, 
lesquels au milieu de leurs borribles débauches, tant de jour que de nuit, beuvotent 
dans nos Calices des rasades, à la santé du Prince d'Orange, qu’ils benissotent ; 
fulminant au contraire mille imprecations contre leur Roi legitime. Le Comman- 
dant, pour se distinguer autant par ses impietez, qu’il Pétoit par som caractere, sé 
[12] revétit de la plus belle de nos Chasubles ; S par une ostentation aussi vaine 
que ridicule, se promenoit sur la greve, avec le Soleil d'argent, qu’il avoit fait 
attacher sur son bonnet ; obligeant ses camarades, par mille paroles de dissolution, 
a lwy rendre les mêmes honneurs ES les mêmes reverences, que les Catholiques rendent 
dans les Processions les plus solemnelles, au tres-saint Sacrement de [ Autel. Ils 
acheverent enfin toutes ces impictez, par une ceremonie autant extraordinaire 
dans sa forme, qu’elle est extravagante tS abominable dans toutes ses circonstances. 
Ils prirent les Couronnes du saint Sacrement ES de la sainte Vierge, qu’ils poserent 
sur La tête d’un mouton : ils lierent les pieds de cet animal ; € l’aiant couché sur 
la Pierre consacrée du [13] maître Autel, ils Pégorgerent, & le sacrifierent, en dérision 
du Sacrifice de la sainte Messe, pour remercier Dieu (à ce qu'ils disoieni) des 
premiers avantages qu'ils remportoient sur les Papistes de la Nouvelle France. 
Ils mirent ensuite le feu aux quatre coins de l'Eglise, qui fut bien tôt reduite en 
cendres, de même que celle de nôtre Mission en l'Isle de Bonaventure, qui eut ausst 
une pareille destinée, aprés qu'ils en eurent brise les Images, &F coupé tous les 
ornemens à grands coups de sabre. Vous pouvez bien juger, par la douleur que 
vous ressentez au simple recit que je vous fais de ces desastres, combien je fus sensible- 
ment touché, lorsque dans l'endroit même où avoit été le maître Autel de nôtre Eglise, 
j'y trouvay encore la carcasse du mou- [14] ton qui avoit servi de victime au sacrifice 
abominable de ces Impies. Outré (F penetré de douleur de voir ainsi toutes les 
Croix de cette Mission hachées par morceaux, ou renversées par terre, je format 
en même-tems la resolution de rétablir les principales ; à quoy je reüssis, avec le 
secours charitable des Habitans, qui se porterent à ce saint ouvrage avec encore 
plus de pieté &9 de devotion, que ces miserables Heretiques n’avoient fait paroitre 
de fureur ES de rage à les renverser: Mats helas/ mon cher Pere, pay grand 
sujet de croire, & je crains bien qu’elles ne ressentent encore les effets funestes d’une 
seconde descente de ces ennemis jurez de nôtre sainte Religion ; puisque deux jours 
aprés Pérection de ces Croix, c’est à dire le dixième de Septembre, [15] nous fûmes 
obligez de couper incessament nos cables, (9 de faire voile à la vüe de sept navires 
ennemis, qui nous donnerent la chasse d’une étrange maniere, maïs dont nous échapämes 
enfin heureusement, à la faveur de la nuit, pendant laquelle nous vimes avec regret 
toutes les Habitations de la petite riviere en feu. Dieu sçait l'embarras € les 
inquietudes où nous nous trouvâmes alors, natant point de leste ce qu’il nous en 
faloit pour forcer de voile, afin de nous éloigner plus promtement de lIsle Percée, 
comme nous le soubaitions ; €3 outre cela, manquant de pain, d’eau douce, © en 
un mot, de tout ce qui étoit necessaire pour une navigation aussi longue ES aussi 
difficile, que celle de Canada en France ; mais enfin, notre Seigneur nous délivra 
de tous ces dangers par sa misericorde, [16] &$ particulierement de lArmateur de 
Flessingue, qui s'étant rendu maitre de nôtre vaisseau, nous pilla entierement ; © 


334 NOUVELLE RELATION 


ne nous aïant retenu que quatre à cing heures dans son bord, nous renvoia dans 
nôtre navire, aprés beaucoup de menaces ES de mauvais traitement : oS deux jours 
aprés, étant derechef poursuivi par un autre vaisseau, nous découvrimes heureuse- 
ment l'Isle-Dieu, où nous venons de moiüiller l'ancre à la rade, ES d’où je vous écris 
cette Lettre, dans Vesperance de vous entretenir plus amplement des malheurs de 
nôtre Mission de PIsle Percée. Souvenez vous cependant de moy dans vos saints 
Sacrifices, &F me croiez pour l'éternité tout à vous. 


Nous avons sans doute lieu de croire, par tant d’horreurs [17] & de sacrileges, 
que ces Impies ne reüssiront pas dans le projet pernicieux qu’ils ont formé, de 
desoler entierement la Colonie de la Nouvelle France; & que le Seigneur, 
qui se jouë comme il luy plaît des desseins des méchans, protegera ses fideles 
Sujets contre les ennemis jurez de son saint Evangile, & délivrera son Peuple 
de l’opression & de la tyrannie de ces cruels Pharaons, en donnant la victoire 
aux Canadiens, sous la conduite de Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac; ce que 
nous avons lieu d’esperer, suivant les dernieres nouvelles que nous avons reçûës 
du Canada. 

L’Eglise de cette Mission étoit destinée au Prince des Apôtres, & la ceremonie 
que l’on en fit pensa me coûter la [18] vie ; puisque pour la rendre plus celebre, 
plus pompeuse & plus magnifique, m’étant embarqué dans un canot avec trois 
de nos Sauvages, afin d’y apporter tout ce que j’aurois pû trouver d’ornemens, 
le mauvais tems nous surprit: la mer changea presque en un momêt. Il 
s’éleva enfin un orage & une tempête si furieuse, qu’elle brisa & emporta les deux 
extrémitez de nôtre canot, de maniere que nous nous trouvâmes dans l’eau 
jusques à la ceinture, & dans un danger manifeste de perir & de nous perdre tous, 
sans le secours charitable de nos Sauvages; car ces Barbares, qui étoient alors, 
par bonheur pour nous, cabanez sur les rivages de la mer, s’apperçûrent heur- 
eusement de nôtre disgrace: Ils en furent si sen- [19] siblement touchez, qu’ils 
quitterent promtement leurs habits, & par une generosité que nous ne pouvons 
assez reconnoître ni admirer, les uns se jetterent tous nuds à la nage, & quelques 
autres s’embarquerent avec tant de succez dans leurs canots, qu’ils nous délivre- 
rent enfin du peril où nous nous êtions malheureusement engagez. Nos Capi- 
taines François voulurent reconnoître par leurs festins & les presens, qu’ils 
firent genereusement à tous ces Sauvages, les bons offices qu’ils venoient de rendre 
à leur Missionaires ; & par une sainte émulation, ces Messieurs voulurent bien 
donner aussi tout l'éclat, & faire paroître toute la ferveur qu’on pouvoit sou- 
haiter dans un Pais barbare, [20] & dans une conjoncture si facheuse, pour 
honorer la ceremonie de la Dedicace de la premiere Eglise qu’on ait jamais érigée 
à la gloire de Dieu dans ce lieu de pêche, depuis l'établissement de la Foi, & 
la naissance du Christianisme dans la Nouvelle France ; comme vous le pouvez 
voir fort au long, dans le Livre que j’ay fait du premier établissement de la Foi 
dans la Nouvelle France, qui se vend chez le même Libraire. Cette Mission 
avec celle de l’Isle de Bonaventure, qui a Sainte-Claire pour Titulaire & pour 
Patrone, & qui n’est éloignée de l’Isle Percée, que par le trajet d’une petite 
lieuë, nous a été donnée du consentement de Monseigneur de Laval, alors 
Evêque de Petrée & Vi-[21] caire Apostolique, mais depuis premier Evêque de 
Quebec ; par Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac Lieutenant General des armées 
du Roi, Gouverneur de toute la Nouvelle France: afin que rien ne manquat 
au zele infatigable qu’il a toûjours fait paroître pour le soulagement spirituel 


DE LA GASPESIE 335 


& temporel des Sujets de sa Majesté, qui viennent negocier, pêcher, ou s’habituer 
dans cette nouvelle Colonie. Les Recolets luy seront à jamais redevables de 
honneur, d’avoir été les premiers missionnaires sedentaires de cette belle mission, 
qui s’est renduë celebre & florissante, par les travaux & les soins Apostoliques 
qu’ils ont pris pour le salut des François & des Sauvages qui la composent aujour- 
d’huy. C’est [22]1à où les Reverends Peres Hilarion Guesnin & Exuper de Thunes 
ont signalé leur zele & leur pieté, avec une édification singuliere de tous ces Peuples. 

Le tres-Reverend Pere Potentien Ozon, Provincial des Recollets de Saint 
Antoine de Pade en Artois, qui passa en qualité de Commissaire & Superieur 
de nos Missions en 1675. m’y destina la même année, pour y continuer le bien 
que ces illustres Missionnaires y avoient déja saintement commencé. Le Lion 
d’or, commandé par le Capitaine Coûturier, fut le vaisseau sur lequel je m’em- 
barquay, afin de me rendre au plûtôt à l’Isle Percée. Nous y arrivimes le ving 
septiéme Octobre de la même année, aprés avoir [23] essuïé mille dangers ; mais 
entr’autres une tempête si fâcheuse & si violente, tout proche de la fameuse 
Isle d’Anticostie, que nôtre Capitaine se voïant dans l’impossibilité de resister 
à la fureur de l’orage, prit la resolution de repasser en France, sans motiller 
Pancre a la rade de l’Isle de Bonaventure, & ainsi d’y abandonner les hommes 
qu’il y avoit laissez en allant à Quebec, pour y faire la pêche de Moruëé: mais 
enfin, le calme succedant tout à coup à la tempête, sur les dix heures du matin, 
fit changer de dessein à nôtre Capitaine, qui continua sa route comme aupara- 
vant ; & aprés beaucoup de peines & de fatigues, nous abordâmes, graces à Dieu, 
fort heureusement, à [24] l’'Habitation de Monsieur Denys, sur les quatre heures 
aprés midi, qui étoit tres bien logé, sur le bord d’un bassin vulgairement appellé 
la Petite riviere, separé de la mer par une belle langue de terre, qui par l’agré- 
ment merveilleux qu’elle donne à ce lieu, le rend un sejour fort agreable. 

La solitude où je me trouvay alors, sans y penser, avec trois à quatre per- 
sonnes qui étoient au service de Monsieur Denys, n’eut rien que d’engageant 
& d’aimable pour moy : je peux même dire, avec verité, qu’elle fut la principale 
de toutes mes consolations ; puisqu’elle me procura tout le tems que je pouvois 
raisonnablement souhaiter, pour me disposer saintement aux fonctions penibles 
& laborieuses de ma premiere [25] Mission, que le merite de l’obeïssance venoit 
de confier à mes soins. 

Un homme, qui dans la bassesse de son extraction, conservoit une vertu peu 
commune & assez rare, parmi les domestiques les plus zelez pour le service de 
Dieu & de leurs Maîtres, adoucit beaucoup les rigueurs de nôtre hivernement. 
On peut dire que j’étois charmé du plaisir qu’il prenoïit dans les entretiens que 
nous avions souvent ensemble, touchant l’affaire importante de son salut. Il 
prenoit un soin particulier de m’éveiller tous les jours regulierement à quatre 
heures, afin de me disposer à celebrer la sainte Messe, que je disois ordinairement 
a la pointe du jour, avec les Prieres du ma- [26] tin: & le soir, selon la coûtume 
tres-lotiable & generalement observée dans toutes les Familles de la Nouvelle 
France, nous disions le Chapelet en commun, avec les Prieres ordinaires, qui 
étoient suivies de la lecture des Reflexions les plus touchantes du Jugement 
dernier, composées par le tres-Reverend Pere Hyacinthe le Febvre. Comme c’est 
un ouvrage rempli d’érudition, & des veritez les plus solides du Christianisme, il 
m’a aussi toûjours été d’un tres-grand secours dans tous les endroits differents 
où l’obeïssance m’a destiné pour le service de nos Missions. Je l’appellois mon 
Missionnaire par excellence, qui pendant mon absence travailloit fructueusement 


336 NOUVELLE RELATION 


à la conversion [27] des ames ; puisqu’en effet l’aïant une fois donné à quelqu’un 
de ces Catholiques, dont la vie n’étoit pas des plus regulieres, la lecture qu’il en fit 
pendant six semaines, luy inspira des sentimens d’une contrition si sincere & si 
veritable, qu’en me remettant ce Livre entre les mains, il me fit une confession 
generale de toute sa vie passée, aprés avoir été plus de dix-huit ans, sans fre- 
quenter le Sacrement de Penitence. 

Je m’appliquai serieusement pendant tout cet hiver, à l’étude de certains 
Ecrits de la langue Algomquinne, que l’on m’avoit donnez ; croïant qu’ils me 
seroient necessaires pour l'instruction des Sauvages au retour de leur chasse, qu’ils 
faisoient à quinze ou vingt [28] lieuës de nôtre Habitation. Tout mon travail 
cependant fut inutile, car nos Gaspesiens n’entendoient que tres-imparfaitement 
l’Algomquin ; & il me falut tout de nouveau commencer l’étude des Prieres 
Gaspesiennes que l’on m’envoïa de Quebec par la premiere barque, qui au 
commencement du printems partit pour l’Isle Percée. Je les appris en fort 
peu de tems, avec beaucoup plus de facilité que je ne me l’étois persuadé : je les 
enseignai même pour la premiere fois à nos Sauvages, avec beaucoup de succez, 
par des caracteres instructifs, dont je parlerai dans la suite de cette Histoire. 
Mais enfin, comme toute l’application que je donnois pour me rendre sçavant 
dans le Gaspesien, [29] dont l'intelligence est absolument necessaire, quelque 
difficile qu’il soit, aux Missionnaires qui veulent travailler efficacement au salut de 
ces Peuples, étoit interrompuë pendant l’été, par les services que j’étois obligé 
de rendre à nos François, qui viennent quelque-fois jusques au nombre de quatre 
à cinq cens, faire la pêche de Moruë à l’Isle Percée : Je pris resolution, aprés 
le départ des navires, de suivre les Sauvages dans les bois pendant l’hiver, & de 
demeurer avec eux dans leurs cabanes, pour m’instruire entierement dans la 
langue Gaspesienne, que je me suis enfin renduë assez familiere, aprés beaucoup 
de peines & de travaux. J’en ay même fait un Diction- [30] naire, que j’ay laissez 
à Quebec, dans nôtre Convent de Nôtre-Dame des Anges; afin de faciliter à 
nos Missionaires, comme il m’a fait, tout le bien qu’il a plû à Nôtre-Seigneur 
d’operer par mon foible ministere, & qu’il voudra faire par leur zele, dans la 
conversion de ces Infideles, qui habitent plus de deux cens lieuës de ce Nouveau 
Monde, & qui portent plusieurs noms differens, suivant la difference des rivieres 
& des endroits les plus considerables qu’ils habitent. 

Comme je me suis singulierement appliqué, par le conseil de mes amis, à 
en connditre éxactement les Maximes, les Mœurs & la Religion, j’ay crû que 
j’en devois donner au Public une pein- [31] ture & une idée fidele & parfaite, par 
cette nouvelle Relation ; trop heureux & trop satisfait de mes peines, si on en fait 
la lecture avec le même plaisir que j'écris le détail de tout ce que j’ay remarqué 
de plus curieux & de plus agreable, dans les Missions que j’ay eu l’honneur de 
cultiver, pendant les douze années que j’ay demeuré dans la Nouvelle France. 

C’est une erreur qui n’est que trop commune, dont il est à propos de 
desabuser le Public. Il faut avoüer qu’on se persuade trop facilement dans 
nôtre Europe, que les Peuples de l’Amerique Septentrionale, pour n’avoir pas 
été élevez dans les maximes de la civilité, ne retiennent de la nature humaine que 
le seul [32] titre d’Hommes Sauvages, & qu’ils n’ont aucunes de ces belles qualitez 
de corps & d’esprit, qui distinguent l’espece humaine de celle des animaux de 
la terre ; les croiant tous velus comme des ours, & plus inhumains que les tygres 
& les leopards. Il est bon cependant, pour corriger une idée si grossiere, si 
injuste & si peu raisonnable, qu’on sçache la difference qu’il y a entre nos 


DE LA GASPESIE 337 


Sauvages, & quantité d’autres Peuples feroces & cruels ; mais particulierement 
des Habitans des Isles des Gorgades, dont l'Histoire fait mention qu’un certain 
Hano Capitaine Cartaginois, rapporta deux peaux de femmes toutes velués, 
qu’il fit mettre dans le Temple de Junon, comme un prodige & [33] une rareté 
singuliere : puisqu’en effet nos Gaspesiens ont moins de poil que les François, 
les aïant vû moy même s’arracher celuy de la barbe jusques à la racine, pour n’en 
avoir non plus que les femmes; & qu’enfin la Nature leur inspire assez de 
tendresse & de charité envers leurs Enfans, leurs Compatriotes, & les Etrangers 
même, pour ne les pas croire semblables aux animaux les plus feroces & les plus 
furieux, comme il sera aisé de remarquer dans la-suite de cette Histoire, où je 


ferai paroître par la sincerité de mon stile, le Sauvage Gaspesien, en quelque 
état qu’on le puisse considerer. 


[34] CHAPITRE II. 
De POrigine des Gaspesiens. 


ORIGINE de ces Peuples, & la maniere dont ce Nouveau Monde a 

été habité par une multitude presque infinie de Peuples de tant de 

Nations differentes, nous paroit tellement obscure, qu’aprés les 

recherches les plus curieuses & les plus éxactes qu’on en a faites 

jusques a present, tout le monde est obligé d’avoiier & de confesser ingenûment, 
qu’on n’en peut avoir une connoissance juste & veritable. 

Il semble que ce secret devroit être uniquement reservé aux Sauvages, & 
que d’eux [35]seuls on en devroit apprendre toute la verité; puisqu’enfin il a été 
un tems parmi nous, qu’on ignoroit qu’il y eût une Amerique Septentrionale, 
que les plus sçavans mêmes ne faisoient pas difficulté de loger dans les espaces 
imaginaires, ne la pouvant loger dans la capacité de leurs esprits, & qu’il n’y a 
pas encore deux cens ans qu’on en a fait la premiere découverte. Nos Gas- 
pesiens cependant ne nous peuvent rien apprendre de certain sur ce sujet; 
peut-être parce qu’ils n’ont aucune connoissance des belles Lettres, qui leur 
pourroient donner celle de leurs ancêtres, & de leur origine. Ils ont bien, si 
vous voulez, quelque idée legere & fabuleuse de la creation du Monde & du deluge ; 
disant que lors- [36] que le Soleil, qu’ils ont toûjours reconnu & adoré comme 
leur Dieu, crea tout ce grand Univers, il divisa promtement la Terre en plusieurs 
parties, toutes separées les unes des autres par de grands lacs: que dans chaque 
partie il fit naitre un homme & une femme, qui multiplierent, & vécurent fort 
long-tems ; mais qu’étant devenus méchans avec leurs enfans, qui se tuoient 
les uns les autres, le Soleil en pleura de douleur, & la pluie tomba du Ciel en si 
grande abondance, que les eaux monterent jusques à la cime des rochers & des 
montagnes les plus hautes & les plus élevées. Cette inondation, qui, disent-ils, 
fut generale par toute la terre, les obligea de s’*embarquer sur leurs canots d’écorce, 
[37] pour se sauver du gouffre furieux de ce deluge general: mais ce fut en vain, 
car ils perirent tous malheureusement, par un vent impetueux qui les culbuta, 
& les ensevelit dans cet horrible abime; 4 la reserve cependant de quelques 
vieillards & de quelques femmes, qui avoient été les plus vertueux & les meilleurs 


Y 


338 NOUVELLE RELATION 


de tous les Sauvages. Dieu vint ensuite, pour les consoler de la mort de leurs 
parens & de leurs amis: aprés quoy il les laissa vivre sur la terre, dans une 
grande & heureuse tranquillité; leur donnant avec cela, toute ladresse & 
l’industrie necessaire pour prendre des castors & des orignaux, autant qu’ils en 
auroient besoin pour leur subsistance. Ils ajoûtent encore [38] quelques autres 
circonstances tout-à-fait ridicules, que j’obmets volontiers; parce qu’elles ne 
nous prouvent aucunement un secret inconnu aux hommes, & reservé à Dieu 
seul. 

D’autres veulent que ce Nouveau Monde ait été peuplé par quelques par- 
ticuliers, qui s'étant embarquez sur la mer pour établir une Colonie dans les 
Pais étrangers, furent attaquez par l’orage & la tempête, qui les jetta sur les 
côtes de l’Amerique Septentrionale, où ils firent malheureusement naufrage, 
& perdirent avec leurs navires, tout ce qu’ils pouvoient avoir de biens & de 
plus precieux dans le monde; en sorte que ce naufrage les aïant mis tout-à- 
fait hors d’esperance de repas-[39] ser jamais dans leur Pais, ils prirent la resolution 
de travailler serieusement à la conservation de leurs vies, s’adonnant à la pêche 
& à la chasse, qui ont toûjours été fort abondantes dans ces quartiers ; & qu’au 
défaut de leurs habits, la necessité, qui est la mere des inventions, leur donna 
l’industrie de se vêtir de peaux de castor, d’origniac, & des autres animaux 
qu’ils tuoient à la chasse: qu’il se pouvoit faire veritablement qu’ils fussent 
instruits des Misteres sacrez de nôtre sainte Religion, qu’ils eussent même la 
connoissance & l’usage des belles Lettres; puisque dans les établissemens des 
Colonies, on y fait ordinairement passer des hommes également sçavants & 
devots, pour en- [40] seigner aux Peuples avec les sciences humaines, les maximes 
les plus solides de la sagesse & de la pieté Chrêtienne : mais que personne ne 
leur aïant succedé dans ces glorieux emplois, la connoissance qu’ils avoient du 
vrai Dieu, des belles Lettres & de leur Origine, s’étoit ainsi insensiblement 
perduë & effacée dans leur malheureuse posterité, par la succession des tems. 

Quoiqu’il en soit, le culte ancien & l’usage religieux de la Croix, qu’on admire 
encore aujourd’huy parmi les Sauvages de la riviere de Mizamichis, que nous 
avons honorée du titre auguste de la riviere de Sainte-Croix, pourroient bien 
nous persuader en quelque façon, [41] que ces Peuples ont reçû autrefois la con- 
noissance de l’Evangile & du Christianisme, qui s’est enfin perduë, par la negli- 
gence & le libertinage de leurs ancêtres ; à peu prés comme nous lisons dans la 
Vie de S. François Xavier, qui trouva dans l’une de ses Missions une belle Croix 
que l’Apôtre saint Thomas y avoit plantée, & un Peuple qui n’avoit plus qu’une 
legere, ou presque point d’idée de la veritable Religion, que cet illustre Disciple 
de Jesus luy avoit prêchée avec tant de zele, aux dépens de sa vie & de tout son 
sang. J’en ferai un traité particulier, lorsque je parlerai de la Religion des 
Gaspesiens, dont l’origine nous est tout-à-fait inconnuë. Ils observent cependant, 
& retiennent dans [42] leur conduite plusieurs maximes de nos premiers Peres, 
étant vêtus, logez & nourris comme eux; n’aïant pas même d’autres armes, 
soit pour la guerre, soit pour la chasse, que celles qui furent premierement en 
usage chez nos ancêtres, aprés la creation du Monde. 


DE LA GASPESIE 339 


CHAPEPRE TIL 


De la Naissance des Gaspesiens. 


N a douté avec justice, si les hommes recevoient plus d’avantage en 
naissant, qu’en mourant : c’est pour cela que cette question passoit 
autrefois en problème chez certains Peuples, qui parta- [43] geoient 
leurs pleurs & leur joie à la naissance & à la mort de leurs enfans, 

par rapport au bonheur ou au malheur qu’ils recevroient dans ces deux états 
si contraires, & tout à fait opposez. C’étoient là les opinions litigieuses & 
problématiques de ces anciens Philosophes dans les tenebres de Vinfidelité, 
ou ils manquoient de lumiere pour connoitre qu’il n’y a que la vertu & le peché 
qui rendent la vie ou la mort bienheureuse, ou malheureuse. Comme nos 
Sauvages ont été privez de ces belles instructions que le Christianisme inspire 
à ceux qui renaissent au Saint Esprit par le Baptéme, & qu’ils se croient tous 
égaux à la vie comme à la mort, sans distinction des Chefs du com- [44] mun 
de la Nation, ils se réjoüissent tous ensembles à la naissance de leurs enfans, jusques 
à faire des festins des harangues publiques, & toutes sortes de réjoüissances. 

Il n’est pas de nos Gaspesiens comme des Cimbres, qui mettoient les leurs 
dans les neiges pour les endurcir au froid, & les accoûtumer à la fatigue; ni 
comme de nos anciens Gaulois, qui les jettoient dans l’eau aussi-tôt qu'ils 
étoient nez, dans la croiance que ceux qui nageoient & qui venoient sur Peau 
en se debatant, étoient veritablement legitimes; & que ceux qui couloient a 
fond devoient être reputez bâtards & illegitimes. Les Sauvages lavent leurs 
enfans dans la riviere, aussi-tôt [45] qu’ils sont venus au monde : ensuite ils leur 
font avaler de l’huile d’ours ou de loup marin; & pour berceau, ils les font 
reposer sur une petite planche qu’ils couvrent de peaux de castor, ou de quelques 
autres pelleteries. Les femmes ornent curieusement ce petit berceau, de quel- 
ques grains de rassade, de pourcelaine, de porc-épy, & de certaines figures 
qu’elles forment avec leur matachias, pour l’enjoliver, & le rendre d’autant 
plus magnifique, qu’elles aiment leurs enfans; ausquels elles font de petites 
robes de peau toutes matachiées, qu’elles embelissent de tout ce qu’elles ont 
de plus joli & de plus curieux. Elles acouchent avec beaucoup de facilité, & 
portent des fardeaux tres- [46] pesans pendant leur grossesse. Plusieurs même se 
trouvant prises de ce mal en allant querir du bois, se retirent un peu à l’écart 
pour mettre leurs enfans au monde; & elles apportent le bois 4 la cabanne sur 
le dos, avec leurs enfans entre leurs bras, comme si de rien n’étoit. Une 
Sauvagesse étant un jour en canot, & se sentant pressée par les douleurs de 
lPenfantement, pria ceux de sa compagnie de la mettre à terre, & de l’attendre 
un moment: elle entra seule dans le bois, où elle acoucha d’un garçon, qu’elle 
apporta au canot, sur lequel elle rama tout le reste du chemin. Elles n’enfantent 
point dans la cabanne, les hommes ne la cedant jamais ; lesquels y de- [47] 
meurent, tandis que la femme accouche dans les bois, au pied d’un arbre. Si elle 
a un peu de peine, on luy attache les bras en haut à quelque perche, luy bouchant 
le nez, les oreilles & la bouche ; aprés quoy on luy presse fortement les flancs, afin 
de contraindre l’enfant de sortir du ventre de sa mere. Si elle se sent un peu 


340 NOUVELLE RELATION 


trop violentée, elle appelle les Jongleurs, qui viennent avec joie, pour extorquer 
quelque pipe de tabac, ou quelques autres choses dont ils ont besoin: disant 
que c’est un present qu’ils demandent pour leur Ouahiche, c’est à dire pour 
leur Demon; afin qu’il chasse & qu’il ôte ce ver qui empêche l’accouchement. 
C’est ainsi que ces maîtres fourbes s’ingerent par [48] tout, comme vous le 
verrez fort au long dans le Chapitre XIV. où je traite de la superstition des 
Gaspesiens. 

Nos Gaspesiens ne sont pas si ridicules que ceux de l’Amerique Meridionale, 
qui au même instant que leurs femmes sont accouchées, se mettent au lit, comme 
s’ils avoient eux-mêmes souffert les douleurs & les tranchées de l’enfantement ; 
pendant que leurs femmes, avec toutes leurs parentes & leurs amies s’efforcent 
de consoler ce malade imaginaire, à qui elles donnent mille douceurs, & tout 
ce qu’elles ont de meilleur. Les Sauvages ont trop de cœur, pour vouloir 
passer pour des femmes nouvellement accouchées, puisqu’ils [49] soulagent leurs 
compagnes avec beaucoup de charité ; allant à la chasse, pour fournir abonda- 
ment dequoy les nourrir, afin qu’elles puissent allaiter leurs enfans: car il est 
inoüi qu’elles les mettent en nourrice, ne pouvant se résoudre de donner aux 
autres les fruits de leurs entrailles ; blâmant par cette conduite, l’insensibilité 
de ces meres qui abandonnent ces petits innocens aux soins des nourrices, dont 
ils sucent assez souvent la corruption avec le lait: comme l’experience malheu- 
reuse l’a fait assez voir dans la conduite d'Alexandre le Grand, & de l'Empereur 
Caligula ; dont le premier, au rapport de saint Clement Alexandrin, s’enyvroit 
comme une bête, parce que sa mere étoit [50] sujette au vin: le second, suivant 
le témoignage de l'Histoire, ne respiroit que le sang & le carnage, jusques-là qu’il 
souhaitoit avec passion que le Peuple Romain n’eût qu’une seule tête, afin de 
pouvoir décapiter d’un seul coup, tous les Citoïens d’une si puissante Repub- 
lique; parce que sa nourrice, pour l’accoûtumer à la cruauté & luy inspirer 
une humeur barbare, rougissoit avec son sang le bout de ses mamelles. Nos 
pauvres Sauvagesses ont tant de tendresse pour leurs enfans, qu’elles n’estiment 
pas moins la qualité de nourrice, que de mere : elles les allaitent même jusques 
à l’âge de quatre à cinq ans ; & lorsqu'ils commencent à manger, elles mâchent 
la viande, pour la [51] leur faire avaler. On ne peut exprimer la tendresse & 
Pamitié que les peres & meres ont pour leurs enfans. J’ay vû leur offrir des 
presens considerables, afin qu’ils les donnassent à quelques François pour les faire 
passer en France : mais c’est leur arracher le cœur ; & ils verroient des millions, 
qu’ils ne les abandonneroiïent pas d’un moment. Ces enfans malheureux païent 
souvent d’ingratitude ces pauvres parens ; car on en a vû qui ont tué & assassiné 
leurs peres, quand ils sont parvenus à une vieillesse décrepite : on a va, dis-je, 
ces monstres de nature qui les ont abandonnez au milieu des bois & des neiges, 
& qui pour comble de cruauté, leur ont cassé la tête. 

[52] Leur occupation ordinaire est de faire des arcs & des fléches pour tirer aux 
oiseaux, avec des lignes & des hameçons pour la pêche. Ils sont si adroits à 
ces éxercices, qu’ils tuent toutes sortes d’oiseaux en volant. 


DE LA GASPESIE 841 


CHAPITRE IV. 
Des habillemens &$ parures des Gaspesiens. 


UOIQUE quelques-uns de nos Sauvages se servent aujourd’huy de 
couvertures, capots, just’au-corps, & des étofes qu’on apporte de 
France pour leur faire des habits ; il est toutefois constant qu'avant 
l’établissement des François dans ce nouveau Monde, [53]ils ne 
se couvroient que de peaux d’origniac, de castors, de martes & de loups marins, 
dont sont encore à present vêtus plusieurs de ces Peuples. La figure & la repre- 
sentation d’Hercules, qui a sur ses épaules en forme de manteau, la peau du lion 
qu’il avoit genereusement vaincu & terrassé, comme l'Histoire rapporte, est à 
peu prés celle d’un Sauvage dans sa cabanne, vêtu à la mode de ses ancêtres ; 
qui ont cependant toûjours fait paroître, comme les Gaspesiens d’aujourd’huy, 
beaucoup plus de pudeur que cette fausse Divinité, par le soin particulier qu’ils 
prennent de couvrir & de cacher ce que la nature & la bien-seance ne permettent 
pas de montrer. Le grand froïd, de plus, qu’il [54] fait pendant l’hiver dans le 
Canada, les oblige de se couvrir bien plus modestement : mais au reste, quelque 
rigoureux que soit l’hiver, & quelque excessive que la chaleur soit en été dans 
leur Paiïs, ils se servent toûjours également de bas en étriers & sans pied ; & leurs 
souliers, qui sont tous plats & sans talons, ressemblent proprement à des chaussons 
de cuir, qu’ils fourrent de peaux d’origniac, pour se conserver toûjours de la 
chaleur aux pieds. Quant à leurs habits, ils sont grands & larges : les manches 
ne tiennent point au corps; elles en sont separées, & liées l’une à l’autre par 
deux courroies, qui se partagent également par une ouverture qui sert à passer 
la tête. Une de ces manches [55] tombe par devant, & elle ne ne couvre que la 
moitié du bras: & l’autre par derriere, qui couvre toutes les épaules. Les 
habits des femmes ne sont en rien differens de ceux des hommes: je vous dirai 
seulement qu’elles se parent & s’habillent avec tant de reserve & de modestie, 
qu’elles ne laissent voir aucune nudité qui puisse blesser la pudeur & l’hon- 
nêteté. Pour leurs habillemens, elles se servent d’une couverture blanche ou 
rouge, qui leur tombe depuis les épaules jusqu’à mi-jambe, en forme de tunique, 
dont elles s’envelopent tout le corps, qu’elles ceignent d’une ceinture garnie 
de rassade & de pourcelaine. 

Il est à remarquer qu’il n’est pas possible de leur persua- [56] der de s’habiller à 
la Françoise, & qu’il n’y a rien de si grotesque, que de voir une de nos Sauvagesses 
vétué en Bourgeoise, ou en Damoiselle. Elles paroissent en cet habillement, 
du sentiment & de l’humeur de David au regard des armes que Saül luy voulut 
donner pour combatre contre Goliath: elles disent qu’elles n’en peuvent 
approuver l’usage, & qu’il leur seroit impossible de marcher ni d’agir librement, 
avec les habits de nos Francoises; en un mot, elles sont si entétées des leurs, 
qu’elles ne veulent pas seulement entendre parler des nôtres: Mais ce qui me 
paroit encore assez ridicule, tant parmi les hommes que parmi les femmes ; 
c’est que les uns & les autres mettent pour l’or- [57] dinaire leurs chemises 
par-dessus leurs habits. | 

Les ornemens & les bijoux les plus superbes, les plus magnifiques, & aussi 


342 NOUVELLE RELATION 


les plus ordinaires dont elles se parent dans les assemblées & les festins publics, 
consistent en quelques coliers, ceintures & brasselets, qu’elles font elles-mêmes, 
& qu’elles enjolivent d’une maniere toute innocente, avec de la rassade & du 
poil de porc-épi, qu’elles teingnent en rouge ou en jaune, suivant leur goût & 
leur fantaisie : mais au reste elles sont ennemiés du luxe & de la vanité; con- 
damnant méme par leur modestie, l’ambition & les dépenses superflués & tout- 
à-fait criminelles de ces femmes qui portent sur elles tant de richesses & de 
bijoux, que Saint [58] Clement Alexandrin s'étonne qu’elles ne ‘succombent 
sous un fardeau si lourd & si pesant. 

Il est encore inoüi de voir chez elles de ces nuditez criminelles & volontaires, 
indignes de ces Dames veritablement Chrêtiennes, qui ont tant soit peu d’amour 
pour la pureté & de zele pour l’honneur & la gloire de leur sexe. Elles se 
contentent de ce que la nature leur à donné de grace & de beauté, qu’elles 
diminuent même encore assez souvent, en les voulant conserver par l’artifice 
& le secours de leurs matachias, mais d’une maniere tout à fait ridicule. Il 
faut sçavoir que par le matachias des Sauvages, dont nous parlerons souvent, on 
entend ordinairement un [59] mélange de differentes couleurs, dont ils se servent 
pour se peindre le visage, ou pour former sur leurs habits certaines figures de 
bêtes fauves, d'oiseaux, ou de quelques autres animaux, tels qu’il leur vient dans 
l'imagination. Ils ne connoissent que quatre sortes de couleurs, sçavoir le 
rouge, le blanc, le noir & le jaune: ils n’ont pas même de nom propre & par- 
ticulier dans leur langue, pour exprimer les autres dont nous nous servons en 
Europe. Le rouge qu’ils mettent en usage n’est pas vif comme nôtre ver- 
millon; ce n’est qu’un rouge sombre, à peu prés comme le sang de dragon : 
mais pour la Tissaouhianne, qui est une petite racine rouge & deliée, semblable 
à la graine de per- [60] sil, elle est de valeur, disent-ils, & fort estimée parmi eux ; 
en effet nos Gaspesiennes, qui la conservent avec beaucoup de soin, s’en accom- 
modent admirablement bien pour teindre d’un beau rouge éclatant le poil de 
porc-épi, avec lequel elles enjolivent les canots, les raquettes, & les autres 
ouvrages qu’on envoie en France par curiosité. 

Lors donc que nous disons que les Sauvages se matachient, cela veut dire 
qu’ils se barboüillent le visage, tantôt de noir, & tantôt de rouge, comme 
il leur plaît. Les plus fantasques font un mélange de ces deux couleurs : 
les uns se peignent d’une seule ou de plusieurs couleurs ; les autres se bar- 
boüillent tout le front de rouge, & le reste du vi- [61] sage de noir: d’autres 
enfin, encore plus capricieux que les premiers, se tirent une ligne toute noire 
depuis le milieu du front jusques au bout du nez, & les deux joües seront toutes 
mouchetées & raiées de blanc, de jaune, de noir & de rouge. Ce matachias est 
proprement celuy dont ils se servent au jour des festins, & de leurs recreations 
les plus solemnelles. Ils en usent méme jusques dans le deüil ; car pour marquer 
leur tristesse & leur afiction, lorsqu'ils apprennent la mort de quelques-uns de 
leurs proches, ils se matachient toute la face de noir: & quand ils vont en 
guerre, ils se servent alors de rouge ; afin, disent-ils, que leurs ennemis, ni leurs 
compagnons mêmes ne puissent [62] appercevoir les differens changemens de 
visage, que la crainte fait assez souvent paroître dans les personnes les plus intre- 
pides & les plus genereuses. 

Au reste, il me semble qu’on ne doit pas tant s'étonner de ce que nos 
Sauvages se matachient d’une maniere qui nous paroît si ridicule; puisqu'il 
est constant que les Romains se peignoïient autrefois le corps de vermillon, au 


DE LA GASPESIE 343 


rapport de Pline, quand ils entroient en triomphe dans la Ville de Rome; & 
qu’ils en coloroient méme leur Jupiter. Deplus, nous voions aujourd’huy, 
sans aller chercher l’antiquité, que les femmes n’empruntent que trop souvent, 
par les mouches & par leur fard, une beauté que la nature leur a [63] refusée. 
Aussi nos Sauvages qui vinrent il y a quelque-tems en France, n’ont pû entendre 
sans s’éclater de rire, la raillerie de certaines Dames qui les prenoient pour des 
mascarades, parce qu’ils paroissoient à la Cour, matachiez à la Sauvagesse : 
Elles n’ont point d’esprit, répondirent-ils à leur Interprete, & leur reproche 
est injuste, puisqu’elles ont elles-mêmes le visage tout moucheté de noir, comme 
nos Sauvages, dont il semble qu’elles portent toûjours le deüil, par leur maniere 
de se matachier. 

Les Gaspesiens vont tous, pour l'ordinaire, tête nuë; coûtume qui est 
assûrément tres-ancienne : car nous apprenons par l'Histoire Romaine, que Jules 
Cesar marchoit toû- [64] jours de cette maniere devant ses troupes, tant au 
Soleil, qu’à la pluie ; & qu’il ne porta un laurier en forme de couronne, qu’aprés 
en avoir demandé & obtenu la permission du Senat. Nos Sauvages se forment 
aussi assez souvent une espece dé couronne, avec les deux aîles des oiseaux qu’ils 
onttuez à la chasse; & ils ne se sont jamais servis de bonnets ni de chapeaux, 
que depuis que les François leur en ont donné l’usage. Ils laissent pendre leurs 
cheveux : quelque fois ils les troussent par derriere, ou bien ils en font des 
cadenettes, qu’ils lient proprement, & qu’ils enjolivent avec de petits coliers de 
rassade & de pourcelaine. Quoique les enfans y naissent avec des cheveux de 
diverses couleurs, [65] comme en Europe; cependant ces Barbares ne sont jamais 
blonds quand ils sont avancez en âge, quelque soin qu’ils prennent de leurs 
cheveux: car vous remarquerez qu’ils en font grande estime, & qu’ils ne les 
noircissent qu’à force de les graisser, & de les froter continuellement d’une 
espece de graisse, qu’ils conservent uniquement pour cet usage. Les filles 
mêmes & les femmes en mettent sur leurs visages, aussi-bien que sur les cheveux, 
particulierement quand il est question de paroître en public; se persuadant 
qu’elles ne sont jamais plus belles ni plus agreables, que lorsqu’elles ont un 
visage tout luisant de graisse. Elles se percent aussi les oreilles, ausquelles elles 
attachent quelques [66] grains de rassade, avec des grelots, sols-marquez, deniers, 
& autres bagatelles de cette nature, qui leur servent de pendans d’oreiïlles. Jay 
vû même, avec assez de surprise, d’autres Sauvages, communément appellez 
les Nez-percez ; parce qu’effectivement ils se percent le tendron du nez, auquel 
ils attachent quelques grains de chapelet ou de pourcelaine, qui leur tombent 
sur l'extrémité des lévres. 

Voila les habillemens & la parure de nos Gaspesiens, qu’ils estiment au-delà 
de tout ce qu’on pourroit s’imaginer : ils sont si infatuez de leurs manieres de 
s'habiller & de leurs maximes de vivres, qu’ils méprisent les nôtres, & ne s’y 
peuvent du tout accoûtu-[67]mer. Ils n’ont pas moins aussi de répugnance pour 
bâtir des Maisons & des Palais comme nous : ils se moquent & se raillent de nos 
édifices les plus somptueux & les plus magnifiques ; cependant ils en admirent 
la beauté, autant qu’ils en sont capables, mais enfin sans en vouloir profiter. 


344 NOUVELLE RELATION 


CHAPITRE V. 


Des Cabannes © logemens des Gaspesiens. 


OMME ces Peuples vivent sans societé & sans commerce, ils n’ont 
ni Villes, ni Bourgs, ni Villages, à moins qu’on ne veüille appeller 
de ce nom quelques [68] amas de Cabannes en forme de tentes, bien 
mal propres, & assez mal arrangées. 

Leur Cabannes ne sont composées que de perches, qu’ils couvrent de quel- 
ques écorces de bouleau, cousuës les unes avec les autres, & enjolivées le plus 
souvent par mille figures differentes d’oiseaux, d’origniac, de loutres & de 
castors, que les femmes y craïonnent elles-mêmes avec leur matachias. Ces 
Cabannes sont d’une figure ronde, capables de loger quinze à vingt personnes ; 
en sorte cependant qu’avec sept ou huit écorces, ils en construisent une dans 
laquelle on void des trois à quatre feux. Elles sont si legeres & si portatives, que 
nos Sauvages les roulent [69] comme un morceau de papier, & les portent ainsi 
sur leur dos, par tout où il leur plaît; semblables à peu prés aux tortuës, qui 
portent leurs maisons ; & suivant la coûtume ancienne de nos premiers Peres, 
lesquels ne demeuroient cabannez dans un lieu, qu’autant de tems qu'ils y 
trouvoient dequoy subsister avec leurs familles & leurs troupeaux. Cest ainsi 
que nos Gaspesiens décampent, lorsqu'ils ne trouvent plus dequoy vivre dans 
les lieux où ils resident; parce que n’aïant ni bestiaux à nourrir, ni terres, ni 
champs à cultiver, ils sont obligez d’être presque tofijours errans & vagabons, 
pour chercher la nourriture, & les autres commoditez necessaires à la vie. 

[70] Il appartient au Chef de la famille, privativement à tout autre, d’ordonner 
de cabanner où il luy plaît, & de décabanner quand il veut. Cest pourquoy, 
la veille du départ, il va luy-même tracer le chemin qu’on doit tenir, & choisir 
un lieu propre & commode pour camper : il en ôte tout le méchant bois, coupe 
les branches qui pourroient l’incommoder, applanit & fraie une route, pour 
faciliter aux femmes le moïen de traîner sur la neige & sur leur tabagannes, le 
peu de meubles & de bagages qui composent leurs ménages. I] marque encore 
luy seul le plan de la Cabanne: il jette la neige avec ses raquettes, jusques a 
ce qu’il ait trouvé la terre, qu’il applanit & qu’il hache par mor- [71] ceaux, pour 
en Oter tout ce qui est gelé ; afin de loger le plus commodément qu’il peut, le 
nombre de gens qui composent sa famille. Cela étant fait, il coupe ensuite autant 
de perches qu’il juge à propos, & les plante en rond, sur le bord du creux qu’il 
a fait dans la terre & dans la neige ; en sorte toutefois que les extrémitez d’en- 
haut se terminent en pointe, comme des tentes ou des clochers : aprés quoy 
il fait des préparatifs pour la chasse, d’où il ne revient que la Cabanne ne soit 
entierement accommodée par les femmes, ausquelles il en commet le soin 
pendant son absence, donnant à chacune son emploi particulier. Ainsi les unes 
vont cüeillir des branches de sapin, [72] dont elles mettent les écorces sur des 
perches: d’autres cherchent du bois sec pour faire du feu: les autres appor- 
tent de l’eau pour mettre boüillir dans la chaudiere, afin de tenir le souper prêt, 
quand les hommes arrivent de la chasse. La femme du Chef, en qualité de 
Maîtresse, choisit les branches de sapin les plus tendres & les plus deliées, pour 
en couvrir tout le circuit du dedans de la Cabanne, reservant le milieu pour leur 


DE LA GASPESIE 345 


servir de foier. Elle ajuste ensuite, & proportionne les plus grandes & les 
plus rudes a la hauteur de la neige, lesquelles forment une espece de petite 
muraille ; en sorte que ce petit bâtiment paroît plûtôt une Cabanne de prin- 
tems, que d’hiver, par [73] une verdure agreable que le sapin conserve long-tems 
sans se flaîtrir. C’est encore à elle de marquer la place d’un chacun, suivant 
l’âage, la qualité des personnes, & la coûtume de la nation. Celle du chef est 
a droite; il la cede quelquefois par honneur & par civilité aux étrangers, les 
conviant même de prendre place & de se reposer sur quelques peaux d’ours, 
d’orignaux, de loup marin, ou sur quelques belles robes de castors dont ces 
sauvages se servent, comme de tapis de Turquie. Les femmes occupent toûjours 
les premieres places qui sont prés de la porte, afin d’estre toutes prêtes à obeiïr, 
& à servir promptement lors qu’on leur commande. 

[74] ly a de grandes incommoditez dans ces sortes de cabannes ; car outre 
qu’elles sont si basses, qu’on ne s’y peut aisément tenir debout, & que de neces- 
sité il y faut estre tofijours assis ou couché; c’est que d’ailleurs elles sont d’une 
froideur qui ne se peut exprimer, & la fumée qu’on est necessairement obligé 
de souffrir dans la compagnie de ces barbares, est quelque chose d’insuportable. 

Toutes ces disgraces sans doute ne sont pas les moindre mortifications, que 
souffrent les Missionnaires, qui pour se faire tout à tous, à l’exemple de saint Paul, 
afin de gagner ces peuples à Jrsus-Curisr, ne laissent pas malgré tant d’incom- 
moditez, de travailler sans relâche à la [75] conversion de ces pauvres [nfideles. 

Je passe sous silence plusieur sautres manieres de cabanner, qui sont en usage 
chez nos Gaspesiens; parce qu’elles n’ont rien de plus considerable, que de 
faire extrémement souffrir ceux qui les suivent dans les bois, & qu’elles sont 
toutes également chetives & miserables ; mais quoy qu’il en soit, ils en font 
autant & même plus d’estime que de nos maisons les plus superbes & les plus 
commodes. C’est ce qu’ils témoignerent un jour à quelques-uns de nos 
Messieurs de l’Isle Percée, qui m’ayant prié de leur servir d’interprete dans une 
visite qu’ils souhaitoient rendre à ces Sauvages, & de leur faire concevoir, que ce 
se- [76] roit une chose bien plus avantageuse pour-eux de vivre & de se bâtir à 
nôtre maniere, furent extrémement surpris, lorsque le chef qui avoit écouté avec 
beaucoup de patience, tout ce que je lui avois dit de la part de ces Messieurs, 
me répondit en ces termes. Je m’etonne fort, que les François aient si peu 
d'esprit, qu’ils en font paroître dans ce que tu me viens de dire de leur part, 
pour nous persuader de changer nos perches, nos écorces, & nos cabannes, en 
des maisons de pierre & de bois, qui sont hautes & élevées, a ce qu’ils disent, 
comme ces arbres! hé quoy-donc, continua-t-il, pour des hommes de cinq 
à six pieds de hauteur, faut-il des maisons, qui en aient soixante ou qua- [77] 
tre-vingts ; car enfin tu le sçai bien toy Patriarche, ne trouvons nous pas dans les 
nôtres toutes les commoditez, & les avantages que vous avec chez vous, comme 
de coucher, de boire, de dormir, de manger & de nous divertir avec nos amis, 
quand nous voulons ? Ce n’est pas tout, dit il, s’adressant à l’un de nos Capi- 
taines; mon frere, as-tu autant d’adresse & d’esprit que les Sauvages, qui 
portent avec-eux leurs maisons & leurs cabannes, pour se loger par tout ou bon 
leur semble, independamment de quelque Seigneur que ce soit? tu n’est pas 
aussi brave, ni aussi vaillant que nous; puisque quand tu voyages, tu ne peus 
porter sur tes épaules tes batimens ni tes édifices ; ainsi, il faut [78] que tu fasses 
autant de logis, que tu changes de demeure, ou bien que tu loges dans une 
maison empruntée, & qui ne t’appartient pas; pour nous, nous nous trouvons 


346 NOUVELLE RELATION 


à couvert de tous ces inconveniens, & nous pouvons toûjours dire plus veritable- 
ment que toy, que nous sommes par tout chez nous, parceque, nous nous faisons 
facilement des Cabannes par tout ou nous allons, sans demander permission 
à personnes tu nous reproche assez mal à propos, que nôtre païs est un petit 
enfer, par raport à la France, que tu compares au Paradis Terrestre, d’autant 
qu’elle te fournit, dis-tu, toutes sortes de provisions en abondance ; tu nous dis 
encore que nous sommes les plus miserables, [70] & les plus malheureux de tous 
les hommes, vivans sans religion, sans civilité, sans honneur, sans societé, & en 
un mot sans aucunes regles, comme des bêtes dans nos bois & dans nos forêts, 
privez du pain, du vin & de mille autres douceurs, que tu possedes avec excez 
en Europe. Hé bien, mon frere, si tu ne sçais pas encore les veritables senti- 
mens, que nos Sauvages ont de ton pais, & de toute ta nation, il est juste que 
je te ’aprenne aujourd’huy : je te prie donc de croire que tous miserables que 
nous paroissions à tes yeux, nous nous estimons cependant beaucoup plus 
heureux que toi, en ce que nous sommes tres-contens du peu que nous avons, 
[80] & crois encore une fois de grace, que tu te trompes fort, si tu prétens nous 
persuader que ton pais soit meilleur que le nostre; car si la France, comme 
tu dis, est un petit Paradis Terrestre, as-tu de l’esprit de la quitter, & pourquoy 
abandonner femmes, enfans, parens & amis? pourquoy risquer ta vie & tes 
biens tous les ans, & te hazarder temerairement en quelque saison que ce soit 
aux orages, & aux tempêtes de la mer, pour venir dans un païs étranger & bar- 
bare, que tu estimes le plus pauvre & le plus malheureux du monde : au reste 
comme nous sommes entierement convaincus du contraire, nous ne nous met- 
tons guere en peine d’aller en France, parce que [81] nous aprehendons avec 
justice, d’y trouver bien peu de satisfaction, voiant par experience que ceux 
qui en sont originaires en sortent tous les ans, pour s’enrichir dans nos côtes ; 
nous croions de plus que vous estes encore incomparablement plus pauvres 
que nous, & que vous n’estes que de simples compagnons, des valets, des ser- 
viteurs & des esclaves, tous maitres, & tous grands Capitaines que vous paroissiez 
puisque vous faites trophée de nos vieilles guenilles, & de nos méchans habits 
de castor, qui ne nous peuvent plus servir, & que vous trouvez chez nous par 
la pesche de Moruë que vous faites en ces quartiers, de quoy soulager vôtre 
misere, & la pau- [82] vreté, qui vous accable : quant à nous, nous trouvons toutes 
nos richesses & toutes nos commoditez chez nous-mêmes, sans peines, & sans 
exposer nos vies aux dangers où vous vous trouvez tous les jours, par de longues 
navigations ; & nous admirons en vous portant compassion dans la douceur de 
nôtre repos, les inquietudes & les soins que vous vous donnez nuit & jour, 
afin de charger vôtre navire: nous voïons même que tous vos gens ne vivent 
ordinairement, que de la Morüe que vous pêchez chez nous ; ce n’est continuel- 
lement que Morüe, Morüe au matin, Morüe à midi, Morüe au soir, & toûjours 
Morüe, jusques là même, que si vous souhaitez quelques bons morceaux ; c’est à 
[83] nos dépens, & vous êtes obligez d’avoir recours aux Sauvages, que vous 
méprisez tant, pour les prier d’aller à la chasse, afin de vous regaler. Or main- 
tenant dis-moi donc un peu, si tu as de l’esprit lequel des deux est le plus sage 
& le plus heureux ; ou celui qui travaille sans cesse, & qui n’amasse, qu’avec 
beaucoup de peines, de quoi vivre; ou celuy qui se repose agreablement, & 
qui trouve ce qui luy est necessaire dans le plaisir de la chasse & de la pêche. Il 
est vray, reprit il, que nous n’avons pas toûjours eu l’usage du pain & du vin, 
que produit vôtre France: mais enfin avant l’arrivée des François en ces 


DE LA GASPESIE 347 


quartiers, les Gaspesiens ne vivoient-ils pas plus long-tems qu’a present? & si 
nous n’a- [84] vons plus parmi nous de ces viellards de cent trente 4 quarante ans, 
ce n’est que parce que nous prenons insensiblement vôtre maniere de vivre, 
l’experience nous faisant assez connoître que ceux-là d’entre nous vivent d’avan- 
tage, qui méprisans vôtre pain, vôtre vin, & vôtre eau de vie, se contentent de 
leur nourriture naturelle de castor, d’orignaux, de gibier & de poissons, selon 
l'usage de nos ancêtres & de toute la nation Gaspesienne. Aprens donc, mon 
frere, une fois pour toutes puisqu'il faut que je t’ouvre mon cœur, qu’il ny a 
pas de Sauvage, qui ne s’estime infiniment plus heureux, & plus puissant que 
les François. Il finit son discours par ces dernieres paroles, disant qu’un Sauvage 
trouvoit sa vie pa [85] tout; qu’il se pouvoit dire le Seigneur & le Souverain 
de son païs, parce qu’il y residoit autant qu’il lui plaisoit avec toute sorte de 
droits, de pêche & de chasse, sans aucune inquietude, plus content mille fois 
dans les bois & dans sa cabanne, que s’il toit dans les Palais, & à la table des 
plus grands Princes de la Terre. 

Quoyque l’on puisse dire de ce raisonnement, j’avoïe pour moy que je les 
estimerois incomparablement plus heureux que nous, & que la vie même de ces 
Barbares seroit capable de donner de la jalousie, s’ils avoient les instructions, 
les lumieres, & les mêmes moïens pour leur salut, que Dieu nous a donnés pour 
nous sauver, par pré- [86] ference à tant de pauvres Infideles, & par un effet 
de sa misericorde : car aprés tout, leur vie n’est pas traversée de mille chagrins 
comme la nôtre; ils n’ont point chez-eux ces charges ni ces emplois soit de 
judicature, soit de guerre, qu’on recherche parmi nous avec tant d’ambition, 
& ne possedant rien en propre, ils n’ont aussi ni chicane ni procez, pour la 
succession de leurs parens ; le nom de Sergent, de Procureur, de Greffier, de 
Juge, & de President leur est inconnu; toute leur ambition se termine, à 
surprendre, & à tuër quantité de Castors, d’orignaux, de Loup marins & d’autres 
bêtes fauves, afin d’en prendre la viande pour se nourrir, & la peau pour se vêtir ; 
ils vivent [87] d’une tres-grande union, ne se querellans, ni ne se battans jamais 
que dans l’ivresse ; mais au contraire, ils se soulagent reciproquement dans leur 
besoin les uns les autres, avec beaucoup de charité & sans interest. C’est une 
joie continuelle dans leurs cabannes ; la multitude des enfans ne les embarrasse 
point: car bien loin de s’en chagriner, ils s’estiment d’autant plus heureux & 
plus riches, que leur famille est plus nombreuse, ne prétendant pas que la 
fortune des enfans soit plus considerable que celle de leurs peres, aussi n’ont ils 
point toutes ces inquietudes, que nous nous donnons, pour leur amasser des 
biens & les élever dans le faste & dans la grandeur ; d’où vient que la nature a 
toûjours [88] conservé parmi-eux dans toute son integrité, cet amour conjugal, 
qui ne doit jamais souffrir d’alteration entre le mari & la femme par la crainte 
interessée d’avoir trop d’enfans, charge qu’on estime en Europe trop onereuse, 
mais que nos Sauvages reputent tres-honorable, tres-avantageuse, & tres-utile, 
celui-là étant le plus consideré dans toute la nation qui en a un plus grand 
nombre ; parce qu’il trouve plus de support dans sa vieillesse, & que les garçons 
& les filles font également dans leur condition le bonheur & la joie de ceux 
qui leur ont donné la vie : ils vivent enfin les uns & les autres, le pere & les enfans 
comme les premiers Rois de la terre, qui vivoient [89] au commencement du 
monde de leur chasse de leur pêche, de legume & de sagamité ou boüilli, sem- 
blable, à mon avis, au pulment que Jacob demanda à Esaü avant que de lui donner 
sa benediction. 


348 NOUVELLE RELATION 


CHAPITRE VI. 


De la maniere de vivre des Gaspesiens, &S de leur nourriture. 


L est constant que nos Gaspesiens ont eu si peu de connoissance du pain 
& du vin, que lorsque les François arriverent la premiere fois dans leur 
païs, ces Barbares prirent le pain qu’on leur presenta, pour quelque 
mor- [90] ceau de tondre de bouleau, & se persuaderent que les François 
étoient également cruels & inhumains; parce que, disoient-ils, dans leurs : 
divertissemens ils bûvoient du sang sans repugnance; c’est ainsi qu’ils appel- 
loient le vin: aussi furent ils quelque tems, non seulement sans en goûter, 
mais même sans vouloir en aucune façon familiariser, & commercer avec une 
nation, qu’ils croïoient accoûtumée au sang & au carnage; cependant à la fin, 
ils se sont fait peu à peu à ce breuvage, & il seroit à souhaiter, qu’ils eussent 
encore aujourd’hui la même horreur pour le vin & l’eau de vie qu’ils prennent 
jusqu’à l’ivresse au préjudice de le ur salut & du Christianisme, leur faisant 
commet- [91] tre des crüautez bien plus grandes, que celles qu’ils se figuroient 
dans la conduite des François. 

Plusieurs sans doute sont surpris & ont de la peine à comprendre comment 
un Missionnaire peut vivre des années toutes entieres à la Sauvagesse ; j’avoüe 
effectivement, qu’il en coûte aussi bien des mortifications, particulierement 
dans les commencemens, qui sont tofijours extrémement penibles: mais enfin 
on en a bien-tôt surmonté toute la repugnance, quand on a des viandes aussi 
bonnes & aussi succulentes, que celles d’origniac, de castor, de loup marin de 
porc epic, de perdrix, d’outarde, de sarcelles, de canards, de becasses, de mo- [92] 
rüe, de saulmon, de bar, de truitte, & de quantité d’autres poissons & gibiers, 
qui servent de nourriture ordinaire aux Sauvages. 

-Les mois de Janvier & de Fevrier, sont pour l’ordinaire le tems de la peni- 
tence involontaire & du jeûne tres-rigoureux de ces Barbares, & souvent même 
tres funeste, vû les effets cruels & horribles qu’il cause parmi eux ; dont cepen- 
dant ils pourroient facilement prevenir les fâcheuses suites, s’ils vouloient suivre 
exemple des fourmis, & des petits écureüils, qui par un instinct autant ad- 
mirable qu’il est naturel, amassent avec soin dans l’êté, de quoy vivre abondam- 
ment pendant l’hyver. Mais enfin [93] nos Gaspesiens, sont de ces gens qui ne 
se soucient pas du lendemain, plûtôt par paresse d’amasser de bonnes provisions, 
que par le zele d’observer le conseil que Dieu en donne dans son saint Evangile. 
Ils se persuadent que quinze à vingt paquets de viande ou de poisson sechez 
ou boucannées à la fumée, sont plus que suffisans pour les nourrir l’espace de 
cinq à six mois: cependant comme ce sont des gens de bon appetit, ils con- 
somment bien-plûtôt leurs vivres, qu’ils ne s’imaginent; ce qui les expose 
assez souvent au danger de mourir de faim, faute des alimens qu’ils pourroïent 
facilement avoir jusqu’à l'abondance s’ils s’en vouloient don-donner la peine ; 
mais ces [94] Barbares étant errans & vagabonds, ils ne labourent point la terre, ils 
ne moissonnent ni bled d’inde, ni pois, ni citroüilles, comme les Iroquois, les 
Hurons, les Algomquins, & plusieurs autres peuples du Canada; ce qui les 
reduit quelquefois dans une si grande necessité, qu’ils n’ont plus la force ni le 


DE LA GASPESIE 349 


courage, de sortir de leurs cabannes, pour aller chercher de quoy vivre dans 
les bois. C’est alors qu’il est impossible de voir sans compassion des petits 
innocens, qui n’aiant plus que la peau & les os, font assez connoître dans un 
visage tout extenué, & dans des carcasses vivantes, la faim cruelle qu’ils souffrent, 
par la negligence de leurs peres & meres, qui se trouvent [95] eux même obligez 
avec leurs malheureux enfans de manger du sang caillé, des raclures de peaux, 
des vieux souliers, & mille autres choses contraires à la vie de l’homme ; tout 
cela seroit peu, s’ils n’en venoient quelques-fois à d’autres extremitez bien 
plus touchantes & plus horribles. 

Il est surprenant d’apprendre, qu’ils se voient souvent reduits à des excez 
si grand & si cruels qu’on ne les peut seulement entendre sans fremir, & la 
nature ne les peut souffrir sans horreur ; nous en avons veu un exemple assez 
deplorable à la riviere de sainte Croix, autrement dite Miramichis, dans le mois 
de Janvier 1680. où nos Sauvages consommerent leurs viandes, [96] & leurs pois- 
sons boucannez, bien plûtôt qu’ils ne se l’êtoient imaginez ; en sorte que la saison 
n’étant pas encore commode pour la chasse, ni les rivieres propres pour la pêche, 
ils se virent reduits à souffrir tout ce qu’on peut experimenter de rude dans une 
famine, qui en fit mourir jusqu’au nombre de quarante à cinquante. Les 
François qui étoient pour lors au Fort de sainte-Croix les soulagerent autant 
qu'ils pûrent, dans une rencontre où l'obligation de secourir son prochain, 
que PEvangile nous commande d’aimer comme nous même, paroissoit trop 
sensiblement, pour ne pas s’en acquitter, avec toute la compassion, & la charité 
possible. Madame Denis [97] donna ordre à ses Domestiques, de leur distribuer 
selon la necessité de chaque Cabanne, du pain, de la farine, des pois, de la viande, 
du poisson, & même jusques à du bled, que les plus patiens de ces pauvres 
affamez faisoient boüillir; mais quelques-autres d’entreux ne pouvant plus 
supporter la faim cruelle qui les accabloit, le mangeoient tout crud: jusques- 
là même, qu’une pauvre femme étant morte immediatement aprés ce repas, 
qui fut le dernier de sa vie, on fut assez surpris l'Automne suivant, lorsqu’on 
vid plusieurs beaux épis de bled qui étoient venus en parfaite maturité, dans 
la place même où on avoit enterré cette Sauvagesse. Nous n’en pûmes donner 
[98] d’autres raisons que celle-ci, qui nous parut la plus juste & la plus probable : 
c’est qu’il faloit necessairement que ce bled qu’elle avoit mangé tout crud, 
eût germé dans sa carcasse; & que son estomac n’aïant pas eu assez de force, 
ni de chaleur naturelle pour le digerer, il étoit venu en maturité: ce qui est 
tres vraisemblable, puisqu’en effet personne n’avoit jamais semé de froment 
en ce lieu. 

Dans une consternation si grande & une desolation si generale, qui affligeoit 
sensiblement les François & les Sauvages, il se trouva un de nos Gaspesiens, qui 
ne pouvant plus souffrir la faim qui le devoroit tout vivant, fut assez barbare 
& cruel, pour se resoudre d’assassiner & de man- [09] ger sa femme; laquelle 
penetrant dans le funeste dessein de son mari, luy inspira, pour se conserver la 
vie, de casser la tête & de couper la gorge à deux de leurs enfans, l’un âgé de 
cinq à six ans, & l’autre de sept à huit. Il est vrai, disoit cette maratre a son 
mari, le cœur tout transpercé de douleur, que tu es à plaindre, & que la necessité 
où nous sommes est extréme : mais enfin, si tu veux tuer quelqu’un de ta famille, 
ne vaut-il pas mieux que nous mettions à mort quelques-uns de nos enfans, 
& que nous les mangions ensemble ; afin que je puisse élever & nourrir les 
plus petits, qui ne pourront plus vivre, si une fois ils viennent à perdre leur 


350 NOUVELLE RELATION 


mere. Elle plaida si bien sa cause en sa fa- [100] veur, que d’un commun con- 
sentement l’homme & la femme massacrerent & couperent la gorge à ces deux 
pauvres innocens, sans se laisser attendrir aux larmes ni aux lamentations d’une 
petite fille, qui conjuroit son pere & sa mere de ne la pas égorger. Elle ne put 
jamais obtenir cette grace de ces inhumains ; & ils reçûrent tous deux la mort, 
de ceux qui leur avoient donné la vie. Ils hacherent ensuite par morceaux, & 
mirent dans une chaudiere toute boüillante les cadavres de leurs enfans: & 
enfin, par une cruauté inoüie, dont le simple souvenir fait encore aujourd’hui 
fremir d’horreur la Nation Gaspesienne, ces monstres de nature les mangerent 
en la compagnie d’un de leurs [101] freres, qui fut obligé de fuir avec les autres 
à la riviere de Saint Jean, de peur que les Chefs de nos Sauvages les surprenant 
dans ce cruel festin, ne leur eussent cassé la tête ; & en effet ils furent autant 
indignez que surpris, à la nouvelle d’une action si noire & si barbare. Il est 
vrai que ces malheureux, au retour du Printems, qui se trouva tres-commode 
pour la chasse, étoient inconsolables, du miserable genre de mort de leurs enfans, 
qu’ils avoient inhumainement sacrifiez à la conservation de leur vie. Ils 
étoient dignes, par leurs cris, de toucher de compassion les cœurs les plus 
insensibles : le pere reprochoit à la mere l’excez de sa cruauté : la femme repre- 
sentoit à son mari son [102] peu de constance à souffrir la faim, & d’avoir été 
si dénaturé, que de vouloir conserver sa vie aux dépens de celle qu’ils avoient 
donnée l’un & l’autre à leurs enfans. Cette pauvre mere affligée luy reprochoit, 
les larmes aux yeux, avec des soupirs & des gemissemens capables d’attendrir 
un cœur de bronze; que luy seul l’avoit forcée à consentir malgré elle, à une 
action si brutale & si barbare: mais aprés avoir pleuré reciproquement un 
malheur volontaire où il n’y avoit plus de remede, & la perte irreparable de leurs 
chers enfans, dont ils faisoient encore retentir les noms au milieu de leurs 
plaintes, ils ne pouvoient trouver assez de larmes, ni de termes pour détester & 
pour expri- [103] mer eux-mémes l’énormité de leur crime. Je les ay vi moi- 
méme, ces parens infortunez, qui avoient encore, comme des autres Cains, 
Vimage affreuse de leur crime abominable si presente à leur idée, qu’ils se 
croioient 4 tout moment frapez de la méme malediction que Dieu donna 4 
ce fratricide. Effraiez qu’ils étoient sans cesse par une terreur panique qui ne 
les abandonnoit jamais, ils se persuadoient voir autant de boureaux qu’ils 
rencontroient de Sauvages: & ne pouvant trouver de sûreté en aucun lieu, 
pour se dérober à la juste colere de nos Gaspesiens, qui ne les regardoient plus 
qu’avec horreur & indignation, ils couroient les bois jour & nuit sans relâche, 
cherchant [104] inutilement partout un repos qu’ils ne pouvoient rencontrer 
nulle-part ; mais encore moins dans le fond de leur conscience, qui les boureloit 
& les persecutoit continuellement avec tant de cruauté, au seul souvenir de 
Vhorreur du crime qu’ils venoient de commettre, qu’ils se crfirent enfin tout-d- 
fait indignes de recevoir les billets & les caracteres que je donnois aux autres 
Sauvages, & dont je me servois tres-utilement pour leur enseigner les Prieres, 
le Catechisme, & les principes de la Foi que je leur annonçois. Comme je 
m'apperçûs donc qu’ils n’osoient plus paroître, & qu’ils cessoient de se rendre 
à Instruction avec les autres, je tâchai de les rassûrer, & de leur persuader 
[105] de venir à nôtre Chapelle pour y apprendre les Prieres : ils me répondirent 
que c’étoit en vain; car quelques efforts qu’ils pussent faire, disoient-ils, pour 
apprendre ce que je leur enseignois, jamais ils n’auroient la memoire, ni l’esprit 
de le retenir, jusqu’à ce que ce crime leur fût entierement remis & pardonné 


DE LA GASPESIE 351 


de Dieu, par le ministere du grand Patriarche: cest ainsi qu’ils appellent 
Monseigneur l’Evêque de Quebec, voulant, disoient-ils, se jetter à ses pieds, 
pour obtenir de luy l’absolution de leur crime. 

Tels étoient les paroles & les sentimens de ces pauvres malheureux. Je fis 
tout mon possible pour les consoler, en leur promettant la protection & tout le 
secours que je [106] pourrois ; leur remontrant qu’à la verité leur crime étoit 
énorme, mais qu’enfin Dieu avoit plus de bonté & de misericorde pour eux, 
qu’ils n’avoient eu de malice & de cruauté, en mettant ainsi à mort ceux ausquels 
ils avoient donné la vie. Ils crûrent à mes paroles, & reçûrent mes billets ; 
bien resolus de faire & de pratiquer éxactement tout ce que je pourrois leur 
inspirer de bon, pour appaiser la justice de Dieu, & se concilier sa misericorde. 

Voila sans doute les accidens fàcheux où s’exposent tous les ans nos Sauvages, 
par leur paresse, & par le peu de soin qu’ils prennent d’amasser suffisamment en 
Eté, dequoi éviter & prévenir mille [107] malheurs, qui les accablent tres-fre- 
quemment en Hiver; comme ils ne le sçavent que trop bien eux-mêmes, par 
la funeste experience qu’ils en font. Ces Gaspesiens en tombent d’accord 
avec nous; mais il semble que l’abondance qu’ils trouvent au Printems, l'Eté 
& PAutomne, leur fasse perdre le souvenir des disgraces qu’ils ont souffertes 
pendant l’Hiver. 

Aprés tout, j’avouë qu’on ne peut assez admirer la constance avec laquelle 
ils souffrent les rigueurs de la faim; & on peut dire qu’ils jeûnent peut-être 
avec autant, ou plus même de patience & d’austerité, que les Anachoretes les 
plus reguliers & les plus mortifiez. C’est quelque chose de surprenant, de voir 
qu’ils se [108] font une entiere occupation de chanter à gorge déploiée, & de 
danser quelque fois comme des fols, lorsqu’ils ont un appetit devorant, & qu'ils 
n’ont rien dequoy se rassasier ; pour perdre, disent-ils, par ce divertissement, 
lenvie qu’ils pourroient avoir de manger. Il ne leur est pas difficile de de- 
meurer des trois à quatre jours à jeun, lors particulierement qu’ils sont à la 
chasse, & qu’ils poursuivent quelques bêtes fauves, comme l’origniac. Ils ne 
prennent jamais de refection devant cet éxercice, quelque penible qu’il leur 
soit; mais sur le soir, quand ils sont de retour à la Cabanne, ils se regalent de 
tout ce qu’il y a de meilleur; faisant boüillir, griller, ou rôtir, suivant le goût 
d’un chacun, [109] tout ce qu’ils ont, sans reserve, & sans aucune apprehension 
qu’on compte leurs morceaux; mais au contraire, ces Barbares estiment que 
c’est une chose fort loüable & glorieuse, de manger beaucoup: C’est pour- 
quoy, ne se pouvant soûmettre aux regles de la temperance & de l’œconomie, 
qui cependant leur seroient bien utiles & necessaires, ils font consister tout leur 
bonheur & mettent leur beatitude à manger avec excez, à accorder à leur appetit 
au-delà de ce qu’il souhaite, & à manger comme bon leur semble, tant de jour 
que de nuit; se faisant un plaisir & une felicité parfaite de leurs ventres : aussi 
est-ce un proverbe parmi nous en Canada, qu’il ne faut que quatre à cinq bons 
[110] repas pour les remettre des fatigues & des langueurs de plusieurs mois 
de maladie. 

Ils conservent inviolablement entr’eux la maniere de vivre qui étoit en 
usage pendant le siecle d’or; & ceux qui se figurent un Sauvage Gaspesien 
comme un monstre de la nature, ne croiront que difficilement la charité avec 
laquelle ils se soulagent reciproquement les uns & les autres: Le fort supporte 
le foible avec plaisir ; & ceux qui par leur chasse font beaucoup de pelleterie, 
en donnent charitablement à ceux qui n’en ont point, soit pour païer leurs 


352 NOUVELLE RELATION 


dettes, soit pour se vêtir, ou avoir le necessaire à la vie. Les veuves & les 
orphelins reçoivent des presens; & s’il s’en trouve quelqu’une qui [111] ne 
puisse nourrir ses enfans, les anciens prennent le soin de les distribuer & de les 
donner aux meilleurs chasseurs, avec lesquels ils vivent, ni plus ni moins que 
s’ils étoient les propres enfans de la Cabanne. Ce seroit un opprobre & une 
espece de blâme digne d’un reproche éternel, si on sçavoit qu’un Sauvage aïant 
des vivres en abondance, n’en eût pas fait largesse à ceux qu’il scauroit dans la 
disette & dans la necessité. Voila pourquoy ceux qui tuent les premiers 
origniaux au commencement de Janvier & de Fevrier, tems auquel ces Peuples 
pâtissent davantage, d’autant qu’ils ont consommé toutes leurs provisions, se 
font un plaisir d’en porter eux-mêmes tres-éxactement à [112] ceux qui n’en 
ont point, fussent-ils éloignez de quinze à vingt lieuës : & non contens de cette 
liberalité, ils les convient encore, avec toute la tendresse possible, de venir en 
leur compagnie, & de s’approcher de leur Cabanne ; afin de les pouvoir soulager 
plus commodément dans leur necessité, & dans leur plus pressant besoin ; avec 
mille promesses de leur faire genereusement part de la moitié de leur chasse : 
Belle instruction, sans doute, pour ces riches impitoïables & ces cœurs de roche, 
qui n’ont que des entrailles de fer pour leurs semblables, & qui ne se mettent 
aucunement en peine de secourir la misere extréme de tant de pauvres qui 
gemissent, & qui souffrent la faim & la [113] nudité, pendant que ces mauvais- 
riches regorgent d’une infinité de biens & de richesses, dont la Providence ne 
les a fait que dépositaires, & ne les a mis entre leurs mains, que pour en faire 
un saint usage d’aumônes & de charité aux membres necessiteux du Sauveur. 

La viande d’origniac est celle que nos Gaspesiens estiment davantage: ils 
en aiment la graisse, & l’estiment un mets si delicieux, qu’ils la boivent toute 
pure, avec autant de sensualité que si c’étoit la liqueur du monde la plus 
agreable. Ils la mangent encore toute cruë, comme quelque chose d’exquis : 
en un mot, il n’y a point chez eux de festin plus magnifique, que lorsque celuy 
qui traite donne aux con-[114] viez un pain de cacamos de neuf à dix livres. 
Or ce pain est une espece de graisse qui se tire des os des jambes & des cuisses 
des origniaux : & aprés qu’ils en ont mangé toute la moëlle, ils mettent ces os, 
qu’ils concassent & qu’ils pilent, jusques à presque les reduire en poudre, dans 
une grande chaudiere d’eau boüillante ; en sorte que tout ce qui peut rester 
de moëlle ou de graisse dans ces os ainsi brisez, surnage au-dessus de l’eau par 
la chaleur du feu. Ils l’amassent ensuite, & la conservent soigneusement, 
comme quelque chose d’excellent & de delicat. Quant au boüillon, il devient 
blanc comme du lait; & suivant leur sentiment, ils le croient aussi pectoral 
qu’un [115] grand verre d’eau-de vie, ou que le meilleur de nos consommez. 
Ils font beaucoup plus d’état de l’origniac femelle pendant l’Hiver, que du 
male: & au contraire, ils estiment bien davantage le male en Eté, que la 
femelle; parce qu’en effet ces animaux ont l’alternative, pour devenir gras 
& maigres, n’étant pas de leur nature ni de leur temperament de l’être en 
même tems: ce qui est encore fort commun à plusieurs autres animaux du 
Canada. 

Si par bonheur il arrive que le chasseur tuë une femelle pendant l’Hiver, 
ou un mâle pendant l’Eté, il se fait alors une réjoüissance entiere dans toutes 
les Cabannes voisines, dans l’attente & dans l’esperance où chacun est de [116] 
manger délicieusement de la graisse d’origniac; mais ils redoublent leur joie 
avec des cris & des chants d’allegresse, quand le Chasseur, tout victorieux de sa 


DE LA GASPESIE 353 


prise, entre dans la Cabanne, & jette par terre, d’un serieux & d’une fierté 
comme sil avoit triomphé d’un redoutable ennemi, le fardeau qu’il a apporté 
sur ses épaules, dans lequel sont envelopez le cœur, le roignon, la langue, les 
entrailles, & la graisse la plus delicate. C’est par là d’abord que ses amis & 
toute sa famille commencent le regale, tandis que les filles & les femmes vont 
avec mille marques de joie, toûjours en chantant & en dansant, querir sur 
leurs traîneaux le reste de la viande de Porigniac que ce glorieux [117] Chasseur 
a laïssee fort proprement ensevelie dans les neiges. 

C'est à la Maîtresse de la Cabanne de ménager tout ce qu’on apporte de la 
chasse, si on peut dire qu’il se trouve quelque ceconomie parmi des gens qui 
mangent presque à tout moment. Elle choisit de tous les boïaux de cet animal, 
ceux qui sont les plus gras, qu’elle fait boüillir, aprés les avoir fort legerement 
lavez, & qu’elle accommode ensuite en paquets, à peu prés comme les boudins 
& saucisses : c’est dequoy ils font ordinairement leurs regales les plus delicieux. 
Elle découpe encore en feüillet, tout ce qu’il y a de plus charnu & de plus maigre, 
qu’elle fait secher & boucaner à la fumée, sur des [118] perches qui forment une 
espece de petit échaffaut ; afin d’empécher que leur viande ne se gâte, ni ne se 
corrompe. C’est ainsi que sans l’usage du sel, ni d’aucune autre épicerie, ils 
la conservent tres facilement quelque-tems, & leur est dans la suite, comme 
jay déja dit, d’un tres-grand secours dans les extrémitez, où ces pauvres mal- 
heureux, faute de prévoïance, ne tombent que trop souvent. On peut dire 
que le muffle & la langue boucanez de l’origniac, sont merveilleux & excellens ; 
mais c’est encore quelque chose de meilleur & de bien plus délicat, non seule- 
ment au goût de nos Sauvages, mais même à celuy de nos François, & de toutes 
les autres Nations qui sont en Canada, lorsqu'on mange [1 19] Pun & l’autre 
tout frais & sans les avoir exposez à la fumée : c’est aussi le festin par excellence 
de nos Gaspesiens. Ils font encore rôtir quelque-fois par divertissement, la 
tête toute entiere d’un petit élan, qu’ils appellent communément dans leur 
langue Nigaiou, sans en ôter ni le mufle, ni la langue ; mais seulement, sans 
autre ceremonie, ils attachent à quelque perche une corde, à laquelle cette tête 
est suspenduë directement devant le feu, en sorte qu’en luy donnant le branle 
de tems en tems avec un bâton, elle tourne & détourne à droite & à gauche 
sans se brûler, jusqu’à ce qu’elle soit cuite. Il n’y a rien encore de si plaisant, 
que de voir le foier assiegé, pour ainsi dire, d’au- [120] tant de portions de 
viande embrochée dans des bâtons, qu’il y a de Sauvages dans la Cabanne ; 
lesquels ne pouvant se donner la patience qu’elle soit entierement rôtie, 
VParrachent demi-cuite de la broche, & la mangent ainsi comme des chiens 
goulûment, avec une avidité surprenante, qui seroit capable de dégoûter les 
personnes le plus en appetit. Voila tout l’appareil que ces Barbares apportent 
dans leurs repas ordinaires, sans chercher ni napes, ni serviettes, tables, plats, 
assiettes, ni fourchettes. 

Plusieurs sont en peine de sçavoir la maniere dont les Sauvages faisoient 
boiiillir leur viande, devant qu’on leur eût donné l’usage de nos chaudieres, 
qu’ils trouvent aujour- [121] d’hui extrémement commodes. J’ay appris d’eux 
mêmes, qu’au défaut de nos chaudieres ils avoient de petits baquets ou auges 
de bois, qu’ils remplissoient d’eau, dans laquelle ils jettoient si souvent des 
pierres ardentes qu’ils faisoient rougir au feu, que l’eau peu à peu s’échaufant, 
boüilloit enfin par l’ardeur & la chaleur de ces roches embrasées, jusqu’à ce que 
la viande fût suffisamment cuite pour la manger à la Sauvagesse, c’est à dire à 


Z 


354 NOUVELLE RELATION 


demi-cruë, comme ils la mangent encore aujourd’hui, & d’une maniere même 
tout-à-fait dégoûtante; car il est vrai que ces Peuples sont singuliers dans 
leur façon de vivre, par une malpropreté qui fait mal au cœur. Je ne puis me 
per- [122] suader qu’il y ait aucune Nation dans le Monde, si maussade dans 
le boire & dans le manger, que la Gaspesienne, si ce n’est peut-étre quelques 
autres Peuples de ce nouveau Monde: aussi est-il vrai que de toutes les peines 
que les Missionnaires souffrent d’abord, pour s’accoûtumer à la maniere de vivre 
de ces Sauvages, afin de les instruire dans les maximes du Christianisme, celle- 
ci est sans doute une des plus difficiles à supporter; puisqu'elle leur cause 
souvent des bondissemens de cœur. Jamais nos Gaspesiens n’écurent leur 
chaudiere que la premiere fois qu’ils s’en servent, à cause, disent-ils, qu’ils 
apprehendent le verd-de-gris, qui n’a garde de s’y attacher, quand elles sont 
bien graissées [123] & brûlées. Ils ne l’écument point non plus, parce qu’il leur 
semble que c’est ôter la graisse du pot, & autant de bien perdu ; ce qui rend la 
viande toute farcie d’une écume noire & épaisse, semblable à de petites boulettes, 
qui font à peu prés la figure d’un lait tourné: ils se contentent d’en ôter 
seulement les plus gros poils d’origniac, quoiqu’elle ait souvent traîné dans leur 
Cabanne des cinq à six jours, & que les chiens même en aïent toûjours goûté 
les premiers par avance. Ils n’ont point d’autres tables que la terre plate, ni 
d’autres serviettes pour essuier leurs mains, que leurs souliers, ou leurs cheveux, 
ausquels ils s’essuient éxactement les mains. Enfin il n’y a rien que [124] de 
rude, de grossier & de rebutant dans les manieres extraordinaires de vivre de ces 
Barbares, lesquels n’observent dans le boire ni dans le manger, aucunes regles 
de bienseance, ni de civilité. 

La boisson ordinaire de nos Gaspesiens est l’eau naturelle qu’ils boivent avec 
plaisir pendant l'Eté. Pour l’Hiver, ils sont assez souvent obligez de fondre 
la neige dans leurs chaudieres, pour en boire l’eau, qui sent presque toûjours la 
fumée. Quant à l’eau d’érable, qui est la séve de l’arbre même, elle est égale- 
ment délicieuse pour les François & les Sauvages, qui s’en donnent au Printems 
à cœur joie. Il est vrai aussi qu’elle est fort agreable & abondante dans la 
Gaspesie; car par une [125] ouverture assez petite, qu’on fait avec la hache 
dans un érable, on en fait distiler des dix ou douze pots. Ce qui m’a paru 
assez remarquable dans l’eau d’érable, c’est que si à force de la faire boüillir 
on la réduit au tiers, elle devient un veritable syrop, qui se durcit à peu prés 
comme le sucre, & prend une couleur rougeâtre. On en forme des petits pains, 
qu’on envoie en France par rareté, & qui dans l’usage sert bien souvent au 
défaut du sucre François. J’en ay plusieurs fois mélangé avec de l’eau-de-vie, 
des cloux de girofle & de la canelle; ce qui faisoit une espece de rossoli fort 
agreable. L'observation est digne de remarque, qu’il faut qu’il y ait de la 
neige au pied de cet arbre, pour qu’il laisse [126] couler son eau sucrée; & il 
refuse de donner cette douce liqueur, lorsque la neige ne paroît plus sur la terre. 
Mais enfin, tout ce que je puis dire de l’eau du Canada en general, c’est qu’elle 
est extrémement saine, bienfaisante, & beaucoup meilleure qu’en France: 
jamais, ou du moins rarement on s’en trouve incommodé, selon l’experience que 
j'en ay faite moy-méme pendant plusieurs années ; aussi disons-nous en Canada, 
que les eaux de la Nouvelle France valent le petit vin de l’Europe. 


DE LA GASPESIE 355 


[127] CHAPITRE VII. 
De Pignorance des Gaspesiens. 


LS ne sçavent ni lire, ni écrire: ils ont cependant assez de jugement & 
de memoire, s’ils vouloient avoir autant d’application qu’il en faut pour 
apprendre lun & l’autre ; mais outre l’inconstance & l'instabilité de leurs 
esprits, qu’ils ne veulent gêner qu’autant qu’il leur plait, ils sont encore 

tous dans cette fausse & ridicule creance, qu’ils ne vivroient pas long-tems, s’ils 
étoient aussi sçavans que les François: de-là vient qu’ils se plaisent à vivre & 
à mourir dans leur ignorance naturelle. [128] Quelques-uns cependant de ces 
Sauvages que l’on 2 pris la peine d’instruire, sont devenus en peu de tems Philo- 
sophes, & même assez bons Theologiens: mais aprés tout, ils sont toûjours 
demeurez Sauvages, n’aïant pas eu l'esprit de profiter de ces avantages con- 
siderables, dont ils se sont rendus tout-à-fait indignes, en quittant les études 
pour demeurer dans les bois avec leurs Compatriots, où ils ont vêcu en tres- 
méchans Philosophes; preferant, par un raisonnement extravagant, la vie 
Sauvage à la Françoise. 

Jay rencontré dans ma Mission, deux filles de nos Gaspesiens qui sçavoient 
lire & écrire, parce qu’elles avoient demeuré chez les Ursulines [129] de Quebec, 
qui saintement animées de ce zele tout de feu qu’elles font paroître pour la 
gloire de Dieu & le salut des ames, retiennent chez elles les petites filles des 
Sauvages, ausquelles elles apprennent avec la pieté & la devotion, non-seulement 
à lire & à écrire, mais encore à faire d’autres ouvrages conformes à leur état. 

La facilité & la metode que j’ay trouvé d’enseigner les Prieres à nos Gaspe- 
siens, avec certains caracteres que j’ay formez, me persuadent efficacement que 
la pluspart se rendroient bien tôt sçavans : car enfin, je ne trouverois pas plus 
de difiiculté à leur montrer à lire, qu’à prier Dieu par mes papiers, dans lesquels 
chaque lettre arbitraire signifie un mot particulier, [130] quelque-fois même 
deux ensemble. Ils ont tant de facilité pour concevoir cette sorte d’écriture, 
qu’ils apprennent dans une seule journée, ce qu’ils n’eussent jamais pû retenir 
en une semaine entiere sans le secours de ces billets, qu’ils appellent Kigna- 
motinoer, où Kateguenne. Ils conservent ces papiers instructifs avec tant de 
soin, & ils en font une estime si partituliere, qu’ils les mettent bien proprement 
dans de petits étuis de bouleau enrichis de pourcelaine, de rassade & de porc-épi. 
Ils les tiennent entre leurs mains comme nous faisons nos heures, pendant la 
sainte Messe, aprés laquelle ïls les serrent dans leurs étuis. L’avantage & 
Putilité principale que produit cette nouvelle [1311 metode, c’est que les Sauvages 
s’instruisent les uns les autres, en quelque endroit qu’ils se rencontrent: ainsi 
le fils enseigne son pere, la mere les enfans, la femme son mari, & les enfans les 
vieillards, sans que le grand âge leur donne aucune repugnance d’apprendre par 
leurs petits neveux, & par les filles mêmes, les principes du Christianisme. Il 
n’est pas jusques aux plus petits Sauvages, qui n’aïant pas encore entierement 
Vusage de la parole, prononcent cependant du mieux qu’ils peuvent, quelques 
mots de ces billets qu’ils entendent dans leurs Cabannes, lorsque les Sauvages, 
par une sainte émulation, les lisent & les repetent ensemble. On à même 
souvent admiré avec [132] justice, dans nôtre Convent de Quebec, un petit 


356 NOUVELLE RELATION 


enfant d’environ sept ans, qui lisoit distinctement dans son livre les Prieres 
que je luy avois apprises en faisant la Mission. Il déchifroit ces caracteres 
avec tant de facilité & de presence d’esprit, que nos Religieux, aussi bien que les 
Seculiers, en furent extraordinairement surpris. Ils ne furent pas moins 
édifiez, voiant le pere & la mere assister à la sainte Messe, leurs heures Gas- 
pesiennes à la main, où étoient les instructions qu’un bon Chrêtien doit sçavoir, 
pour assister avec merite à cet auguste Sacrifice. Ces pauvres Sauvages, qui 
m’avoient adopté pour leur enfant, avec les ceremonies ordinaires, étoient 
venus exprès de plus [133] de cent cinquante lieuës, pour me conjurer de re- 
tourner au plûtôt avec eux. Il n’y avoit que deux mois que j’étois arrivé à 
Quebec, pour rendre compte au Reverend Pere Valentin le Roux, nôtre Com- 
missaire & Superieur, à present Custode des Recollets de la Province de Saint 
Denis en France, des Missions de la Gaspesie, Isle Percée, Ristigouche, Nipisiquis 
& Mizamichis, que l’obeïssance avoit confiées à mes soins. Il est vrai que 
j'avois été obligé de rester en nôtre Convent de Nôtre-Dame des Anges, plus 
long-tems que je ne m’étois proposé; parce que le R. Pere Commissaire n’y 
étoit pas quand j’y arrivai. 

Le méme zele qu’il a fait [134] paroitre tofijours avec tant d’ardeur & de 
succez pour la gloire de Dieu, le salut des ames, le service du Roi, & Phonneur 
de nôtre sainte Reforme, durant les six années qu’il a gouverné nos Missions 
de la Nouvelle France, l’avoit obligé de s’embarquer dans l’un des canots du 
Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac, qu’il eut l’honneur d’accompagner jusques 
au Fort du même nom, à six-vingt lieuëés de Quebec ; afin d’y animer par ses 
paroles & par son éxemple, les R R. Peres Gabriel de la Ribourd, Zenobe 
Membré & Loiiis Hennepin, qu’il avoit destinez pour faire avec Monsieur de 
la Sale, la fameuse découverte du Golfe de Mexique, par les fleuves de Saint 
Laurent & de Missi- [135] pé; ou d’y aller luy-même tout le premier, s’il en 
eût été besoin, partager avec eux les travaux Apostoliques qu’il faloit soûtenir 
dans cette glorieuse entreprise. 

Il fut cependant sensiblement mortifié, de ne plus trouver au fort de Fron- 
tenac nos Missionnaires, qui étoient déja partis pour la découverte du Golfe de 
Mexique : ensorte qu’aprés avoir fait dans cette Mission tout ce que son zele 
luy inspira de bien, & donné les ordres necessaires au R. Pere Luc Buisset 
Recollet, qui étoit resté seul au Fort pour l’instruction des François & des 
Sauvages ; il descendit avec Monsieur le Comte de Frontenac à Quebec, & 
se rendit en nôtre Convent de Nôtre-Dame des Anges. 

[136] Je luy representai alors, avec cette aimable confiance que sa bonté 
& sa douceur naturelle inspiroit à tous les Missionnaires, ce que j’avois jugé 
capable d’avancer pour la gloire de Dieu & le salut des ames dans toutes ces 
Missions. Il en écouta favorablement les propositions ; & je peux dire avec 
verité, que ce voiage que je fis 4 Quebec, eut tout le succez que je pouvois en 
esperer: en sorte qu’aprés avoir fait les éxercices spirituels sous sa direction, 
afin d’y recevoir les lumieres & les forces necessaires pour m’acquitter dignement 
de mon ministere ; je me disposois déja 4 partir quand nos Sauvages parurent 
à Quebec. 

Quelque inclination, cependant, que j’eus de rester en- [137] core quelques 
jours dans nôtre solitude de Nôtre-Dame des Anges, il falut me rendre aux 
instances de mes Sauvages, ausquels j’avois promis en passant, que je retour- 
neroiïs chez eux dans une Lune & demie, c’est à dire dans six semaines. 


DE LA GASPESIE 857 


Affligez sensiblement qu’ils étoient de mon absence, & voiant que ce terme 
que je leur avois prescrit étoit déja expiré, les Chefs délibererent d’un commun 
accord de m’envoier deux canots, avec ordre aux Sauvages qu’ils deputerent 
pour cet effet, de me témoigner le grand desir qu’ils avoient de me revoir au 
plûtôt, & de me demander si les Lunes de Quebec étoient plus longues que 
celles de Ristigouche; c’est l’endroit où je [138] faisois alors ma Mission. Je 
ne pis me défendre des instances que me firent ces Deputez, pour m’obliger à 
presser mon retour: & suivant plûtôt l’attrait de la grace, que les inclinations 
naturelles, qui m'inspiroient fortement de joüir plus long-tems de la con- 
versation de mes Freres ; je m’embarquai enfin avec plaisir dans leurs canots ; 
& aprés quinze jours d’une heureuse navigation, nous arrivâmes aux Cabannes 
de nos Sauvages, qui me reçûrent avec tant de cordialité, d'affection & de 
tendresse, qu’ils firent des festins publics & particuliers, avec les harangues & 
les réjoüissances ordinaires, pour me témoigner, autant qu’ils en étoient capables, 
la joie qu’ils avoient de mon [139] retour. Que je fûs agreablement surpris, 
& que je ressentis de consolation dans mon cœur, lorsque voulant presenter de 
mes papiers à des Sauvages qui étoient venus de bien loin, exprés pour se faire 
instruire, ils en déchifroient déja les caracteres, avec autant de facilité que s’ils 
étoient toûjours demeurés parmi nous; d’autant que ceux que j’avois aupara- 
vant instruits étant retournez chez eux, avoient enseigné ceux-ci, & avoient 
fait à leur égard loffice de Missionnaire. 

Il est donc aisé de juger par là, de l’utilité de ces caracteres pour un 
Missionnaire qui veut faire beaucoup de fruit en peu de tems dans toute l’étenduë 
de son district: car pour peu de memoire qu’aient [140] nos Sauvages, ils 
peuvent non-seulement apprendre facilement leurs Prieres par ces caracteres ; 
mais encore il leur est aisé, aprés les avoir oubliées, de s’en ressouvenir, en les 
comptant les uns aprés les autres, de la maniere qu’on leur a montré. 

Enfin, je m’en suis servi si utilement l’espace de dix ans, que si le merite 
de l’obeïssance me destinoït aux Missions nombreuses du Golfe de Mexique 
nouvellement découvert par nos Religieux, qui ont eu l’honneur d’accompagner 
Monsieur de la Salle dans cette glorieuse entreprise, comme je fais voir dans le 
premier établissement de la foi dans la Nouvelle France; je les presenterois 4 
ces Barbares, comme le moïen [141] le plus efficace pour les instruire en fort 
peu de tems, des veritez les plus saintes de nôtre Christianisme. 

Notre Seigneur m’en inspira la metode la seconde année de ma Mission, 
ou étant fort embarrassé de quelle maniere j’enseignerois les Sauvages a prier 
Dieu, je m’apperçûs que quelques enfans faisoient des marques avec du charbon 
sur de l’écorce de bouleau, & les comptoient avec leur doigt fort éxactement, à 
chaque mot de Prieres qu’ils prononçoient : cela me fit croire qu’en leur donnant 
quelque formulaire qui soulageât leur memoire par certains caracteres, je pourrois 
beaucoup plus avancer, que de les enseigner en les faisant repeter plusieurs 
fois ce [142] que je leur disois. Je fus ravi de connoître que je ne m’étois pas 
trompé, & que ces caracteres que j’avois formez sur du papier, produisoient 
tout l’effet que je souhaitois; en sorte qu’en peu de jours ils apprirent sans 
peine toutes leurs Prieres. Je ne vous puis exprimer avec quelle ardeur ces 
pauvres Sauvages contestoient les uns avec les autres, par une émulation digne 
de loüange, qui seroit le plus sçavant & le plus habile. Il est vrai qu’il en coûte 
beaucoup de tems & de peine, pour en former autant qu’ils en demandent, & 
particulierement depuis que je les ay augmentez, pour leur apprendre toutes 


358 NOUVELLE RELATION 


les Prieres de l'Eglise, avec les sacrez Misteres de la Trinité, de l’Incarna- [143] 
tion, du Baptême, de la Penitence & de l’Eucharistie. Mais enfin, que ne 
doit-on pas faire pour Dieu? & qu’importe, de graces, en quoy & de quelle 
maniere emploïer nôtre tems, pourvû que le Seigneur soit glorifié, & qu'on 
procure avec sa gloire le salut des ames, en expliquant avec une simplicité 
Chrêtienne, les Misteres de nôtre Religion à de pauvres Sauvages, qui ont 
passé des soixante & quatre-vingt années sans invoquer jamais une seule fois 
pendant leur vie, le sacré nom du Seigneur? (C’est ainsi que ces Ouvriers 
Évangeliques retirent des portes de l’Enfer, des ames qui ne joüiroient jamais 
de l'éternité bienheureuse, sans le secours charitable de ces genereux Mis- 
sionnaires. 

[144] Comme je n’ay recherché dans ce petit formulaire, que l’utilité de 
mes Sauvages, & la metode la plus promte & la plus facile pour les instruire ; 
je m’en suis servi toûjours avec d’autant plus de plaisir, que plusieurs personnes 
de merite & de vertu, ont bien voulu, de vive voix & par lettres, m’exhorter à 
continuer ; m’obligeant même de leur en envoïer en France, pour faire voir 
aux curieux une nouvelle metode d’apprendre à lire, & comment Dieu se sert 
des moindres choses, pour manifester la gloire de son saint Nom à ces Peuples 
de la Gaspesie. L’approbation de Monseigneur de Saint Valier, à present 
Evêque de Quebec, en a autorisé l’usage plus que suffisamment: & ce digne 
[145] Prelat en a fait tant d’estime, qu’aprés en avoir reconnu luy-même les 
avantages & les utilitez dans le voïage tres-penible qu’il fit à la Cadie, il voulut 
bien en demander des modeles au Reverend Pere Moreau, auquel je les avois 
communiquez il y avoit plusieurs années. Sa Grandeur reçut avec plaisir de 
ce zelé Missionnaire, nos billets & nos caracteres instructifs, pour en faire part 
à l’un de ses Missionnaires : & je ne doute pas que ce bon Serviteur de Dieu 
n’en reçoive bien du soulagement dans les instructions qu’il fera aux Sauvages 
de sa Mission. 

Nos Gaspesiens ont tant de veneration & de respect pour ces caracteres, 
qu’ils se font scrupule de les jet- [146] ter au feu. Lorsqu'ils se déchirent ou 
qu’ils se gâtent, ils m’en rapportent les fragmens ; plus religieux cent fois que 
les Iconoclastes, qui par une impieté sacrilege brisoient les Images les plus 
sacrées. Ces Peuples méme n’ont pti voir sans se scandaliser, la manie d’une 
Sauvagesse qui les jetta au feu, en dépit de ce que je l’avois chassée de la Priere, 
pour une faute considerable qu’elle avoit commise. 

Son incartade étant trop extraordinaire & trop scandaleuse parmi un Peuple 
qui commençoit déja à avoir beaucoup de veneration pour les instructions du 
Christianisme, je crûs que j’étois obligé de témoigner par certaines formalitez 
conformes au genie [147] des Sauvages, le ressentiment que j’en avois conçû ; 
afin que mon silence ne donnât pas occasion à quelque autre d’en faire 
autant. 

Je fus donc à sa Cabanne, où je trouvai son pere avec quelques autres 
Sauvages, qui furent assez surpris de me voir entrer, avec une contenance qui 
marquoit la douleur que j’avois dans le cœur. Ils me prierent plusieurs fois de 
leur en dire le sujet, que j’affectois de leur dissimuler par mon silence: ils 
s’étonnerent de me voir remuer les cendres de leur foïer, avec autant d’applica- 
tion que si j’y eusse perdu quelque chose de la derniere consequence, & en 
emporter trois ou quatre pincées dans mon mouchoir, faisant des soupirs à la 
Sauvagesse, akabie, [148] akahié. Je luy dis en sortant de leur Cabanne qu’ils 


DE LA GASPESIE 359 


ne devoient pas être surpris de mon silence ; puisque mon cœur pleuroit amére- 
ment; qu’il versoit des larmes de sang, depuis que sa fille avoit jetté dans le 
feu les oukate guenne Kignamatinoër :  Qu’à la verité je paroîtrois peu sensible- 
ment touché de cette insulte, si ce n’étoit que de simple papier; mais que 
j’étois inconsolable pour l’injure qu’elle avoit faite à la Priere de Jesus, qui 
avoit été griévement offensé par cette action scandaleuse: & qu’enfin j’ex- 
poserois ces cendres, que je croïois être celles de mes owkate guenne, à la porte 
de la Chapelle, où sa fille n’entreroit jamais, jusqu’à ce qu’elle les eût détrempées 
de ses larmes, & qu’elle [149] n’eût blanchi de ses pleurs le mouchoir, qui par la 
noirceur qu’il en avoit contracté, marquoit évidemment l’énormité de son 
attentat, qui étoit capable d’attirer la haine & la colere de Dieu sur toute la 
Nation: Que pour mon particulier, je faisois état de les quitter; puisque je 
ne pouvois vivre, si on ne ressuscitoit la Priere qu’on avoit fait mourir dans 
le feu. 

Ces paroles prononcées de la maniere dont il faut parler aux Sauvages en 
semblable rencontre, firent tout l’effet que j’en attendois : car ils parurent tous 
si consternez, qu’ils se persuaderent que j’avois déja fermé pour tofijours la 
porte de la Chapelle, qu’ils appellent la Cabanne de Jesus ; & que j’étois absolu- 
ment re- [150] solu de refuser le Baptème aux Sauvages, que j’avois auparavant 
disposez pour recevoir dignement le premier de nos Sacremens. Ils s’assem- 
blerent tous ensemble, & vinrent en foule me conjurer, au nom du Dieu que je 
leur annonçois, de ne les pas abandonner; me disant que mon chagrin étoit 
juste, à la verité, mais que je sçavois bien que cette fille n’avoit pas d’esprit ; 
& qu’enfin ils feroient tous en sorte, qu’elle repareroit entierement la faute 
qu’elle avoit commise. Ils obligerent en effet cette Sauvagesse à me venir 
trouver le lendemain d’un grand matin, pour me témoigner publiquement, en 
presence de tous les Sauvages, le déplaisir sensible qu’elle avoit dans lame, 
d’a- [151] voir brûlé ses Oukate guenne, dans lesquels étoit la Priere de Jesus ; 
voulant, me disoit-elle, luy faire une amende honorable & reparation d’honneur, 
par une conduite toute sainte & toute opposée aux déreglemens de sa vie passée. 
Elle me conjura, avec toutes les instances possibles, de luy vouloir bien per- 
mettre d'assister avec les autres au saint Sacrifice de la Messe; mais je luy 
refusai cette grace pour quelques jours, afin de luy faire mieux concevoir par 
1a, le scandale qu’elle avoit donné 4 toute la Nation. 

Vous voiez par 1a V’estime que nos Sauvages font de mes Oukate guenne 
Kignatimonoér, que nous appellons, comme j’ay déja dit, papiers ou caracteres 
instructifs: ils n’ont [152] pas moins d’admiration pour nos livres, & princi- 
palement pour nos lettres, dont ils sont les porteurs lorsque nous écrivons à 
nos amis. Ils s’imaginent qu’il y a de l’enchantement & de la jonglerie, ou 
que cette lettre a de l'esprit; puisque, disent-ils, elle a la vertu de dire à celuy 
qui la reçoit, tout ce qui se dit & tout ce qui se fait de plus caché & de plus 
secret. 

Quoique nos Gaspesiens soient dans une ignorance si grossiere, qu’il ne 
sçachent, comme nous avons dit, ni lire, ni ècrire, ils ont cependant quelque 
connoissance de la grande & de la petite Ourse, quils appellent la premiere 
Moubinne, & la seconde Mouhinchiche, qui veut dire effectivement en nôtre 
langue, la [153] grande & la petite Ourse. Ils disent que les trois gardes de 
l'Etoile du Nord, est un canot où trois Sauvages sont embarquez, pour sur- 
prendre cette Ourse ; mais que par malheur ils ne l’ont pû encore joindre. 


360 NOUVELLE RELATION 


Ils ont beaucoup d’industrie, pour faire sur de l'écorce une espece de carte, 
qui marque éxactement toutes les rivieres & ruisseaux d’un Pais dont ils veulent 
faire la description: ils en marquent au juste tous les endroits ; en sorte qu’ils 
s’en servent avec succez, & qu’un Sauvage qui la possede fait de longs voïages 
sans s’égarer. 

Ils connoissent cinq sortes de vents, scavoir le Nord, le Sud, le Nord-est, 
le Nord oiiest, & le Sud-oiiest. Ils ont [154] l’idée si juste, que pourvû qu'ils 
voient le Soleil, ils ne s’écartent jamais de leur route; & connoïissent si précisé- 
ment toutes les rivieres, que pour peu qu’on leur indique quelque Cabanne, 
fat-elle éloignée de quatre-vingt ou cent lieués, ils la trouvent à point nommé, 
quoiqu’il faille traverser des forêts fort épaisses : Mais quand la nuit les surprend, 
ou que les broüillards cachent le Soleil, alors ils sont bien embarrassez, quel- 
ques remarques naturelles qu’ils trouvent faites sur certains arbres, & quelque 
mousse ou branches qui panchent du côté du Nord, & qui leur servent de regle 
dans leurs voïages au défaut du Soleil; car si-tôt que l’obscurité survient ils 
perdent la [155] tramontane. Ils ne reglent leurs lieués que par les pointes & 
les caps qui se trouvent le long des rivieres ou des côtes. Ils les comptent & 
les mesurent encore par la longueur du tems qu’ils mettent à leur voiage, & par 
le nombre des nuits qu’ils sont obligez de coucher en chemin; ne comptant 
point le jour de leur départ, ni celuy de leur arrivée. 

Ils ne sçavent point compter que jusques au nombre de dix : ainsi quand ils 
veulent dire vingt, ils disent deux fois dix; pour dire trente, ils disent trois 
fois dix ; & ainsi du reste. 

Lorsqu’ils veulent signifier un nombre extraordinaire, ils se servent des 
mémes expressions que nos pre- [156] miers Peres, montrant les feiiilles des 
arbres, les grains de sable, & les cheveux de leur tête ; expression dont Dieu 
luy-méme s’est servi, lorsque promettant 4 Abraham une posterité nombreuse, 
il déclara qu’il luy susciteroit des enfans en aussi grand nombre que les étoiles 
sont au firmament, & les grains de sable sur les rivages de la mer. David même 
ne se sert point d’autre expression pour marquer le nombre de ses pechez, 
que par celuy de ses cheveux : & ce fut aussi de cette maniere de parler dont 
quelques uns de nos Gaspesiens qui étoient venus en France se servirent, pour 
marquer a leurs Compatriotes, lorsqu’ils en furent de retour, le grand nombre 
de Peuple [157] qu’ils y avoient vû. 

Is comptent les années par les Hivers, les mois par les Lunes, les jours par 
les nuits; les heures du matin, a proportion que le Soleil avance dans son 
meridien ; & celles de l’aprés midi, selon qu’il décline, & qu’il s’approche de 
son couchant. Ils donnent trente jours à toutes les Lunes, & reglent l’année 
sur certaines observations naturelles qu’ils font sur le cours du Soleil & des 
saisons. Ils disent que le Printems est venu, lorsque les feüilles commencent à 
pousser, que les outardes paroissent, que les faons d’orignaux sont d’une certaine 
grandeur dans le ventre de leur mere, & que les loups marins font leurs petits ; 
ils connoissent l’Eté, lorsque les saumons [158] montent les rivieres, & que 
les outardes quittent leurs plumes: ils connoissent la saison de l’Automne, 
quand le gibier retourne du Nord au Midi: pour l’Hiver, ils en sçavent les 
approches par la rigueur du froid, lorsque les neiges sont abondantes sur la terre, 
& que les ours se retirent dans le creux des arbres, d’où ils ne sortent que le 
Printems, felon la remarque que nous en ferons dans la suite. 

Nos Gaspesiens donc divisent les années en quatre saisons, par quatre tems 


DE LA GASPESIE 361 


differens: le Printems s'appelle Paniab, l'Eté Nibk, VAutomne Taoüak, & 
Hiver Kesic. Ils ne comptent que cing Lunes d’Eté, & cing d’Hiver pour 
toute Pannée, comme il étoit [159] en usage anciennement parmi les Romains, 
avant que Jules Cesar l’eût divisée en douze mois, un an avant sa mort. Ils con- 
fondent une Lune du Printems avec celles de l'Eté, & une de l’Automne avec 
celles de ?Hiver ; parce qu’en effet il est vrai de dire, qu’il y a peu de Printems 
& d'Automne dans la Gaspesie, d'autant que l’on y passe insensiblement du 
froid au chaud, & du chaud au froid, qui est tres-rigoureux. Ils n’ont point 
de semaines reglées ; s’ils en divisent quelques-unes, c’est par le premier & le 
second quartier, le plein, & le decours de la Lune. "Tous leurs mois ont des 
noms fort significatifs : ils commencent les années par l’Automne, qu’ils ap- 
pellent Tkours, qui veut dire [160] que les rivieres commencent à se glacer ; c’est 
proprement le mois de Novembre. Bonodemeguiche, qui est celuy de Decembre, 
signifie que le ponamon monte dans les rivieres: ils pêchent ce poisson à la 
ligne, faisant un trou dans la glace. Et ainsi des autres mois, qui ont tous leur 
signification particuliere. 


CHAPITRE VIII. 


De la Langue des Gaspesiens. 


À langue Gaspesienne n’a rien du tout de commun dans ses expressions, 

non plus que dans sa signification, avec celles de nôtre Europe : & il 

semble que la confusion deslangues que Dieu fit naître au- [161] trefois, 

pour detruire & renverser de fond en comble cette entreprise fameuse 

& temeraire, par laquelle les hommes ne projetoient pas moins que de joindre 

le Ciel à la Terre, par l’élevation de la tour de Babel, soit parvenuë jusques 

aux Nations nombreuses des Sauvages de la Nouvelle France; puisque parmi 

une infinité de langues differentes qui regnent par tout ces Peuples, nos Gas- 

pesiens si distinguent des Montagniez, Soquoqui, Abennaqui, Hurons, Algom- 

quins, Iroquois, & des autres Nations de ce nouveau Monde, par un langage 
qui leur est singulier. 

C'est aussi de cette singularité que nous pouvons dire que la langue Gas- 
pesienne est tres- [162] belle & tres-riche dans ses expressions ; car elle n’est pas si 
sterile que les langues Europeanes, qui ont recours à une repetition frequente 
des mêmes termes, pour expliquer plusieurs choses differentes. Chaque mot 
du Gaspesien a sa signification particuliere & specifique; ce qui paroit ad- 
mirablement bien dans leurs harangues, qui sont toûjours tres-élegantes. 

Cette langue n’a aucun méchant accent: on la prononce librement & tres- 
facilement ; il ne la faut point tirer du fond de l’estomac, commes celles des 
Hurons, des Suisses, ou des Allemans. Nos Sauvages conviennent avec les 
Grecs & les Latins, en ce qu’ils usent toûjours du singulier, & presque jamais, 
[163] ou du moins tres-rarement du pluriel, quand même ils parlent à leurs Mis- 
sionnaires, ou 4 quelque autre personne considerable; s’exprimant par le mot 
de kir, qui veut dire toi, soit que l’enfant parle a son pere, la femme a son mari, 
& le mari a sa femme. 


362 NOUVELLE RELATION 


Ils ont beaucoup de difficulté à prononcer la lettre r, qu’ils font ordinaire- 
ment sonner comme /; ainsi au lieu de dire mon pere, ils disent mon pele : 
celle de l’# se change en ow ; comme pour dire vertu, ils diront vertou. 

Les noms que nos Gaspesiens se donnent les uns aux autres, ou que le pere 
& la mere imposent à leurs enfans, sont tous fort significatifs : ils imitent nôtre 
premier pere Adam, qui a donné 4 toutes les [164] creatures des noms conformes 
à la proprieté de leur être. Ceux de nos Sauvages expriment & marquent ou 
les belles actions, ou les inclinations naturelles & prédominantes de ceux qui 
les reçoivent ; à peu prés comme les Romains, dont les noms étoient tous signifi- 
catifs : en effet, les uns furent appellez Lucius, pour avoir été nez au point du 
jour; les autres Cesar, parce qu’à la naissance du premier de ce nom, on ouvrit 
par une incision le côté de la mere, pour donner la vie à l’enfant. Ainsi nos 
Sauvages, s’ils sont bons chasseurs, s’appellent Smagnis, ou Koucdedaout, qui 
veut dire Emerillion ; & ainsi du reste. 


[165] CHAPITRE IX, 


De la Religion des Gaspesiens. 


ES Gaspesiens, si on en excepte ceux qui ont reçû la Foi de Jrsus-Cxrisr 
avec le Baptême, n’ont jamais bien connu aucune Divinité ; puisqu'ils 
ont vêcu jusques aujourd’hui sans Temples, sans Prétres, sans sacrifices, 
& sans aucune marque de Religion : en sorte que si on peut juger du 

passé par le present, il est aisé d’inferer que s’ils ont adoré quelque Divinité, 
ils luy ont témoigné si peu de veneration & de respect, qu’ils ont été veritable- 
ment insensibles & infideles en matiere de Religion ; si ce [166] n’est toutefois à 
l'égard du Soleil, qu’ils ont adoré & qui a toûjours été l’objet constant de leur 
culte, de leurs hommages & de leur adoration. Ils ont crû que cet astre 
lumineux, qui par ses influences admirables & ses effets merveilleux fait l’orne- 
ment & toute la beauté de la Nature, en étoit aussi le premier auteur ; & que 
par consequent ils étoient obligez, par reconnoissance, de conserver tous les 
sentimens de respect dont ils étoient capables, pour un astre qui leur faisoit 
tant de bien par sa presence, & dont l’éloignement, pendant les obscuritez de 
la nuit, causoit le deüil à toute la Nature. 

Le culte qu’ils rendoient au Soleil n’étoit pas le sacrifice [167] des Mexicains, 
qui offroient tous les ans 4 leurs Idoles plus de vingt mille cœurs de leurs petits 
enfans ; ni celuy des Ethiopiens, qui benissoient le Soleil 4 son Levant, & qui 
le maudissoient avec mille imprecations dans son Couchant. 

Plus religieux cent fois que ces Peuples extravagans & & cruels, nos Gaspesiens 
sortoient regulierement de leur Cabanne pour le salüer, lorsqu'il commençoit 
à darder ses premiers raïons, ce qu’ils observoient aussi inviolablement à son 
Couchant ; ce tems, dans leur opinion, étant le plus favorable où ces Courtisans 
du Soleil esperoient de le rendre propice à leurs vœux, aprés luy avoir exposé 
leurs necessitez & leurs besoins. 

[168] Ils n’observoient point d’autres ceremonies, que de tourner la face vers 


DE LA GASPESIE 363 


le Soleil: ils commençoient d’abord leur adoration par le salut ordinaire des 
Gaspesiens, qui est de dire par trois fois Ho, ho, ho; aprés quoy, faisant de 
profondes reverences avec quelques agitations des mains au-dessus de leur téte, 
ils demandoient ce dont ils avoient besoin: qu’il conservât leurs femmes & 
leurs enfans: qu’il leur donnât la force de vaincre & de triompher de leurs 
ennemis : qu’il leur accordât une chasse abondante en orignaux, castors, martes, 
& en loutres ; avec une grosse pêche de toutes sortes de poissons : enfin ils de- 
mandoient la conservation de leur vie, avec un grand nombre d’an- [169] nées, 
& une longue posterité. 

Voila ce que j’ai vû observer à un certain vieillard de cette Nation, qui en 
mourant, ce me semble, a emporté avec luy tout ce qui restoit de superstition 
& de faux culte d’une Religion assez mal observée ; puisque depuis luy je n’ai 
vû, ni ne sçache de Gaspesien qui ait fait cette sorte de ceremonie. 

C’est-là l’idée generale que j’ai conçûé de la Religion de nos Gaspesiens ; 
parce que dans le particulier j’ai trouvé auprés de certains Sauvages, que nous 
appellons Porte-Croix, une matiere suffisante pour nous faire conjecturer & 
croire même que ces Peuples n’ont pas eu l’oreille fermée à la voix des Apôtres, 
dont le [170] son a retenti par toute la terre : puisqu'ils ont parmi eux, tout infi- 
deles qu’ils soient, la Croix en singuliere veneration, qu’ils la portent figurée sur 
leurs habits & sur leur chair ; qu’ils la tiennent à la main dans tous leurs voïages, 
soit par mer, soit par terre; & qu’enfin ils la posent au dehors & au dedans de 
leurs Cabannes, comme la marque d’honneur qui les distingue des autres 
Nations du Canada. 

Ces Sauvages demeurent à la riviere de Mizamichiche, que nous avons 
depuis honorée du titre auguste de Sainte-Croix, au bruit du canon, & de mille 
acclamations de joie & de réjoüissance, tant des François, que des Sauvages. 

Comme j'estime que cette [171] remarque est une des plus considerables de ma 
Relation, j’ai crû qu’aprés la perquisition tres-éxacte que j’en ai faite pendant 
les douze années de Mission que j’ai demeuré parmi ces Peuples, je devois 
satisfaire au desir & à la priere de plusieurs personnes, qui m’ont conjuré de 
mettre au jour cette Histoire ; afin de faire connoître au Public l’origine du 
culte de la Croix chez ces Infideles, son interruption, & son retablissement. 


[172] CHAPITRE X. 


De Porigine du culte de la Croix, chez les Gaspesiens 
dits Porte-Croix. 


E ne sçai quel jugement vous ferez de la maniere que nos Sauvages disent 
avoir reçû la Croix, selon la tradition de leurs ancêtres ; qui porte que leur 

Païs étant affligé d’une maladie tres dangereuse & pestilentielle, qui les 
reduisoit dans une extréme disette de toutes choses, & qui en avoit déja mis 
plusieurs dans le tombeau ; quelques vieillards de ceux qu’ils estimoient les meil- 
leurs, les plus sages & les plus considerables s’endormirent, tous ac- [173] cablez 
de langueur & de chagrin, de voir une desolation si generale, & la ruine prochaine 
de toute la Nation Gaspesienne, si elle n’étoit promtement soulagée par un 


364 NOUVELLE RELATION 


puissant secours du Soleil, qu’ils reconnoïssent, comme nous avons dit, pour 
leur Divinité. Ce fut, disent-ils, dans ce sommeil plein d’amertume, qu’un 
homme beau par excellence leur apparut, avec une Croix à la main, qui leur 
dit de prendre bon courage, de s’en retourner chez eux, de faire des Croix 
semblables à celle qu’on leur montroit, & de les presenter aux Chefs des 
Familles ; les assûrant que s’ils les recevoient avec estime, ils y trouveroient 
indubitablement le remede 4 tout leurs maux. [174] Comme les Sauvages sont 
credules aux songes jusqu’à la superstition, ils ne negligerent pas celuy-ci, dans 
leur extréme necessité: ainsi ces bons vieillards retournerent aux Cabannes, 
d’où ils étoient partis le jour precedent. Ils firent une assemblée generale de 
tout ce qui restoit d’une Nation mourante ; & tous ensemble conclurent, d’un 
commun accord, que l’on recevroit avec honneur le sacré signe de la Croix qu’on 
leur presentoit du Ciel, pour être la fin de leur misere, & le commencement 
de leur bonheur : comme il arriva en effet, puisque la maladie cessa, & que tous 
les affligez qui porterent respectueusement la Croix furent gueris miraculeuse- 
ment : Plus heureux mille [175] fois que les Peuples de Bizance, dont la Ville fut 
presque toute dépeuplée de ses Habitans, par la peste qui avoit infecté toute 
la Sicile & la Calabre en l’année sept cens quarante-huit. 

L'Histoire nous apprend que l’on voioit de certaines Croix bleuës & 
reluisantes sur les habits des personnes, & que tous ceux qui en étoient 
marquez mouroient subitement de la peste, au grand étonnement de tout 
le monde. 

La Croix ne fut pas si fatale, ni d’un si mauvais augure à nos pauvres Gas- 
pesiens : elle fut plûtôt dans leur Païs, comme l’Arc-en-ciel que Dieu fit paroitre 
autrefois à la face de tout l'Univers, pour consoler le genre humain, avec [176] 
promesse de ne le plus punir d’un second deluge; & c’est ainsi que la Croix 
arréta tout court ce torrent de maladie & de mortalité qui desoloit ces Peuples, 
& leur fut un signe efficace & rempli d’une merveilleuse fecondité de graces & 
de benedictions. Les avantages miraculeux qu’ils en reçüûrent, leur en firent 
esperer de bien plus considerables dans la suite; c’est pourquoy ils se pro- 
poserent tous, de ne decider aucune affaire, ni d’entreprendre aucun voïage 
sans la Croix. 

Aprés donc la resolution prise dans leur Conseil, qu’ils porteroïient toûjours 
la Croix, sans en excepter même les petits enfans, pas un Sauvage n’eût jamais 
osé paroitre de- [177] vant les autres, sans avoir en sa main, sur sa chair, ou sur 
ses habits, ce sacré signe de leur salut: en sorte que s’il étoit question de décider 
quelque chose de consequence touchant la Nation, soit pour conclure la paix, 
ou déclarer la guerre contre les ennemis de la Patrie, le Chef convoquoit tous 
les Anciens, qui se rendoient ponctuellement au lieu du Conseil; où étant 
tous assemblez, ils élevoient une Croix haute de neuf à dix pieds, ils faisoient 
un cercle & prenoient leur place, avec chacun leur Croïx à la main, laissant celle 
du Conseil au milieu de l’Assemblée. Ensuite le Chef prenant la parole, faisoit 
ouverture du sujet pour lequel il les avoit convoquez au Conseil ; & tous [178] 
ces Porte-Croix disoient leur sentimens, afin de prendre des mesures justes, & 
une derniere resolution sur l'affaire dont il s’agissoit. Que s’il étoit question 
d’envoier quelque Deputé à leurs voisins, ou à quelque-autre Nation étrangere, 
le Chef nommoit & faisoit entrer dans ce cercle, celuy de la jeunesse qu’il 
connoissoit le plus propre pour l’éxecution de leur projet: & aprés luy avoir 
dit publiquement le choix qu’on avoit fait de sa personne pour le sujet qu’on 


DE LA GASPESIE _ 865 


luy communiquoit, il tiroit de son sein une Croix admirablement belle, qu’il 
tenoit envelopée dans ce qu’il pouvoit avoir de plus precieux ; & la montrant 
avec reverence a toute l’Assemblée, il faisoit, par une ha- [170] rangue pré- 
meditée, le recit des graces & des benedictions que toute la Nation Gaspesienne 
avoit reçûës par le secours de la Croix. Il ordonnoit ensuite au Deputé de 
s’approcher, & de la recevoir avec reverence; & la luy mettant au col: Va, 
luy disoit-il, conserves cette Croix, qui te preservera de tous dangers auprés 
de ceux ausquels nous t’envoions. Les Anciens approuvoient par leurs acclama- 
tions ordinaires d’hoo, hoo, hoo, ce que le Chef avoit dit; souhaitant toute sorte 
de prosperité à ce Deputé, dans le voiage qu’il alloit entreprendre pour le 
service de sa Nation. 

Cet Ambassadeur donc sortoit du Conseil, la Croix au col, comme la marque 
hono- [180] raire & le caractere de son Ambassade : il ne la quittoit que le soir, 
pour la mettre sur sa tête, dans la pensée qu’elle chasseroit tous les méchans 
esprits pendant son repos. Il la conservoit toûjours avec soin, jusqu’à l’accom- 
plissement de sa negociation, qu’il la remettoit entre les mains du Chef, avec 
les mémes ceremonies qu’il l’avoit reçûë, en plein Conseil; où devant toute 
l’Assemblée, il faisoit rapport de l’issuë de son voïage. 

Enfin, ils n’entreprenoient rien sans Croix: le Chef la portoit luy-méme 4 
la main, en forme de baton, lorsqu’il marchoit en raquettes; & il la plaçoit 
dans le lieu le plus honorable de sa Cabanne. S’ils s’embarquoient sur l’eau 
[181] dans leurs petits canots d’écorce, ils y mettoient une Croix à chaque 
bout ; croiant religieusement qu’elle les preserveroit du naufrage. 

Voila quels étoient les sentimens d’estime & de veneration de nos anciens 
Gaspesiens, pour la Croix, qui subsistent encore aujourd’hui religieusement 
dans les cœurs de nos Porte-Croix; puisqu’il n’y en a pas un qui ne la porte 
dessus ses habits, ou dessus sa chair. Les langes & les berceaux des petits enfans 
en sont toûjours ornez : les écorces de la Cabanne, les canots & les raquettes 
en sont toutes marquées. 

Les femmes enceintes la figurent ‘avec le porc-épi dessus l’endroit de la 
couverture qui cache leur sein, pour [182] mettre leur fruit sous la protection 
de la Croix. Enfin il n’y en a guere qui ne conserve precieusement en son 
particulier, une petite Croix faite avec de la pourcelaine & de la rassade, qu’il 
garde & qu’il estime à peu prés comme nous faisons les Reliques ; jusques-là 
même, que ces Peuples la preferent à tout ce qu’ils ont de plus riche & de plus 
precieux. 

Une Sauvagesse nommée Marie Joseph, que le Reverend Pere Claude Moreau, 
le plus ancien de nos Missionnaires, avoit baptisée, en est une preuve convain- 
cante. Faussement allarmée, aussi-bien que les autres Sauvages avec lesquels 
elle étoit cabannée, & croïant que les Iroquois étoient entrez dans le [183] 
Pais, pour desoler une troisiéme fois la Nation Gaspesienne, elle s’embarqua 
avec tant de precipitation dans son canot d’écorce, pour traverser la riviere, 
que laïant abandonné au gré du courant, elle s’égara volontairement dans les 
bois, pour éviter la fureur de ses ennemis. La faim & la necessité que cette 
pauvre femme ressentit étoient si grandes, qu’elle s’estima encore heureuse de 
trouver dans ces deserts, des racines qui luy servirent de nourriture pendant 
les dix ou douze jours de son égarement. Accablée de douleur dans cette 
vaste solitude, elle n’avoit point d’autre consolation que sa Croix ; elle ne la 
quitta jamais; jusques-là même qu’étant obligée de repasser la ri- [184] viere 


366 NOUVELLE RELATION 


à la nage, pour se rendre aux Cabannes des Sauvages, qui la croïoient morte, 
elle aima mieux renoncer & delaïsser le peu qu’elle avoit, que d’abandonner sa 
Croix, qu’elle mit entre ses dents, & se rendit ainsi aux Cabannes : disant qu’il 
n’y avoit rien de plus precieux que la Croix, puisqu’elle l’avoit preservée d’une 
infinité de dangers; qu’elle luy avoit procuré toute sorte de consolation dans 
ses disgraces ; & qu’enfin la vie luy paroîtroit tout-à-fait indifferente, s’il faloit 
qu’elle vêcût sans la Croix. | 

On connoît assezjles lieux de la sepulture de ces Peuples, par les Croix qu’ils 
plantent sur leurs tombeaux; & leurs Cimetieres, distinguez par ce signe de 
salut, paroissent pli- [185] tôt Chrétiens, que Sauvages: ceremonie qu'ils 
observent autant de fois qu’il meurt quelqu'un de la Nation des Porte- 
Croix, fût-il éloigné de cent lieuës de l’endroit où se fait ordinairement leur 
sepulture. 

Les lieux de pêche & de chasse les plus considerables sont distinguez par 
les Croix qu’ils y plantent; & on est agreablement surpris, en voïageant dans 
leur Païs, de rencontrer de tems en tems des Croix sur le bord des rivieres, à 
double & à trois croisées, comme celles des Patriarches. En un mot, ils font 
tant d’estime de la Croix, qu’ils ordonnent qu’elle soit enterrée avec eux dans 
un même cercüeil, aprés leur mort; dans la croïance que cette Croix leur 
[186] fera compagnie dans l’autre monde, & qu’ils ne seroient pas connus de leurs 
ancêtres, s'ils n’avoient avec eux la marque & le caractere honorable qui 
distingue les Porte Croix, de tous les autres Sauvages de la Nouvelle France. 

Comme cette Nation Gaspesienne des Porte-Croix a été presque toute 
détruite, tant par la guerre qu’elle a euë avec les Iroquois, que par les maladies 
qui ont infecté ce Païs, & qui par trois à quatre fois en ont fait mourir un fort 
grand nombre, ces Sauvages se sont insensiblement relâchez de cette premiere 
ferveur de leurs ancêtres: tant il est vrai que les pratiques les plus saintes & 
les plus religieuses, par une certaine fatalité annexée aux choses hu- [187] 
maines, souffrent toûjours beaucoup d’alteration, si elles ne sont animées & 
conservées par le même esprit qui leur a donné la naissance. Enfin, quand 
je fus dans leur Païs pour commencer ma Mission, je trouvai des Peuples qui 
n’avoient plus que l’ombre de la coûtume de leurs anciens : Ils manquoient de 
respect pour la Croix; ils avoient aboli l’usage des Assemblées Croisées, où 
la Croix étant au milieu du cercle & du Conseil, comme nous avons dit, ils 
décidoïent en dernier ressort des affaires de la Nation. Mais au reste, nous 
avons travaillé heureusement, pour faire renaître dans le coeur & dans l’esprit 
de ces Sauvages, l’amour & l’estime qu’ils devoient conserver inviolable- [188] 
ment pour ce sacré signe de leur salut : & le Ciel versa avec abondance la pleni- 
tude de ses benedictions, sur le zele du R. P. Emanuel Jumeau nôtre cher 
Compagnon Missionnaire, qui eut la consolation de voir nos Gaspesiens plus 
affectionnez que jamais au culte de la Croix, aprés y avoir emploïé soigneuse- 
ment tous ses soins, & le talent que Dieu luy a donné, pour la conversion de 
ces pauvres [nfideles. Ce bon Religieux, que j’avois autrefois introduit dans 
le Noviciat de nôtre Convent d’Arras, le jour même que j’en partis pour le 
Canada, m’avoit plusieurs fois écrit, pour me témoigner le zele que Dieu luy 
donnoit pour le salut des ames ; & que la plus grande de toutes ses [189] con- 
solations, me disoit il, seroit de mourir genereusement au milieu des bois & 
des forêts du Canada, en annonçant l’Evangile de Jesus-CHrisr aux Sauvages. 
Il exposa le desir qu’il en avoit, au Reverend Pere Provincial ; & aprés en avoir 


DE LA GASPESIE 367 


reçû lobedience, qu’il luy demanda avec beaucoup de ferveur, il s’embarqua à 
la Rochelle pour le Canada, & vint ainsi me soulager dans les éxercices penibles 
& laborieux de la Mission que je faisois à nos Porte-Croix. Il apprit la langue 
en tres-peu de tems, à la faveur du Dictionnaire que j’en avois composé ; en 
sorte qu’il fut bien-tôt en état d’instruire ces Infideles. 

Quelque inclination que j’eus de demeurer plus long- [190] tems avec cet 
aimable Missionnaire, je fus toutefois obligé de me priver de cette consolation : 
jugeant qu’il étoit à propos, pour la gloire de Dieu, de nous separer ; afin de 
me rendre utile à plusieurs autres Sauvages, qui m’avoient suplié par leurs 
Ambassadeurs, d’aller chez eux annoncer l'Evangile de Jesus-Curisr. 

Nous fixâmes donc, d’un commun accord, le jour de nôtre separation. Les 
Porte-Croix, qui en avoient appris la nouvelle, s’assemblerent à la Chapelle, 
pour assister aux Prieres que nous devions faire devant nôtre départ. Ils 
s’efforcerent à l’envi les uns des autres, de me donner des marques sinceres 
de leur amitié, en me témoignant un sensible regret de ce que je les quittois. 
[191] Nos Sauvages ne m’abandonnerent point: & quelque chagrin qu’ils 
eussent dans le cœur, ils me le dissimulerent cependant, autant qu’ils en furent 
capables; soit pour ne pas augmenter la peine que j’avois moi-même de les 
quitter ; soit parce que je leur promettois de les revoir aussi-tôt que j’aurois 
achevé la Mission que j’allois commencer pour la conversion de leurs Freres. 

Je leur fis, avant que de nous separer, une harangue premeditée, dans 
laquelle leur aiant exposé les peines que j’avois prises pour les instruire dans les 
maximes du Christianisme, je leur témoignai que je n’en voulois point de 
reconnoissance plus agreable, que le bon usage qu’ils fe- [192] roient de mes 
instructions. Je leur fis connoître encore, l’avantage que je leur avois procuré, 
en leur donnant un Missionnaire aussi zelé pour leur salut, que le Pere Emanuel ; 
& obligation étroite qu’ils avoient sur tout, d’embrasser & de conserver le 
Christianisme, avec plus de pieté que les autres Sauvages de ce nouveau Monde, 
à cause de cette grace miraculeuse qu’ils avoient reçûëé du Ciel par préference 
à tant d’autres Nations, comme le signe & le gage sacré de leur salut. Enfin, 
aprés les avoir exhorté de tout mon cœur, par le merite de la Croix, que je 
tenois en main, & que j’embrassois souvent avec reverence, d’étre toûjours 
fideles à Dieu, & d’avoir pour leur Mission- [193] naire les mêmes soins, les 
mêmes respects & les mêmes amitiez qu’ils avoient eûës pour moi; je conjurai 
le Pere Emanuel Jumeau, par tout ce que je luy piis dire de plus tendre & de 
plus touchant, de perseverer constament à les instruire des veritez de nôtre 
sainte Religion. Il falut enfin nous separer, aprés avoir imploré le secours du 
Ciel pour l’heureux succez de nos Missions. Je pris donc congé de nos François, 
& je fus coucher à Mirmenaganne avec trois Sauvages, à quatre lieuës du Fort 
de Monsieur Richard de Fronsac. 

J'appris avec joie, quinze jours aprés mon départ, par l’un de nos Porte- 
Croix, que ce cher Missionnaire aïant assemblé autant de Sauva- [194] ges qu’il 
avoit pô, les avoit obligez de faire amende honorable à la Croix; afin de luy 
faire rendre par ces Peuples, une partie de l’honneur que la négligence de leurs 
ancêtres luy avoient ravi. 

La ceremonie commença le soir, au Soleil couchant, en cette maniere, 
Le Pere fit élever une Croix semblable à celle que les Anciens de la Nation 
Gaspesienne avoient coûtume de mettre au milieu de la place destinée pour 
tenir leur Conseil: il se prosterna respectueusement avec tous les Sauvages, 


368 NOUVELLE RELATION 


devant ce sacré signe de nôtre salut; & entonna en langue Sauvage, à la fin 
des Prieres ordinaires, le Vexilla regis, que nos Porte-Croix chantoient a 
Valterna- [195] tive, les hommes & les femmes, avec une pieté singuliere. Tout 
le monde se retira dans la Cabanne du Chef, après ces éxercices de devotion, 
où l’on ne fit que parler des merveilles de la Croix: je peux même dire avec 
verité, que comme le Peuple d’Israël, qui avoit vêcu long-tems dans la negli- 
gence & le mépris des Commandemens de la Loi, ne put contenir ses larmes, 
lorsque le Grand-Prétre Helchias leur fit le recit fidele des bienfaits qu’ils avoient 
reçûs de Dieu, & le juste reproche de l’ingratitude où ils avoient vêcu si long- 
tems, sans en reconnoître les excellences & les grandeurs ; ainsi tous nos Porte- 
Croix fondoient en larmes, lorsque le Pere Missionnaire leur ex- [196] pliqua 
les avantages & les benedictions qu’ils avoient reçûs de la Croix; l'estime & 
la veneration avec laquelle elle avoit été honorée par leurs ancêtres ; & le peu 
de soin qu’on avoit eu jusqu'alors, de luy rendre le culte qui luy étoit legitime- 
ment dû. Ils protesterent tous publiquement, avant que de se coucher, qu’ils 
en étoient sensiblement touchez de douleur ; & que le même Soleil qui avoit 
été le témoin de leur ingratitude, le seroit aussi des respects & des adorations 
qu’ils rendroient publiquement à la Croix. La nuit se passa avec ces sentimens 
de devotion : & le lendemain à la pointe du jour, le Pere fit dresser son Autel 
dans une Cabanne particuliere, que les Sauvages [197] avoient accommodée 
fort proprement avec des branches de sapin, où il celebra la sainte Messe ; aprés 
laquelle, tout revêtu qu’il étoit des habits Sacerdotaux, il distribua des Croix 
à tout ce qu’il y avoit de Gaspesiens, jusques aux enfans même. Ces Sauvages, 
par une sainte émulation, qui marquoit visiblement l’approbation qu’ils don- 
noient au zele de leur Missionnaire, firent tous autant qu’ils étoient, plusieurs 
belles Croix, lesquelles ils enjoliverent avec la rassade, la pourcelaine, & leur 
peinture ordinaire ; & ils les attacherent aux deux bouts de leurs canots, dans 
lesquels ils s'embarquerent, en chantant devotement le Vexilla regis. 

Je laisse au Lecteur à juger de la beauté de cette flotte [198] Gaspesienne, 
qui par une agreable varieté d’étendarts ornez de ces Croix de differentes 
couleurs, faisoient voir, par l’agitation de l’eau & la reverberation du Soleil, un 
spectacle des plus ravissans, qui donna beaucoup de consolation aux François, 
quand ils virent arriver ces Sauvages auec leur Missionnaire, portant tous à la 
main ce sacré signe du salut. 

Ce fut l’année 1677. & la seconde aprés mon arrivée en Canada, que je 
commengai pour la premiere fois la Mission des Porte-Croix, avec les circon- 
stances que vous allez voir dans la Relation du penible voiage que je fis par 
les bois brûlez; afin de leur prêcher l’Evangile, suivant la promesse que j’en 
avois faite [199] aux Deputez que le Chef de cette Nation m’avoit envoiez, 
de la riviere de Sainte-Croix a Nipisiquit, pour me prier de les aller catechiser. 


DE LA GASPESIE 369 


CHAPITRE XI. 


Relation du penible Voiage de V Auteur, allant annoncer la Foi aux 
Gaspesiens Porte-Croix. 


L est bien vrai qu’il n’y a que Dieu seul qui puisse adoucir, par l’onction 
de sa grace, les travaux Apostoliques des Missions laborieuses de la Nouvelle 
France: aussi faut-il avoüer ingenûment, que toutes les forces de la 
Nature ne serviroient qu’à augmenter les peines des Missionnaires, si la 

Croix d’un [200] Dieu crucifié ne leur communiquoit une partie de cette force 
victorieuse, avec laquelle il a glorieusement triomphé de tout ce qu’il y avoit 
de plus rude & de plus douloureux dans les opprobres du Calvaire. C’étoit 
aussi sans doute dans cette pensée que l’Apôtre saint Paul disoit, qu’il pouvoit 
toutes choses avec la grace de celuy qui luy donnoit la force de tout entre- 
prendre, & de tout faire pour sa gloire & le salut des ames. 

Je n’ai jamais fait une experience plus sensible de cette verité, que dans 
le voïage que j’entrepris pour aller administrer les Sacremens aux François, 
qui demeuroient avec Monsieur Richard Denys de Fronsac à Mizamichis, & 
prêcher l'Evangile aux Sau- [201] vages Porte-Croix, qui n’avoient presque 
point du tout entendu parler des Misteres de nôtre sainte Religion. La charité 
que je devois avoir pour tous les Sauvages de ma Mission, me sollicitoit puissam- 
ment de Pentreprendre, quoique ce fût dans la saison de l’Hiver la plus difficile & 
la plus rigoureuse : & il semble que Dieu en approuva le dessein, puisqu’un 
Sauvage, lorsque nous y pensions le moins, arriva avec sa femme à Nipisiquit, 
qui m’assûra que pour éviter quelques differents qui étoient survenus entre les 
Gaspesiens de Ristigouche, il en étoit sorti avec sa femme & son enfant, pour 
se retirer à Mizamichis ; afin d’y vivre en repos, avec ceux de sa connoissance. 
Comme c’étoit 14 [202] pour moi une occasion assez favorable, & une com- 
pagnie qui me pouvoit être d’un tres-grand secours pendant cette route, je le 
priai de differer son départ jusqu’à quelques jours, pour me donner le tems & 
la consolation de baptiser quelques Sauvages que j’avois instruits, pour recevoir 
le premier & le plus necessaire de nos Sacremens. Nôtre Sauvage m’attendit 
avec plaisir : Monsieur Hainaut de Barbaucannes voulut bien être de la partie, 
& s’offrit, de la maniere la plus obligeante, à me tenir compagnie. On fit pour 
cet effet nos provisions, qui consistoient en vingt-quatre petits pains, cinq à 
six livres de farine, trois livres de beurre, & un petit baril d’écorce, qui contenoit 
[203] deux à trois pots d’eau-de-vie: d’ailleurs, je métois précautionné d’une 
boëte de confection d’hyacinte, que les Religieuses Hospitalieres m’avoient 
donnée devant mon départ de Quebec pour Nipisiquit. 

Nipisiquit est un sejour des plus charmans qu’il y ait dans la grande Baye 
de Saint Laurent : il n’est éloigné que de douze à quinze lieuës de l’Isle Percée. 
La terre y est fertile, & abondante en toutes choses: L'air y est pur & sain. 
Trois belles rivieres qui s’y déchargent, forment un bassin tres-agreable, dont 
les eaux se perdent dans la mer, par un détroit qui en fait l’entrée & l’ouverture. 
Les Recollets de la Province d’Aquitaine y ont commencé la Mis- [204] sion en 
1620. & le Pere Bernardin, un de ces illustres Missionnaires, mourut de faim 

ZA 


370 NOUVELLE RELATION 


& de fatigues, en traversant les bois pour aller de Miscou & de Nipisiquit à la 
riviere de Saint Jean, à la Cadie, où ces Reverends Peres avoient leur établisse- 
ment principal. Les R R. P P. Capucins, & singulierement les R R. P P. 
Jesuites, y ont éxercé leur zele & leur charité pour la conversion des Infideles : 
ils y ont fait bâtir une Chapelle dediée à la Sainte Vierge ; & Pon remarque que 
celuy de ces Peres qui quitta cette Mission, laissa son bonnet dessus l’Autel, 
disant qu’il le reviendroit chercher quand il luy plairoït; pour faire connoître 
que sa Compagnie avoit droit d’établisse- [205] ment dans ce lieu. Le Sieur 
Henaut de Barbaucannes y cultive la terre avec succez, & reciieille du froment 
au-delà de ce qu’il en faut pour l’entretien de sa famille. Monsieur Richard 
Denys de Fronsac en est le Seigneur proprietaire. 

Tl est bon de scavoir qu’il faut porter le necessaire à la vie, quand on s’éloigne 
en Canada, des Habitations Françoises, & lorsqu’on entreprend quelque voiage 
considerable ; n’y aïant ni Cabarets, ni Auberges, & ne trouvant pas de maison 
dans ces vastes forêts, pour s’y retirer la nuit, on se trouve obligé de coucher 
à la Belle-étoile. Persuadez que nous étions de cette verité, par experience 
que nous en avions déja [206] faite autrefois; un chacun prit sa couverture, 
& se chargea de son paquet, dans lequel étoit une partie-des vivres dont nous 
avions besoin, pour la route que nous avions à faire. 

Tous nos Gaspesiens assisterent devotement aux Prieres, que nous fimes de 
bon matin, pour implorer le secours des Anges Tutelaires de ces Pais, & de- 
mander à Dieu la conversion des Sauvages Porte-Croix, ausquels j’allois, pour 
la premiere fois, annoncer les veritez de nôtre sainte Religion. Ils firent tout 
ce qu'ils pûrent pour m’obliger de passer avec eux le reste de Hiver, & de 
differer mon départ jusqu’à une saison plus commode & moins rigoureuse : 
mais enfin, il étoit juste de [207] contenter les François & les Sauvages de 
Mizamichis. La parole de Dieu est le pain spirituel des ames ; il faloit, aprés 
quatre mois de sejour à Nipisiquit, le distribüer à ceux qui m’attendoient depuis 
si long-tems pour le recevoir. Je fis donc concevoir à nos Sauvages, que s'ils 
avoient autant de desir du salut de leurs freres, qu’ils m’avoient témoigné, ils 
devoient se réjoüir de la peine que j’allois prendre, pour leur donner les mêmes 
instructions qu’ils avoient eux-mêmes reçûës de mes Catechismes; puisque je 
n’avois pas d’autre dessein, que de les conduire & de les voir tous ensemble dans 
le Ciel. Ces pauvres gens approuverent mes raisons & mon zele, par les applau- 
dissemens ordi- [208] naires à cette Nation, & consentirent enfin à mon départ, 
sous la promesse que je leur fis de retourner chez eux au commencement du 
Printems. 

La femme de nôtre Sauvage se chargea de son petit enfant, que je baptisai 
& nommai Pierre, avant mon départ de Nipisiquit, par un effet singulier de la 
Providence & de la misericorde de Dieu, comme il sera bien aisé de remarquer 
à la fin de la Relation de ce penible Voïage. Nous primes chacun nos paquets 
sur nos épaules, & nous nous mimes en chemin, avec les raquettes aux pieds. 
Le soir nous obligea, aprés quatre à cinq lieuës de marche, de faire une Cabanne, 
afin d’y passer la nuit. Il falut, [209] pour la rendre autant commode que le 
pais le pouvoit permettre, faire un trou dans la neige, haute de quatre à cinq 
pieds, laquelle nous fûmes obligez de jetter avec nos raquettes, jusques à ce que 
nous eussions trouvé la terre, que nôtre Sauvagesse couvrit de branches de sapin 
toutes verdoïantes, sur lesquelles nous nous couchâmes durant la nuit. Mon- 
sieur Henaut se donna la peine, avec nôtre Sauvage, de couper & d’amasser le 


DE LA GASPESIE 371 


bois necessaire pour nous chaufer; & un chacun prit sa refection avec autant 
de contentement, que si nous eussions été dans une bonne Auberge. La perte 
seule que nous avions faite de nôtre eau-de-vie, nous donna un peu de chagrin ; 
car quelque précau- [210] tion que l’on eût prise de bien gommer le petit baril 
d’ecorce, il s’y trouva encore quelque petite ouverture, par laquelle l’eau-de-vie 
s’étoit écoulée en chemin faisant, sans que pas un de nous en eût connoissance, 
que lorsque l’on en voulut prendre un coup aprés le repas. Il n’en restoit plus 
que tres-peu: elle fut aussi distribuée sur le champ, pour nous consoler de 
cette disgrace, & mettre le reste hors de danger de se perdre. Il est vrai cepen- 
dant, que nous fûmes privez d’un grand soulagement, par la perte de cette eau- 
de-vie ; puisque nous nous trouvâmes quelque-tems aprés dans des conjonctures 
si pressantes, que cette liqueur nous eût été sans doute d’un tres-grand secours ; 
mais enfin [211] il falut bien nous consoler de cette facheuse avanture: & nous 
passâmes la premiere nuit, comme toutes les autres de nôtre Voïage, à l’enseigne 
de la Lune & de la Belle-étoile. 

Le lendemain matin, aprés avoir celebré la sainte Messe dans une cabanne 
que nos gens firent exprés, avec des perches couvertes de branches de sapin, & 
aprés que nous eûmes déjeûné & accommodé nos paquets, nous continuâmes 
nôtre voïage, en montant toûjours, & cétoiant la riviere de Nipisiquit, jusqu’au 
rapide appellé vulgairement le Saut aux loups marins, qui fait la separation des 
deux chemins qui conduisent à Mizamichis ; l’un plus court, mais plus difficile, 
par les bois brûlez; & l’autre plus [212] long, mais plus aisé, par la riviere. 
Le desir extréme que j’avois de me rendre incessament chez nos Porte-Croix, 
pour y commencer la Mission, me fit resoudre d’autant plus facilement à prendre 
la route des.bois brûlez, que le Sieur Henaut & le Sauvage même en avoient 
fait la traverse, peu de tems auparavant : & ainsi nous quittâmes, d’un commun 
accord, la riviere, qui cependant nous eût épargné beaucoup de peine & de 
fatigue en la suivant, selon que l’experience nous l’a fait assez connoître depuis. 

Pour sçavoir ce que c’est que les bois brûlez, je vous dirai que le Ciel étant 
un jour tout en feu, plein d’orage & de tonnerres, qui grondoient & se faisoient 
entendre [213] de toutes parts ; la foudre tomba, dans un tems où la secheresse 
étoit extraordinaire, & embrasa non-seulement tout ce qu’il y avoit de bois 
& de forêts entre Mizamichis & Nipisiquit ; mais encore brûla & consuma plus 
de deux cens cinquante lieuës de pais: en sorte qu’on n’y voit plus que des 
troncs d'arbres fort hauts & tous noircis, qui portent dans leur affreuse sterilité, 
des marques d’une incendie generale & tout-à-fait surprenante. Cette vaste 
étendué de pais est toûjours couverte de neige pendant l’Hiver. On n’y voit 
que des rejettons & de petits arbrisseaux, qui paroissent plûtôt des isles distantes 
les unes des autres de deux à trois lieués, que des bois, ni des foréts de Canada : 
en un [214] mot, cet incendie fut si furieux & si violent, que les flames s’élan- 
çoient, & s’embrassoient même, pour ainsi dire, d’un bord de la riviere à l’autre a 
d’où vient que les orignaux & les castors n’y ont paru que long-tems aprés ce 
funeste accident. Tout ce qui donne plus de peine aux Voiageurs qui tra- 
versent ces bois briilez, c’est qu’ils ne trouvent ni lieu pour se cabanner à l’abri 
du vent, ni de bois propre pour se chaufer. Ce fut cependant dans ces tristes 
solitudes, & dans ces deserts plus affreux mille fois que ceux de l’Arabie Pierreuse, 
que nous nous égarâmes, à cause que nous voulûmes suivre les pistes de quelques 
Sauvages qui étoient à la chasse au castor: car vou- [215] lant éxaminer les 
tours & détours des Sauvages & de ces animaux, nous primes une fausse route, 


372 NOUVELLE RELATION 


& nous nous éloignames de celle qui étoit sans doute la plus juste & la plus 
assûrée. Nous marchâmes trois jours continuels au milieu de ce desert, avec 
des peines incroïables ; en sorte que nous ftimes obligez d’y sejourner, pour nous 
reposer de tant de fatigues si longues & si penibles. 

Le lendemain nous continuâmes nôtre route avec de nouvelles difficultez, 
causées par une grande abondance de neige qui étoit tombée la nuit precedente, 
& qui pensa nous desoler entierement ; étant obligez de marcher, depuis le matin 
jusqu’au soir, en ces neiges, dans lesquelles nous [216] enfoncions jusques au 
genoüil, à chaque pas que nous faisions. Cette marche extraordinairement 
penible & fatiguante, jointe à la disette des vivres, n’aïant plus qu’un petit 
morceau de pain chaque jour à manger, nous reduisit dans une misere extrême : 
nôtre Sauvage tomboit sur les dents; sa femme, avec son petit enfant, me 
faisoient compassion: & je vous avouë ingenûment, pour mon particulier, 
que je n’en pouvois plus du tout. 

La necessité cependant où nous étions de toutes choses, nous obligeoit de 
continuer nôtre chemin; & il faloit necessairement ou mourir, ou marcher. 
Monsieur Henaut, Sieur de Barbaucannes, étoit le seul qui avoit le plus de [217] 
courage ; il nous traçoit le chemin : nôtre Sauvage le suivoit, sa femme marchoit 
aprés, & je restois le dernier de la troupe, comme étant le plus harassé du 
chemin, que je trouvois neanmoins plus aisé & moins fatiguant que les autres, 
à cause qu’il étoit batu & fraié par ceux qui me précedoient ; ce qui me fut 
sans doute d’un grand secours, & me donna beaucoup de soulagement. 

Cependant, quelque penible que fut cette marche, je vous avoué qu’elle 
perdoit à mon égard une partie de ce qu’elle pouvoit avoir de rude & de facheux, 
par l’esperance & la pensée que j’avois, que nous approchions de la riviere de 
Sainte-Croix: mais énfin elle me parut affreuse, au-delà de [218] ce qu’on 
peut s’imaginer, lorsque le Sieur Henaut & le Sauvage me dirent qu’il y avoit 
déja trois jours que nous étions égarez; qu’ils ne connoïssoient plus de route, 
ni de chemin ; & qu’énfin il faloit nous abandonner entierement à la Providence, 
& aller où il plairoit à Dieu de nous conduire. 

Cette nouvelle me fut d'autant plus affligeante, qu’il n’y avoit plus d’appar- 
ence de retourner à Nipisiguit, à cause que la neige, qui étoit tombée en grande 
quantité depuis nôtre départ, avoit comblé & couvert toutes nos pistes. Il 
neigeoit encore actuellement ; & il nous falut cependant faire de necessité vertu, 
& marcher jusqu’à la nuit, pour trouver un lieu propre [219] pour nous cabanner. 

Je ne sçaurois vous exprimer ici, quelles furent alors nos inquietudes, nous 
trouvant au milieu de ces deserts, affreux, dépourvûs de toutes les choses les plus 
necessaires à la vie, accablez de foiblesse & de fatigue, dans la saison la plus 
difficile & la plus rigoureuse de l’Hiver, sans vivres; & ce qui est de plus 
afigeant, sans guide & sans chemin. Pour comble de malheur, il y avoit trois 
jours que nous ne mangions qu’un petit morceau de pain sur le soir, qui pour 
lors nous manqua tout-à-fait: en sorte qu’aïant été obligez d’avoir recours à 
la farine que nôtre Sauvage avoit dans son paquet, nous fûmes reduits d’en 
jetter soir & matin deux à [220] trois poignées dans une chaudronnée d’eau de 
neige, que nous faisions boüillir ; ce qui servoit plûtôt à la blanchir, qu’à nous 
nourrir. Pour toute consolation, le Sieur Henaut me dit, qu’il avoit deux 
paires de souliers Sauvages, avec un morceau de peau passée ; & qu’en tout 
cas nous les ferions griller, ou boüillir, pour les manger ensemble, Jugez de là, 
si nous n’étions pas veritablement dignes de compassion. 


DE LA GASPESIE 3738 


La nuit se passa avec de nouvelles difficultez. Un vent de Nord-oiiest, 
@un froid extraordinairement sensible & piquant, nous pensa glacer; parce 
que nous n’avions pii trouver du bois ce qu’il nous en faloit pour nous chaufer 
pendant la nuit: en sorte que [221] pour ne point mourir de froid dans nétre 
cabanne, nous en partimes avant le jour, avec des peines que l’on ne peut 
s’imaginer. Je pensai être abîimé dans un fossé profond que étoit couvert de 
neige, d’où l’on eut beaucoup de peine & de difficulté à me retirer: je peux 
même dire que c’étoit fait/de moi, si par un bonheur singulier je n’eusse rencontré 
un gros arbre qui étoit au-travers de cette fosse, sur lequel je demeurai en atten- 
dant le secours qu’on me donna pour sortir de cet horrible danger, où je me 
vis pour lors exposé à deux doigts de la mort. 

À peine étois-je éloigné d’une portée de fuzil de ce precipice, que voulant 
passer une petite riviere, l’une de mes [222] raquettes se cassa, & je tombai 
dans l’eau jusqu’à la ceinture ; ce qui obligea Monsieur Henaut & le Sauvage, 
de chercher promtement un lieu propre pour nous cabanner, faire du feu pour 
me réchaufer, parce que le froid commençoit à me saisir par tout le corps: ce 
fut dans cette cabanne, où le peu de farine que nous avions toûjours ménagé 
fort éxactement, nous manqua aussi-bien que le pain; la faim nous en chassa 
de bon matin, pour chercher ce que la Providence voudroit nous donner. 

Je conçûs dés-lors parfaitement bien le danger évident où nous étions de 
mourir de faim, de foiblesse, & de miseres dans ces bois, si le Seigneur ne nous 
donnoit bien-tôt les moïens d’en sor- [223] tir: comme je sentois que les forces 
commençoient à me manquer, & que je n’en pouvois presque plus, je renouvellai 
les premieres intentions avec lesquelles j’avois entrepris ce penible voïage; & 
j'offris derechef de bon cœur à Nôtre-Seigneur, les peines & les fatigues que 
j’endurois pour sa gloire, & pour la satisfaction de mes pechez. 

La seule pensée d’un JEesus-Curisr mourant sur la Croix, abandonné de tout 
le monde, nous donnant un éxemple admirable du sacrifice que nous devons 
faire de nôtre vie pour le salut des ames, jointe à la reflexion que je fis sur la 
mort de saint François Xavier, expirant dans sa petite cabanne, destitué de 
tous les secours humains, me combla [224] de joie & de consolation au milieu 
de mes peines : & il est vrai que je fus pour lors persuadé, mieux que jamais, 
que Dieu a un tresor de graces & de benedictons, qu’il reserve uniquement 
pour les Missionnaires, qui se confient & s’abandonnent entierement aux soins 
amoureux de sa Providence, parmi les dangers & les perils les plus affreux de 
leurs Missions, & de leurs travaux Apostoliques. 

Nous avions marché tout le long du jour, & tres-peu avancé, tant a cause 
de la foiblesse extréme où j’étois reduit, qu’à cause de la difficulté du chemin ; 
lorsqu’étant entierement occupé de ces aimables & saintes reflexions, Monsieur 
Henaut & le Sauvage, qui nous devançoient, firent un [225] cri de joie & d’alle- 
gresse, pour la rencontre heureuse qu’ils avoient faite, de la piste toute nouvelle 
d’un Sauvage qui avoit passé le matin pour aller à la chasse. Ils vinrent tous 
les deux au-devant de moi, pour m’assûrer que toutes nos peines alloient bien- 
tôt finir, par l’heureuse arrivée au Fort de la riviere de Sainte-Croix, où ils 
esperoient que nous arriverions bien-tôt. Je ne fus pas insensible, non plus 
que les autres, à la joie que me causa cette agreable rencontre: mais enfin, 
comme il n’y a point de plaisir si épuré dans le monde, qu’il ne s’y trouve toû- 
jours quelque mêlange de chagrin & d’inquiétude, la satisfaction que nous venions 
de recevoir fut alterée, par l’incer- [226] titudee, si nous devions suivre ou re- 


374 NOUVELLE RELATION 


brousser sur les traces nouvellement découvertes; d’autant que nous avions 
sujet de douter si ce Sauvage alloit à la chasse seulement, ou s’il ne commençoit 
pas l’un de ces voïages considerables & d’une longue étenduë de pais, qu’ils 
traversent assez souvent pendant l’Hiver, pour rendre visite à leurs amis. In- 
certains de la route que nous devions tenir, nous resolämes, à tout hazard, de 
traverser ces pistes, & de marcher à nôtre ordinaire; dans l’esperance que 
Dieu nous serviroit de guide, & nous feroit misericorde. Il éxauça nos vœux 
& nos prieres: & le Seigneur se contentant de nos fatigues & de nos peines, 
voulut bien [227] nous consoler d’une maniere qui nous fit admirer la conduite 
admirable de sa divine Providence. 

C’est une coûtume generalement observée parmi nos Gaspesiens, de ne 
retourner jamais le soir, ou du moins tres-rarement, par le même chemin à la 
cabanne, quand ils en sortent le matin pour aller à la chasse : ils prennent des 
routes differentes, afin de batre la campagne, & de découvrir plus de pais de 
ravages d’orignaux & de castors. Dieu permit cependant que le Sauvage dont 
nous avions apperçû les vestiges revint sur ses pas, jusqu’à l’endroit même où 
nous avions traversé son chemin. Il en fut surpris d’abord ; mais conjecturant 
de nôtre maniere de [228] marcher, que ceux qui venoient de passer étoient 
extrémement fatiguez, il prit la resolution de nous suivre, & vint aprés nous, 
pour nous soulager autant qu’il en étoit capable. 

Un certain bruit sourd, causé par l’agitation de ses raquettes & le mouve- 
ment des branches au-travers desquelles il étoit obligé de marcher, m’obligea 
de tourner la tête, pour reconnoître de quel endroit il pouvoit provenir. Vous 
pouvez juger de la joie que j’eus, en voiant ce Gaspesien charitable qui venoit 
à moi, pour nous enseigner nôtre chemin, par celle que vous recevriez vous- 
même en semblable rencontre : la mienne fut si sensible, que je redoublai le 
pas, tout [220] fatigué que j’étois pour en avertir ceux qui me precedoient. 

Comme la nuit s’approchoit, & que d’ailleurs nous étions sans'force & sans 
vigueur, il nous obligea de cabanner, & voulut luy seul prendre la peine de 
couper le bois necessaire pour nous chaufer, & mettre la cabanne en état de 
nous y reposer. Il me fit present d’une perdrix qu’il avoit tué à la chasse; la 
Providence luy en donna deux autres aussi-tôt, pour récompenser la charité 
qu’il nous faisoit : elles étoient juchées sur les branches d’un sapin, comme le 
sont ordinairement les perdrix de Canada; il les tua toutes deux d’un coup 
de fuzil, & on les mit toutes trois dans la chaudiere, [230] pour souper à cinq 
personnes, autant fatiguez du voïage & de la faim, que nous étions pour lors. 

Quoique les Sauvages soient charitables au-delà de ce qu’on s’imagine en 
Europe, ils se font cependant assez souvent prier, quand on a besoin de leur 
secours, mais singulierement quand ils se persuadent qu’on ne peut se passer 
de leur service. Le nôtre étoit de ce caractere : connoïssant parfaitement bien 
de quelle utilité il nous étoit dans la conjoncture fâcheuse où nous nous trouvions, 
il s’offroit de tems en tems à nous servir de guide ; mais à condition, disoit-il, 
que nous luy donnerions deux douzaines de couvertures, une barique de farine, 
& trois de bled d'Inde ; [231] une douzaine de capots, dix fuzils, avec de la 
poudre & du plomb & une infinité d’autres choses qu’il vouloit avoir pour nous 
remettre dans le bon chemin, & nous conduire dans sa cabanne. C’étoit 
beaucoup, je l’avouë ; mais enfin, c’étoit trop peu demander à des gens qui 
auroient volontiers donné toute chose au monde, pour se retirer d’un aussi 
méchant pas que celuy où nous nous trouvions malheureusement engagez, & 


DE LA GASPESIE 375 


duquel nous eussions eu beaucoup de peine à sortir, sans le secours de ce 
Sauvage. 

La nuit se passa un peu plus tranquillement que les precedentes : il falut 
cependant partir le lendemain matin, sans prendre aucune nourriture; & 
comme nôtre pe- [232] tite troupe attendoit que j’eusse achevé mon Office, 
le Sauvage qui me servoit de guide étant impatient de ce que je demeurois si 
long-tems à genoux dans un endroit separé du bruit de la cabanne, s’approcha 
de moi ; & croiant que j’avois eu quelque revelation, ou reçû le don de prophetie, 
me pria fort serieusement de luy prédire ce qui nous devoit arriver durant la 
journée : Tu parles à Dieu, me dit-il; tu enseignes le chemin du Soleil, tu es 
Patriarche, tu as de l’esprit; & il faut croire que celuy qui a tout fait, aura 
exaucé ta priere : Dis-moi donc, si nous tuërons aujourd’hui beaucoup d’ori- 
gnaux & de castors, pour te regaler, aprés tant de fatigues & de miseres que tu 
[233] as souffertes jusques à present. 

Je fus assez surpris de ce discours : & luy aïant répondu que le Seigneur ne 
m’avoit pas fait cette grace, dont je me reputois tout-à-fait indigne, je luy fis 
connoître que Dieu étant le Pere commun de tous les hommes, qui ne refuse 
pas même la nourriture aux corbeaux, ni aux plus petits animaux de la terre ; 
il faloit aussi esperer que sa Providence nous donneroit dequoi nous substanter, 
puisqu’il n’abandonnoit jamais ses serviteurs dans leurs besoins; & que s’il les 
faisoit souffrir pour un tems dans ce monde, c’étoit pour les récompenser éter- 
nellement dans le Ciel. 

Ejougouloumoiiet, c’étoit le nom de ce Sauvage, qui [234] n’étoit pas encore 
baptisé, quoiqu’il fût 4gé de cinquante 4 soixante ans, ne pouvoit comprendre 
ces veritez Chrétiennes. Preoccupé uniquement de la pensée qu’il avoit, que 
Dieu parloit familierement aux Patriarches, me témoigna son chagrin, particu- 
lierement aprés que je luy eûs dit que je ne connoïssois aucun endroit où nous 
pourrions trouver des castors, des ours, ou des orignaux; & qu’enfin il falloit 
s’en remettre entierement aux soins de la divine Providence. Je suis donc, 
repartit Ejougouloumoüet, quelque chose de plus que les Patriarches ; puisque 
Dieu m’a parlé durant mon sommeil, & qu’il m’a revelé qu’infailliblement, 
avant qu’il soit midi, nous tuérons des orignaux & [235] des castors en abon- 
dance, pour nous regaler: Allons, marchons 4 la bonne heure, & tu verras que 
les Sauvages ont plus d’esprit que toi. Il falut le suivre, plûtôt dans l’esperance 
de trouver dequoi manger dans sa cabanne, où nous allions, que dans la route 
qu’il nous obligeoit de faire pour trouver ses orignaux & ses castors, qu’une 
imagination famelique luy persuadoit de rencontrer à tout moment. Cepen- 
dant, ses esperances furent vaines & inutiles : il fut même obligé d’avoüer qu’il 
avoit été trop credule ; & que doresnavant, jamais il ne croiroit plus aux rêves, 
ni aux songes, ausquels tous les Sauvages sont attachez jusqu’à la superstition. 

Pour confondre son extra- [236] vagante credulité, & le convaincre du soin 
que Dieu prend de ses serviteurs, la Providence permit que lorsque nous y 
pensions le moins, nous trouvâmes deux gros porcs-épis, sur les quatre heures 
du soir. Ces animaux, qui ressemblent assez bien aux herissons que l’on voit 
en France, étoient cabannez dans le creux d’un arbre dont ils avoient mangé 
l'écorce, qui leur servoit de nourriture. Ils ont pour l’ordinaire, chacun leur 
cabanne particuliere ; & nôtre Ejougouloumoüet fut surpris aussi-bien que 
nous, de les voir cabannez tous les deux ensemble. On en prit un d’abord, 
qu’on chargea dessus mes épaules, pour porter à la Sauvagesse, qui avoit déja 


376 NOUVELLE RELATION 


allumé le feu, afin de [237] le faire cuire dans la chaudiere. Nous en fimes un 
fort bon repas : le boüillon nous sembla aussi succulant qu’un bon consommé ; 
& nous experimentâmes de bonne-foi, que le proverbe est bien veritable, & 
qu’il n’y a point de meilleure sauce que le bon appetit. Nous portâmes l’autre 
porc-épi à la cabanne de nôtre Sauvage, où nous trouvâmes huit personnes, qui 
faisoient assez voir dans leurs visages extenuez & tout décharnez, le peu de 
nourriture qu’ils avoient pris, & la faim que ces pauvres malheureux souffroient 
depuis un mois, qu’ils étoient cabannez sur le bord d’une riviere, où ils pêchoient 
des truites en tres-petite quantité : ils n’en avoient plus que cinq pour [328] 
toutes provisions, lorsque nous arrivâmes chez eux ; on les mit dans la chaudiere 
avec nôtre porc-épi, que nous mangeâmes ensemble. 

Je fus assez surpris de voir dans la place d’honneur, & dans l’endroit le plus 
considerable de la cabanne, une belle Croix, enjolivée avec de la rassade, entre 
deux femmes que nôtre Ejougouloumoüet entretenoit ; l’une comme sa femme 
legitime ; & l’autre comme sa concubine, qui étoit, disois-il, venuë miraculeuse- 
ment du Ciel à son secours, dans le tems qu’il étoit abandonné de tous les 
Sauvages, & cruellement affigé de maladie au milieu des bois, luy, sa femme & 
ses enfans, sans aucune esperance de secours humain. 

[239] Je pris respectueusement cette Croix entre mes mains, en presence de 
toute la compagnie; & trouvant dans un si beau sujet de pieté, l’occasion 
favorable de catechiser ces Sauvages, je fis connoître à nôtre Ejougouloumoüet, 
qu’elle étoit le caractere du Chrêtien, & le sacré signe de nôtre salut; qu’elle 
condamnoit par sa pureté, la bigamie criminelle dans laquelle il avoit vécu 
jusqu’alors ; & qu’enfin il faloit de deux choses l’une, ou quitter sa concubine, 
ou renoncer tout de bon à sa Croix. 

S'il est ainsi, répondit cet Infidele, j’aimerois mille fois mieux abandonner, 
non-seulement la femme qui vient du Ciel, mais encore ma femme legitime, & 
mes enfans mêmes, [240] plûtôt que de quitter la Croix que j’ai reçûëé de mes 
ancêtres en titre d’heritage & par droit d’aînesse ; & je la veux conserver toûjours 
precieusement, comme la marque d’honneur qui distingue les Sauvages de 
Mizamichis, de toutes les autres Nations de la Nouvelle France. Il me promit 
donc qu’il quitteroit cette concubine ; attendu même que cette femme, peut- 
être interieurement touchée des instructions que je venois de faire à ceux de 
la cabanne, prit resolution de retourner chez ses parens, & de se faire instruire 
pour recevoir le saint Baptême. C’étoit aussi, sans doute, tout ce que je pouvois 
esperer pour lors de ces pauvres Barbares. 

Nous les quittames dans [241] cette bonne resolution; & prenant de nou- 
velles forces de nôtre foiblesse, par l’esperance que nous avions d’arriver ce soir-là 
chez Monsieur de Fronsac, nous continuâmes nôtre route. À peine avions 
nous fait une demi lieuë, que je fus obligé de me jetter sur la neige, par une 
debilité de cœur & un ébloüissement qui me prit, & dont je ne pûs revenir, que 
par le secours d’une prise de confection d’hyacinte, que l’on démêla avec un 
peu d’eau de neige, pour me la faire avaler plus facilement : remede dont je 
fus obligé de me servir le reste du voïage, & qui me donna la force de suivre, 
quoiqu’avec de grandes difficultez, nôtre petite troupe qui me traçoit le chemin. 

[242] Le Sieur Henaut, dont je ne pouvois assez admirer la force & la vigueur, 
mencourageoit du mieux qu’il luy étoit possible ; m’assûrant, à chaque pointe 
de terre ou de rochers que nous rencontrions, qu’il appercevoit l’Habitation & 
le Fort de Monsieur de Fronsac, & qu’il ne restoit plus qu’un peu de chemin 


DE LA GASPESIE 377 


à faire, pour nous délivrer entierement de nos peines, & nous consoler de nos 
fatigues : mais enfin, si la croïance que je donnois à ses paroles, m’obligeoient 
quelquefois de rédoubler le pas, dans Pesperance dont je me flatois d’arriver 
bien-tôt; ma lassitude s’augmentoit aussi d’autant plus, qu’aïant doublé 
plusieurs pointes, je ne voiois point l’Habitation, ni [243] le Fort de Fronsac ; 
en sorte que je ne voulus plus ajoûter foi à tout ce qu’il me dit dans la suite, lors 
même qu’il me montra la veritable pointe que nous cherchions depuis la matin. 
La faim que je souffrois m’empéchoit d’écouter toutes ces raisons ; & la lassitude 
où j’étois reduit ne me laissoit plus de force, qu’autant qu’il m'en falut pour 
me traîner à l’abri du vent, dans un endroit assez agreable, où je me couchai 
sur la neige ; conjurant de tout mon cœur le Sieur Henaut de me laisser tout 
seul, & d’aller avec sa compagnie chez monsieur de Fronsac: Car enfin, luy 
disois-je, ou nous en sommes proche, ou éloignez: si nous avons aussi peu de 
che- [244] min à faire, comme vous le dites, allez à la bonne heure, & rendez- 
vous incessamment au Fort; vous m’envoirez quelques-uns de nos François, 
pour m’apporter des vivres, & pour me conduire chez Monsieur Denys de 
Fronsac : mais si nous en sommes encore aussi éloignez, comme je me le persuade, 
je vous déclare que je ne puis marcher davantage. Tout ce que je pis luy dire, 
ne fut cependant pas capable de le persuader d’aller chercher le repos dont 
luy-méme avoit tres-grand besoin; jamais il ne voulut m’abandonner d’un 
seul moment : il m’encouragea du mieux qu’il luy fut possible, & ordonna aux 
Sauvages de couper du bois pour nous chaufer ; ai- [245] mant mieux, me disoit- 
il, rester dans la cabanne où nous étions, que d’arriver un quart-d’heure avant 
moi au logis. Ce peu de repos me donna des forces nouvelles; & déferant 
entierement, par un principe de reconnoissance, à l’amitié & à la generosité de 
ce fidele ami, je pris la resolution de continuer nôtre chemin : en sorte qu’aprés 
avoir marché l’espace d’une petite demi-lieuë, nous arrivâmes, par un tems de 
neige qui tomboit en abondance, au Fort & à l’Habitation de Monsieur de 
Fronsac, lequel fit tout ce qu’il put pour nous remettre & nous consoler de nos 
fatigues. Nous y fûmes bientôt visitez par nos Sauvages Porte-Croix, qui 
demeurent ordinairement à Mizamichi- [246] che, qui est une belle riviere, 
abondante en toute sorte de chasse & de poisson : elle est éloignée de quarante 
lieués de l'Isle Percée; les terres y sont assez fertiles. Nous l’avons appellée 
depuis, la Riviere de Sainte-Croix, en memoire & à l’honneur de ce sacré signe 
de nôtre redemption, qui est en veneration singuliere parmi ces Peuples infideles. 
L'accident funeste qui nous mit dans la derniere de toutes les consternations, 
trois ou quatre jours aprés nôtre arrivée, nous fit assez connoître que nous 
étions dans un pais où la Croix, qui avoit autrefois comblé de benediction les 
Sauvages, selon la tradition de leurs ancêtres, nous fit goûter une bonne partie 
de son amertume. 

[2471 Nôtre Sauvagesse, femme de Koucdedaoüi, avec lequel nous etions 
païtis de Nipisiquit, s’étoit cabannée à l’absence de son mari, tout proche le 
Fort de Monsieur de Fronsac, avec une Sauvagesse de sa connoissance, qui avoit 
un enfant à la mammelle. Au défaut d’écorce de bouleau, elles couvrirent leur 
cabanne avec des branches de sapin, & trouverent à propos d’y mettre de la paille, 
pour s’y reposer durant la nuit. Le froid étoit extréme: un vent de Nord- 
oiiest qui souffloit de toute sa force, en augmentoit la rigueur; en sorte que 
ces femmes se virent obligées de faire plus grand feu qu’à l’ordinaire, & s’en- 
dormirent paisiblement, sans aucun présentiment du malheur qui leur [248] 


378 NOUVELLE RELATION 


devoit arriver: mais, à peine ces deux Sauvagesses infortunées eurent-elles 
fermé les yeux, que le feu prit à la paille; & poussant son activité jusques aux 
branches de sapin, il consomma & reduisit en cendres toute la cabanne. On 
laisse A penser, quelle fut l'extrémité où furent reduites ces pauvres femmes, 
lorsqu'elles se virent toutes investies & environnées de flames: elles firent 
d’abord des cris si perçans, qu’ils parvinrent à nos oreilles, presque aussi-tôt 
qu’ils furent sortis de leur bouche. On peut même dire qu’elles ne seroient 
jamais sorties de ce terrible embrasement, si l’une de ces deux Sauvagesses, 
aïant toûjours une presence d’esprit admirable dans un danger si pressant, 
[249] n’eût fait une ouverture à la cabanne, par laquelle elle se jetta toute nuë 
avec son enfant, au milieu de la neige. Sa compagne ne fut pas si prudente, 
ni si heureuse : elle perdit presque aussi-tôt le jugement, que l’esperance de se 
sauver ; & ne se mettant plus en peine de la vie, que pour la conserver à son cher 
enfant, qu’elle tenoit entre ses bras, jamais elle ne le voulut abandonner, jusqu’à 
ce qu’un gros tourbillon de feu & de flâme luy aïant offusqué la vüé, elle fut 
contrainte de le laisser tomber au milieu du feu; & ce fut un grand bonheur 
pour elle, de se trouver, quoique par hazard, à l’endroit par lequel sa compagne 
s’étoit sauvée avec son petit enfant. Une lumiere confuse [250] qui parut 
d’abord à nos yeux, jointe aux pleurs & aux sanglots de ces pauvres mal- 
heureuses, nous firent dans un même moment appréhender & concevoir le 
funeste accident qui étoit arrivé : il étoit trop digne de compassion, pour se 
contenter d’en être seulement les simples spectateurs, comme le fut autrefois 
Neron de l’embrasement de la Ville de Rome ; ou comme Alexandre, de 
Persepolis, reduite en cendres par le conseil de ses concubines : nous courûmes 
tous incessament, pour y apporter le secours dont nous étions capables. 

Jamais la pieté d’Enée, qui retira Anchise hors de l’embrasement de Troye ; 
ni celle de ces trois enfans genereux, qui sauverent leur pere des[251]incendies 
du Vesuve, ne fut mieux representée que par ces pauvres meres, qui avoient 
taché de sauver leurs enfans de ces flames dévorantes: l’une étoit couchée dans 
la neige, avec son petit: l’autre étoit encore à l’ouverture de la cabanne, sans 
pouvoir en sortir; & la douleur qu’elle souffroit étoit d’autant plus sensibles, 
que les flammeches & les charbons tomboient continuellement dessus sa chair. 

L’on sçait que le sapin est un bois plein de gomme, que quelques-uns ap- 
pellent terebentine ; & comme par la violence du feu cette gomme tomboit 
toute brûlante dessus le corps de cette Sauvagesse, il est à croire qu’elle eût 
expiré avec son fils dans cet horrible tourment, si Monsieur Henaut [252] 
ne l’eût, à force de bras, retirée de cet embrasement funeste. 

Jentrai dans la cabanne, qui étoit encore toute en feu, pour tâcher de 
sauver son enfant: mais il étoit trop tard; & ce petit innocent étoit étouffé 
dans les flâmes, à demi rôti. Il expira en effet un moment aprés, entre mes 
bras ; ne me laissant point d’autre consolation, parmi tant de sujets de douleur, 
que celle de l'avoir baptisé avant mon départ de Nipisiquit. Ce fut pour lors, 
que me prosternant à genoux avec ce precieux dépôt, j’adorai, avec les senti- 
mens d’une profonde soûmission, la conduite amoureuse de la Providence dans 
le salut de ses prèdestinez ; puisqu'il m’eût été abso- [253] lument impossible 
de baptiser cet enfant, qui fut la premiere victime que le Ciel reçut de la Mission 
que je fis à nos Porte-Croix. J’ensevelis moi-même le corps de ce petit Ange : 
& on luy rendit solemnellement dans nôtre Chapelle, les honneurs ordinaires ; 
pour faire voir aux Sauvages le respect & la veneration que la sainte Eglise 


DE LA GASPESIE 379 


conserve religieusement, pour tous les enfans qui meurerit dans l’innocence 
aprés leur Baptème. 

On ne peut exprimer les regrets sensibles de cette mere affligée, lorsqu'elle 
fit reflexion sur la perte & le genre de mort d’un fils unique qu’elle aimoit tendre- 
ment. Accablée de douleur & d’amertume par la mort de ce cher [254] enfant, 
elle bouchoit les oreilles à tout ce qu’on pouvoit luy donner de consolation 
dans ses disgraces : elle n’avoit un cœur que pour soupirer, une langue que pour 
se plaindre, des yeux que pour verser des larmes, des pieds & des mains que pour 
remiier les charbons, & foüiller dans les cendres, afin d’y trouver celuy qui faisoit 
le plus grand sujet de sa douleur; en un mot, saisie d’un cruel desespoir, elle 
se fût étouffée elle-même en nôtre presence, si on ne l’eût empêché d’éxecuter 
son pernicieux dessein. 

Les premiers mouvemens sont pardonnables, parce qu’ils nous ôtent & 
nous privent du libre usage de la raison : aussi faut-il avoüer que nôtre Sauvagesse 
paroissoit en quelque [255] maniere excusable, puisque toutes ses actions étoient 
plûtôt d’une femme outrée & transportée par la violence de la douleur, que 
d’une personne raisonnable ; & on peut dire qu’elle ne revint de ses emporte- 
mens, qu’à même-tems qu’elle fut en état de reflechir que son malheur étoit 
sans remede. 

Le Sieur Henaut prit soin de la penser, avec sa charité ordinaire ; & il eût 
entierement gueri toutes ses plaies, si les onguents ne luy eussent manqué. Au 
défaut de nos remedes, les Sauvages en voulurent appliquer des leurs, qui ne servi- 
rent qu’à reduire cette pauvre femme à l'extrémité ; soit que ces remedes sauvages 
fussent incompatibles avec nos on- [256] guents; soit parce qu’ils tarderent 
un peu trop long-tems à y appliquer le premier appareil : si bien qu’aprés vingt- 
deux jours de souffrance, la gangrene se mit dans ses plaies, qui rendoient une 
puanteur si horrible, que personne n’en pouvoit plus approcher du tout. 

Monsieur de Fronsac fit tout ses efforts pour m’empécher de la voir davan- 
tage; mais enfin, comme il étoit plus juste de déferer aux regles de la charité, 
qu’à des raisons humaines, de bien-seance & de civilité ; je voulus luy continuer 
mes services, ne pouvant jamais me résoudre de l’abandonner jusques à la mort. 
Elle avoit été baptisée & nommée Marie, par l’un de nos Missionnaires : je 
Pavois [257] disposée pour se confesser ; en sorte que s'étant toûjours acquitée 
des devoirs d’une bonne Chrêtienne, particulierement sur la fin de sa maladie, 
elle fit une confession generale de ses pechez, le matin du jour des Cendres, & 
mourut le soir, me laissant de grandes esperances de son salut. 

Le corps resta toute la nuit dans la cabanne ; & Monsieur de Fronsac ne me 
voulut jamais permettre de la veiller, comme je le souhaitois. Deux François 
& deux Sauvages furent destinez pour rester auprés de la défunte durant la nuit ; 
Ejougouloumoüet en étoit du nombre, lequel se persuadant que le cierge beni 
étoit composé de la graisse d’orignac, il le mangea tout [258] entier. Nous nous 
en fussions volontiers divertis ; mais il falut ceder à la douleur & à la tristesse, 
qui nous affigeoient autant qu’on se peut imaginer. Fr 

Quelque effort qu’on fit pour transporter le corps au Cimetiere ordinaire, 
on fut cependant obligé de faire la fosse dans la cabanne même, à cause qu’il 
étoit impossible d’en approcher, pour l’inection & la puanteur étrange qui en 
sortoient ; jusques-là même, que le Sieur Henaut voulant s’essuier la face avec 
son mouchoir, fut extrèmement surpris de le voir trempé d’une sueur toute 
bleué & livide, qui marquoit assez le danger évident d’y gagner quelque maladie 


380 NOUVELLE RELATION 


contagieuse. Elle fut enterrée dans sa ca- [259] banne, aprés que j’eus beni 
son tombeau ; & nous dîmes ensuite la sainte Messe pour le repos de son ame, 
dans nôtre Chapelle, où tous les François & les Sauvages assisterent, avec beaucoup 
de devotion. 

Son mari cependant, qui ne sçavoit rien de ce qui s’étoit passé durant son 
absence, arriva de la chasse deux heures aprés que nous eûmes enterré cette 
Sauvagesse : il pleura amerement la mort de sa femme; & comme il aimoit 
tendrement son enfant, il étoit à peu prés comme un autre David, qui demandoit 
à tout moment, où étoit son cher Absalon. Il visita souvent leur tombeau, 
sur lesquels étant un jour à genoux, les mains & les yeux élevez vers le [260] 
Ciel, & le cœur tout transpercé de douleur, on luy entendit prononcer ces paroles 
en forme de priere: O grand Dieu, qui gouvernes le Soleil & la Lune, qui as 
créé les orignaux, les loutres & les castors; appaise-toi, ne sois plus faché contre 
moi, & contente-toi des malheurs qui m’accablent: j’avois une femme, tu 
me l’as ôtée; j’avois un enfant que j’aimois comme moi-même, & je n’en ai 
plus, parce que tu l’as voulu : n’en voila til pas assez ?  Fais-moi donc desormais 
autant de bien, que je ressens de mal à present : ou si tu n’es pas encore satisfait 
de ce que je souffre dans mon cœur, fais-moi mourir au plûtôt ; car aussi bien 
il m’est impossible de vivre davantage. 

[261] Mais enfin, comme le tems est un sçavant Medecin, qui apporte des 
remedes efficaces aux douleurs les plus sensibles, & que d’ailleurs ces Peuples 
ne font pas grand état d’un homme qui pleure, & qui ne se console pas dans les 
accidens mêmes les plus fâcheux de la vie humaine; nôtre Sauvage voulut 
donner des marques autentiques de la force qu’il avoit dessus son esprit, & 
convia les Porte-Croix au festin des morts, qu’il leur fit selon la coûtume ordi- 
naire du Pais. Il le commença par une harangue, qui exposoit succintement 
le sujet pour lequel il les avoit conviez : il ajoûta ensuite une espece d’oraison 
funebre, où il rapporta les belles qualitez de sa femme, & tout ce que ses [262] 
ancêtres avoient fait de plus considerable pour les interêts de la Nation: & il 
finit enfin son discours, en faisant des éloges de son fils; protestant qu’il eût 
été un jour un bon chasseur, un grand guerrier, & le digne heritier de la valeur 
& de la generosité de son pere. 

Un profond silence qui suivit immediatement, l’arrêta tout court, aïant 
les yeux fichez contre terre, comme s’il eût été plongé dans la derniere de toutes 
les mélancolies, pour mieux exprimer l’amertume qu’il avoit dans le cœur, à 
cause de la mort de sa femme & de son enfant: puis tout d’un coup, portant 
la main à ses yeux, pour en essuier quelques larmes qu’il avoit versées devant 
cette assemblée, il fit un cri de joie, & dit en méme- [263] tems: Que s’il avoit 
donné des larmes, qu’il n’avoit pû refuser aux défunts qu’il aimoit si tendre- 
ment, il vouloit cependant en arrêter le cours, pour correspondre à l’estime 
que tous les Sauvages avoient conçûë de la grandeur de son courage. Il 
ajoûta, Que nous étions tous mortels : que la trop grande tristesse & la douleur 
faisoient perdre l’esprit aux Sauvages : & qu’enfin il faloit se consoler de tous 
les accidens fâcheux qui nous arrivent dans la vie; parce que celuy qui a tout 
fait, & qui gouverne toutes choses, le permettoit ainsi. 

Tous les conviez répondirent à cette harangue, par trois ou quatre huées, 
qu’ils pousserent du fond de leur estomac, en disant à l’ordinaire, [264] hé, bé, 
hé; C’est ainsi qu’ils approuvent ordinairement les raisons de celuy qui 
harangue. Nôtre Koucdedaoüi n’eut pas plûtôt reçû ces applaudissemens 


DE LA GASPESIE 881 


publics, qu’il se mit à danser de son mieux, & chanter quelque chanson de guerre, 
de chasse, pour témoigner à l’assemblée qu’il avoit banni de son cœur tout 
ce qu’il y avoit eu jusqu'alors de chagrin, de douleur, & de tristesse: il bût 
ensuite un bon coup d’eau de vie, & donna le reste du flacon aux plus anciens 
pour être distribué aux conviez, avec la sagamite du festin. 

C’est une coûtume generalement observée par nos Gaspesiens, de ne se 
reserver rien du tout de ce qui a été à l’usage des malades, lorsqu'ils [265] 
viennent à mourir ; afin, disent-ils, d’éloigner autant qu’ils peuvent de devant 
leurs yeux, tous les objets qui pourroient renouveller leurs peines, par le 
souvenir & la memoire de leurs parens & de leurs amis; ils brûlent toutes les 
hardes qui leur ont servi pendant leur vie: ou bien ils les enterrent avec eux ; 
afin, disent-ils, que les esprits de ces choses leurs fassent compagnie dans l’autre 
monde : ou ils en font present aux étrangers, pour reconnoissance des services 
qu’ils auront rendus aux défunts. Kouededaoüi donna tout ce que sa femme 
possedoit, aux Sauvages qui avoient assisté sa femme pendant sa maladie. Il 
resta encore quelques jours avec nous; mais enfin, soit qu’il se lassât de rester 
avec [266] les François, soit qu’il ne voulût plus demeurer davantage dans un 
lieu qui luy avoit été si funeste, il prit la resolution de nous quitter, & d’aban- 
donner la riviere de Sainte-Croix, où je demeurois jusques au Printems, pour 
y faire la Mission, & disposer les Porte-Croix à recevoir les principes & les élemens 
du Christianisme. 

Il ne me fut pas beaucoup difficile de trouver le sujet de la premiere 
harangue que je devois faire à ces pauvres [nfideles ; il fut à peu prés le même 
que celuy de Saint Paul, quand il prêcha pour la premiere fois dans Athenes, 
la Foi de Jesus-Curist aux Areopagites. 

Ce grand Apôtre aïant consideré cette fameuse inscrip- [267] tion, que les 
Atheniens avoient fait graver en lettres d’or sur le frontispice du Temple 
qu’ils avoient consacré au Dieu Inconnu, Zgnoto Deo; prit de là occasion de 
leur faire connoître, que ce Dieu Inconnu auquel ils rendoient leurs hommages 
& leurs adorations, étoit celuy-là-même qui avoit fait le Ciel & la Terre; qui 
s’étoit fait homme dans le sein d’une Vierge ; qui par un excez d’amour avoit 
bien voulu expirer sur la Croix, pour le salut de tout le genre humain: que 
la nature avoit donné des marques de son ressentiment, durant les mortelles 
agonies de son Calvaire ; & que le Soleil même en avoit souffert de douleur, 
un éclipse si extraordinaire, que l’un des premiers de l’Areopage, en [268] le 
voiant s’écria, Qu’il faloit ou que le Dieu de la Nature souffrit, ou que la 
machine du Monde allat se dissoudre. 

L’usage de la Croix, & ’honneur que nos Gaspesiens Infideles rendoient a 
ce sacré signe de nôtre salut, me donnerent le même sujet de leur expliquer 
les sacrez Misteres, qu’ils ignoroïent dans les tenebres de leurs erreurs & de 
leur aveuglement. Je leur fis donc concevoir que cette Croix, qu’ils avoient 
reçûé en partage par une faveur singuliere du Ciel, les devoit porter au culte 
& à l’adoration de celuy qui l’avoit embrassée pour nôtre amour : qu’ils avoient 
même des obligations plus étroites que les autres Nations de la Nouvelle [269] 
France, de professer la Foi de Jesus-Curisr; & que pour ce sujet il faloit 
quitter leurs erreurs, & recevoir le Baptême, sans lequel ils ne pouvoient pas 
être sauvez. Ils parurent tres-contens & satisfaits de ce discours, & me pro- 
mirent de suivre éxactement les avis charitables que je leur donnois ; protestant 
tous publiquement, qu’ils étoient bien fachez, de ce que leurs ancétres avoient 


? 


382 NOUVELLE RELATION 


negligé si long-tems le culte du Dieu de la Croix: ils m’offrirent leurs petits 
enfans, & me prierent de les baptiser, en attendant qu’ils fussent eux-mêmes 
suffisamment instruits pour le recevoir. 

Jaccordai la grace du Baptême à cinq ou six de ces enfans, dont le plus 
âgé de [270] tous ne passoit pas deux ans ; & j’ai cette consolation, que quatre 
de ces petits innocens joüissent à present de la gloire, étant morts heureuse- 
ment, quelque-tems aprés leur Baptême. 

Je laisse au Lecteur la liberté de juger comme il luy plaira, de l’origine du 
culte de la Croix parmi cette Nation Infidele; puisque je n’ai pas de fonde- 
ment plus solide pour le persuader de cette verité, que le temoignage des anciens 
Sauvages & des François, confirmé par la Relation qu’enÿa faite Monseigneur 
de Saint Vallier, presentement Evêque de Quebec: attendu même que je me 
suis proposé uniquement dans cette Histoire, d’écrire les choses comme je les 
ai connuës du- [271] rant tout le tems que j’ai fait la Mission chez nos 
Gaspesiens Porte-Croix. | 

Voici cependant, quoiqu’en abregé, quelques raisons principales, qui 
m’obligerent de croire que la Croix avoit été en veneration parmi ces Barbares, 
avant la premiere arrivée des Francois dans leur Pais; car voulant un jour 
faire avoüer à ces Infideles, que les Missionnaires qui m’avoient precedé leur 
avoient enseigné la maniere dont ils devoient adorer la Croix: Hé quoy, me 
dit le Chef, tu es Patriarche ; tu veux que nous croïons tout ce que tu nous 
propose, & tu ne veux pas croire ce que nous te disons: Tu n’as pas encore 
quarante ans, & il n’y en a que deux que tu demeures avec les Sauvages ; & tu 
[272] prétens sçavoir nos maximes, nos traditions & nos coûtumes mieux que nos 
ancêtres, qui nous les ont enseignées. Ne vois tu pas encore tous les jours le 
vieillard Quioudo, qui a plus de six vingts ans? il a vû le premier navire qui 
ait abordé dans notre Pais: il t’a repeté si souvent que les Sauvages de Miza- 
michis n’ont pas reçû des Etrangers l’usage de la Croix; & que ce qu’il en 
sçait luy-même, il l’a appris par la tradition de ses peres, qui ont vêcu pour le 
moins aussi long-tems que luy: Tu peux donc inferer que nous l’avions reçû 
avant que les François vinssent à nos côtes. Mais si tu fais encore quelque 
difficulté de te rendre à cette raison, en voici une autre, qui te doit entiere- 
ment [273] convaincre de la verité que tu revoques en doute. Tu as de 
Pesprit, puisque tu es Patriarche, & que tu parles à Dieu: Tu sçais que la 
Nation des Gaspesiens s’étend depuis le Cap des Rosiers, jusqu’au Cap Breton : tu 
n’ignores pas que les Sauvages de Ristigouche sont nos freres & nos compatriotes, 
qui parlent la même langue que nous; tu les as quittez pour nous venir voir ; 
tu les as instruits: tu as vii les vieillards qui ont été baptisez par d’autres 
Missionnaires que toi; & cependant nous avons été privez malheureusement 
de ce bonheur jusqu’à present. Si donc la Croix est la marque sacrée qui 
distingue les Chrêtiens d’avec les Infideles, comme tu nous l’enseignes: dis- 
nous pourquoi les [274] Patriarches nous en auroient-ils donné l’usage, prefer- 
ablement à nos freres de Ristigouche qu’ils ont baptisez, & qui cependant 
n’ont pas eu toûjours le signe du Chrêtien en veneration, comme nos ancêtres 
qui n’ont jamais reçû le Baptême? Tu vois donc manifestement que ce n’est 
pas des Missionnaires, que nous avons le mistere de la Croix. 

L’on dira que ce raisonnement est sauvage : il est vrai, je l’avouë; mais il 
n’en est pas pour cela ni moins persuasif, ni moins convaincant : puisqu’il est 
vrai de dire, que les Sauvages de Ristigouche sont baptisez, & qu’ils ne portent 


DE LA GASPESIE 383 


point cependant la Croix; mais bien la figure d’un saumon, qu’ils avoient 
anciennement penduë au col, comme [275] la marque d’honneur de leur Pais : 
Car il est à remarquer que la coûtume de tous nos Gaspesiens a toûjours été, 
de porter quelque figure particuliere, qui sont comme des armoiries qui les 
distinguent des autres Sauvages, par rapport aux differens endroits où ils 
resident ordinairement. 

Voila tout ce que j’ai pû reconnoître de l’origine du culte de la Croix, & ce 
que nous avons fait pour en procurer le rétablissement parmi ces Peuples, qui 
n’ont jamais eu connoissance parfaite d’aucune Divinité ; aïant toûjours été, 
comme la pluspart de ceux d’aujourd’hui, insensibles en matiere de Religion. 

Il est vrai que plusieurs de nos Gaspesiens souhaitent à present se faire 
instruire, de- [276] mandent le Baptême, & paroissent même à l’exterieur assez 
bons Chrêtiens, aprés avoir été baptisez ; zelez pour les Prieres ordinaires du 
soir & du matin, modestes dans les Eglises, & portez à se confesser de leurs 
pechez, pour s’approcher dignement de la sainte Communion: mais on peut 
dire que le nombre est tres-petit, de ceux qui vivent selon les regles du 
Christianisme, & qui ne retombent dans les déreglemens d’une vie brutale & 
sauvage ; soit à cause de l’insensibilité naturelle de ces Peuples pour les choses 
du salut; soit à raison de l’yvrognerie, de leurs erreurs, de leurs superstitions, 
& autres défauts considerables ausquels ils sont extrémement adonnez : d’où 
vient que quoique plusieurs [277] Missionnaires aïent beaucoup travaillé pour 
la conversion de ces Infideles, on n’y remarque cependant, non plus que chez 
les autres Nations Sauvages de la Nouvelle France, de Christianisme solide- 
ment établi; & voila peut-être le sujet pour lequel les RR. PP. Jesuites, qui 
ont cultivé avec tant de ferveur & de charité, les Missions qu’ils avoient autre- 
fois au Cap Breton, Miscou & Nipisiguit, où nos Gaspesiens resident encore 
aujourd’hui, ont trouvé à propos de les abandonner, pour en établir d’autres 
aux Nations éloignées, & situées au haut du fleuve de Saint Laurent, dans 
Pesperance d’y faire des progrez plus considerables ; quoique d’ailleurs, selon 
le témoignage de ces Re- [278] verends Peres, les Gaspesiens soient les plus 
dociles de tous les Sauvages de la Nouvelle France, & les plus susceptibles des 
instructions du Chrianisme. 

Il est vrai que le peu de progrez que j’avois fait depuis quatre ans que je 
travaillois 4 la conversion de ces Peuples, avec autant d’application qu’il m’étoit 
possible, joint au déplaisir sensible de ne pas trouver toute la disposition que 
je souhaitois du cété de mes Gaspesiens, dont la pluspart n’étoient Chrétiens 
qu’en apparence, nonobstant les travaux infatiguables de tant d’illustres & 
zelez Missionnaires qui m’avoient precedé, me fit hesiter d’abandonner 
Pouvrage, n’aïant pas lieu d’en esperer de plus heu- [279] reux succez: ce- 
pendant, pour ne rien précipiter dans une affaire d’une si grande consequence, 
je demandai au Saint Esprit les lumieres qui m’étoient necessaires, pour con- 
noitre quelle étoit la volonté de Dieu, pour m’y abandonner entierement. Je 
consultai les personnes les plus éclairées, & sur tout le R. P. Valentin le Roux 
nôtre Superieur, comme Dieu même ; & je peux dire avec verité, que la resolu- 
tion qu'il m’envoïa dans ma Mission, me servit de regle, & m’engagea d’y 
rester encore l’espace de huit ans, pour cultiver cette vigne du Seigneur. Voici 
les propres termes de sa Lettre. 


Fai rech une joie tres-sensible, d'apprendre par les deux vôtres, [280] l’une 


384 NOUVELLE RELATION 


du quinze Avril, l'autre du buit Mai, la continuation de vôtre santé au milieu 
des travaux Apostoliques, où vous éxercez vôtre zele avec tant de succez ES 
dédification : il est vrai que dans ce plaisir extréme que j'ai eu en recevant 
vos Lettres, causé par cette preference d'estime que je fais de vôtre personne, © par 
la tendresse singuliere que j'ai pour vous, je ne crois pas avoir reçà une douleur plus 
sensible depuis que je suis en Canada, que de voir par un endroit de vôtre derniere, 
le dessein où vous êtes d'abandonner vôtre poste, {5 même de retourner en France. 

Ie vous avouë, mon tres-cher Pere, que dans mille mortifications que je reçois 
tous les jours, 3 qui sont comme inseparables de mon ministere, vous êtes [281] 
la personne sur qui j’avois fait plus de fond: la resolution que j’avois remarquée 
en vous l'année derniere, de faire un sacrifice perpetuel de vos travaux à nos 
anciennes Missions, qui renaissent aujourd’hui, par une conduite particuliere de la 
Providence, ES cette onction de grace qui me paroissoit en vous, me consoloient 
infiniment. Len ai beni Dieu mille fois depuis vôtre départ, le conjurant tous 
les jours, aux pieds des Autels, de vous combler de ses benedictions. Ie voïois même 
nos autres Peres dans le même dessein ; 9 je fondois là dessus mes projets {5 mes 
esperances pour la gloire du Seigneur. Ie les croïois plus sûres ES plus certaines 
de vôtre part, que de tous les autres ; mats je congois que mes pechez me rendent 
indigne de cette [282] consolation : je leur attribuë ce changement où vous paroissez ; 
je ne merite pas de voir fleurir de mon tems nos Missions, dont le succez dépend 
uniquement de la fermeté © de la perseverance des Religieux. En cela, mon 
tres-cher Pere, vous serez toujours le maitre de votre sort: je me reserve seule- 
ment le droit de representer, d’exborter, de prier, de conjurer de la part de Dieu ; 
laissant aprés cela une entiere liberté aux Religieux, lorsque nonobstant les prieres 
instantes du Superieur &5 de Pami, qui marquent l'ordre de Dieu, &5 malgré la 
necessité où se trouvent nos Missions, ils soubaîteront de quitter ouvrage ; car le 
sacrifice doit être libre © volontaire. 

Mais enfin, mon cher Pere, considerez, je vous prie, léxemple de Jesus-Curisr, 
ce premier Mis- [283] sionnaire du monde, dont nous devons être les imitateurs, &5 
luy rendre dans la personne de nos freres, ce qu’il à fait pour nous 3 pour eux, 
en nous venant éclairer dans les voies du salut, avec des travaux ES des obstacles 
continuels : sa Mission a été constante ; ES depuis qu’il la commencée, 1l y a 
perseveré tout le reste de sa vie; il Pa consommée par le sacrifice de son propre 
Sang: Et nos debemus pro fratribus nostris animas ponere. C’est jusques-la 
que nous devons aller, pour nous rendre recommandables devant luy par nôtre 
ministere ; €S quoique par sa mort il soit entré dans la gloire, ce Missionnaire ne 
laisse pas d’éxercer sncore les mêmes offices : 1l continue tous les jours une espece 
de Mission, en descendant sur nos Autels, ow il s'attache avec une perseverance 
in- [284] violable ; il en remplit les fonctions à tous momens, par sa grace in- 
terieure, SF par les soins d'une prouidence de Pere sur son Eglise: Ecce ego 
vobiscum sum usque ad consummationem sæculi. Voila le zele de perseverance 
sur lequel se sont reglez les Apôtres 9 tous les hommes Apostoliques, & qui fera 
devant Dieu le discernement de l'amour inviolable que nous aurons pour luy. Si 
les Apôtres s’étoient bornez à un certain nombre d'années ; s'ils s’étoient érigez 
en Missionnaires de trente-six mois, la verité Evangelique n’auroit pas eu tant 
de succez pour la conversion du monde : ils s’en sont fait un vœu ES une necessité 
inviolable, © ils n’ont jamais cessé, pendant qu’ils ont eu un soûpir de vie. Cet 
éloignement de leur Patrie ne leur a point cause de regret, à exem- [285] ple du 
Fils de Dieu, qui avoit quitté la sienne pour venir dans le monde : Exivi à patre, 


DE LA GASPESIE 385 


& veni in mundum. Ces travaux insurmontables, cette faim, cette disette, ces 
persecutions, les mépris, les gibets ES les rouës, Pingratitude, 3 même le peu de 
succez de leurs peines, ne les ont point rebuté : au contraire, tout cela wa fait 
quwenflamer leur xele, pour s'acquitter de leur Mission avec plus @éxactitude, pour 
consommer leur course, &S le ministere de la parole Apostolique qwils avoient regi 
de Dieu. Quelle application n’auroient-ils pas donné à la conversion de ce nouveau 
Monde, qui étoit alors inconnu, € dont Dieu nous a destinez les Apôtres ? 
Posuit tanquam morti destinatos. Et quel reproche Dieu ne vous feroit-il pas 
un jour, @avoir tiré la faux [286] de la moisson, presque aussi tôt que vous Ty 
avez mise? Quel compte ne rendriez vous pas d Dieu, de tant dames qui peri- 
roient, faute d’avoir perseveré à leur annoncer la parole, ou d’avoir jetté la semence, 
& ensuite de ne Pavoir pas cultivée ? Quelle ingratitude à vous, de laisser perir 
des ames pour lesquelles Jesus-Curist est mort, faute de donner la même applica- 
tion que Jesus-Curist a donnée pour nous jusqu’à la mort? Perit in tua scientia 
frater pro quo Christus mortuus est. Vous wignorez pas, mon tres-cher Pere, 
que nos Missions ne sont que de purs amusemens, st Pon ne ne se fixe pour quelques 
années dans les principales, à cause de la diversité des langues : il faut deux ou 
trois ans à un Religieux, auparavant qu'il soit [287] bien en état de se faire 
entendre ; {9 s’il faut le changer après cela, nous travaillerions inutilement, nous 
serions des Missionnaires de nom, €5 non pas d'effet : les Heretiques de la Nouvelle 
Angleterre qui sont à vos portes, vous confondroient en ce point ; ES je ne sçai pas 
ce que nous pourrions répondre à Dieu, quand il nous reprocheroit ce peu de concert 
que nous aurions pour sa gloire. Il s'agit même, mon cher Pere, d'établir, ou 
plûtôt de rétablir nos Missions ; puisqu'elles ne font encore que de commencer à se 
remettre, aprés un intervale de quarante années : il s agit de montrer Péxemple 
à ceux qui viendront aprés nous ; ES si nous mettions les choses sur un pied de ne 
venir 101 qu’en passant, ne serions-nous pas responsables du peu de xele des autres 
à nô- [288] tre imitation ? Si nous avions le don des langues, comme autrefois 
les Apôtres, nous aurions quelque excuse, en disant qu'un autre seroit aussi-bien 
que nous en état de s'acquitter d'une Mission ; maïs puisque Dieu ne nous donne 
pas cette grace, 1l desire de nous que nôtre zele y supplée, par une perseverance &5 
une application habituelle : ES outre cette necessité de la langue, la grace que 
Dieu vous donne @édifier beaucoup par vôtre conversation ; cet attrait ES cette 
onction que j'ai remarquez en vous, pour la conversion de ces pauvres aveugles ; 
la conoissance que vous avez de leurs esprits, 3 la maniere de les prendre ; 
Pascendant que Dieu vous a donné sur ces Barbares, sont des avantages qu'un autre 
ne sçauroit acquerir que par un long travail, &5 qui [289] marquent aussi une 
vocation {5 un choix particulier que Dieu fait de vous pour cette Mission. lai 
mille raisons qui me font comprendre la necessité que nous avons de nous fixer dans 
nos Missions: je tacherat den donner Péxemple a mes freres, par le sacrifice per- 
petuel que jai fait de mon repos, de mon talent, de mon honneur &9 de ma vie, au 
ministere Apostolique dans ce Pais ; &9 je croirois que Dieu ne me le pardonnerott 
jamais, si je venois à me relâcher de ma resolution, à cause du mauvais éxemple 
que je donnerois aux autres, qui à mon imitation en feroient de même : je les vois 
tous assez fermes, &5 assez résolus ; mais en verité, je puis vous dire que si vous 
veniez à lâcher le pied, comme les autres sont beaucoup arrétez par [290] Péxemple 
de vôtre ferveur, que je leur ai souvent proposé, afin de les animer : vous détruiriez 
Pordre ES les moïens des desseins de Dieu, € ce que nous tâchons d’advancer avec 
sa sainte grace, pour leur donner la perseverance. Vous auriez une douleur 


2 B 


386 NOUVELLE RELATION 


éternelle, de voir des Missions tomber dans la décadence, au moment qwelles com- 
mencent à prendre cet esprit de Religion &9 de vertu qui nous doit animer, pour 
répondre à ce que le Seigneur demande de nous dans nôtre Ministere. Vous êts 
peut-être dégoûté, par le peu de fruit que vous remarquez dans la conversion des 
Sauvages ; mais enfin, mon cher Pere, pourriez-vous un jour faire valoir cette 
excuse devant Dieu, étant instruit comme vous êtes des veritez de nôtre Foi? Con- 
siderez. je vous prie, que c’est à nous à [291] planter € à arroser ; maïs que C’est 
à Dieu de donner les accroissemens, (9 de produire les fruits. Nous nous sommes 
suffisamment acquittez de nôtre obligation, quand nous avons annoncé la vertté ; 
ce n’est pas à nous de la rendre feconde, mais de reconnoitre nôtre neant, d’adorer 
les jugemens de Dieu, &9 de luy dire: Quod debuimus facere fecimus, servi 
inutiles sumus. Souvenez-vous que quand le Fils de Dieu donne la Mission a ses 
Apôtres, il leur ordonne de prêcher l'Evangile à toutes les Nations ; non seulement 
à celles qui croiront à leur parole, mais encore à celles qui n’y ajoûteront point de 
foi. Qui crediderit salvus erit, qui non crediderit condemnabitur. Dieu tire 
également sa gloire de la perte des uns, du salut &9 de la sanctification des autres ; 
[292] mais il ne tirera parfaitement sa gloire de ceux qui ne croiront pas, qu’en 
tant qu’il aura eu soin de leur faire annoncer la verité. Nous avons l'avantage de 
justifier Dieu au jugement, dans la condamnation des Infideles qui ne seront pas 
convertis à nos paroles ; ES si nous ne cherchons que la gloire de Dieu, un Mission- 
natre dott être bien plus content dans le peu de succez © de fruit des Missions de 
ce Pais, que s’il operoit des conversions aussi nombreuses que dans l'Eglise naissante, 
ES même dans nos derniers siecles aux Indes Orientales &5 Occidentales, où un homme 
baptisoit en un jour des quatre € cing mille ames ; car Dieu est également glorifié 
dans la dureté de nos Sauvages € dans leur reprobation, aprés qu’on leur a annoncé 
la Foi, comme dans la con- [293] version des autres. Vous avez encore cet avantage, 
que dans les grandes conversions on y peut trouver de la propre complaisance, de la 
gloire € de la satisfaction sensible ; au lieu que dans vôtre sort, vous n’y regardez 
qu’une gloire de Dieu, cachée dans les ombres de nôtre Foi. Cette steterilité de vos 
travaux, ne flate en rien l'amour propre ; ES vous n’y trouverez de gloire que pour 
Peternité, lorsque vous verrez Dieu justifié dans la perte de ces ames,  glorifié 
par le soin que vous aurez eu, © ces assiduitez que vous aurez données à leur con- 
version. Mais serez-vous en état de le faire, si aprés avoir ébauché l'ouvrage, 
vous la bandonnez à un autre, qui en fera de même a votre éxemple? Le Fils de 
Dieu, qui étoit venu principalement pour instruire les [294] Iuifs: Ad oves, que 
perierunt domus Israël, En a-fil beaucoup convertis, à lexception de douze 
Apôtres chancelans, © de quelques Disciples ?  Qu’a til trouvé, sinon de Paveugle- 
ment, de la dureté dans tout le reste de son Peuple, des mépris, de l'ingratitude, &5 
enfin une mort infâme ? mais toute sa vüe étoit de justifier Dieu dans leur perte ; 
5 la pureté ES la sainteté de ses intentions le sotitenoit dans la sterilité de ses 
travaux. Il a perseveré jusques ala mort dans sa Mission: il est venu pour être 
le Sauveur de tous les hommes, ES il est mort pour tous : 11 est mort pour ceux qui 
se damnent, comme pour les plus grands Saints ; afin que son sang plaidät pour la 
justice, (FS magnifiat la misericorde de son Pere dans le jugement des reprouvez. 
Il a cri: que [295] son Sang ne se prodiguoit pas @étre répandu in ruinam, & in 
resurrectionem multorum ; pourvi qu’il pit dire, quid ultra potui facere vinee 
mee? expectavi ut faceret uvas, & fecit labruscas. Ne veut il pas que Pon 
jette la semence de sa parole, aussi bien sur des cœurs insensibles que sur des cœurs 
dociles ? 5 s’il faloit se rebuter par le peu de fruit de nos travaux, où est le Pre- 


DE LA GASPESIE 387 


dicateur qui pourroit monter deux fois en Chaire, dans les Pais les plus Catholiques ? 
Tant de bouches sont ouvertes en France, pour la reformation des mœurs ; cependant 
combien voit on operer de conversions ? ES pour un million de Predications, de 
Catechismes, d'Instructions familieres, combien y en a-Pil qui rabatent d’un seul 
point le leur [296] vanité, de l'esprit d'interêt, d'impudicité, de médisance, de 
ressentiment, Sc. ? Ils n’ont donc point d'autre ressource, que celle de dire qu’ils 
Sacquittent de ce que Dieu demande de leur Ministere ; luy laissant operer la con- 
version ou la sanctification, par la grace interieure, £5 enfin de le justifier un jour 
dans son jugement : Ut justificeris in sermonibus tuis, & vincas cum judicaris. 
Il semble que le tems 85 l'heure de la Providence n’est pas encore venu pour les 
Nations de ce nouveau Monde ; les moissons ne blanchissent pas encore, il est vrai ; 
mais que sçavez-vous si Dieu n’a pas destiné de Paccorder enfin quelque jour à nos 
larmes, à nos soûpirs € à nos travaux ; ES si nous ne serons pas coupables des 
retardemens que [297] Dieu y apporteroit, si nous venons à manquer de fermeté 5 
de constance dans notre vocation? Du moins, mon cher Pere, pouvez-vous esperer 
de sauver des enfans, ou des vieillards moribons, €% méme quelques adultes, par- 
ticulierement des enfans, que lon instruit peu à peu: ES quand vous ne sauveriez 
qu'une seule ame, elle vaut plus que la conquête de tout le Monde, aprés que Dieu a 
donné son Sang pour elle. Les travaux de toute votre vie seroient tres-bien emploiez, 
selon les principes de notre Foi ; que Saint Ignace, Patriarche de nos Freres ajoints 
dans la conversion de ce nouveau Monde, se seroit estimé heureux, si pour fruit de 
ses travaux © du sacrifice de sa vie, il avoit pit esperer de convertir une seule des 
Courtisanes de Rome. Ie ne s¢au- [298] rois croire que l'attrait de la Patrie soit 
Poccasion ou le sujet de votre dégoût, € peut-être de votre chagrin : nous avons 
fait par notre Profession un renoncement si general à Pere, à mere, à Païs, à amis, 
que tout cela ne doit plus avoir de charme pour vous. Votre vocation même dans 
ce nouveau Monde, qui n’est pas differente de celle des Apôtres, à dû faire mourir 
tous ces ressentimens de la Nature: ces hommes divins n’avoient plus de Patrie ; 
ou plitot les endroits où ils étoient destinez, leur en tenoient lieu. Le vous trouvai 
l'année derniere dans les sentimens assez conformes à ceux de la grace sur cet article. 
Vous me disiez que cet éloignement du Païs ES des proches, étoit ce qui vous plaisoit 
le plus ; © que vous n’auriez jamais de regret à votre vocation en Canada, par 
[299] cette consideration, que méme vous voiex bien qwelle seroit la source de votre 
salut. Or ce seroit, mon tres-cher Pere, en avoir bien-tôt changé de pensée, ou bien 
mal reconnoître la grace que Dieu vous auroit fait, que de vous lasser au milieu de 
votre course, de former des desseins si opposez à ceux de Dieu sur votre personne, 
© aux attraits de sa sainte grace particulierement dans les conjonctures presentes, 
où certaines personnes qui nous caressent a Pexterieur, ne seroient peut être point 
Jächez de vous en voir rappellé par des ordres superieurs. Sçavez-vous bien que 
depuis deux ans, sa Grandeur me presse de ne pas souffrir que nos Missionnaires 
sovent plus de trois ans attachez à une même Mission ? Le vois bien que Pon sur- 
prend, par des artifices de [300] Demon, la droiture de ses intentions, pour faire 
échouer par ce moïen les entrepises de son xele &5 du notre ; ES vous ne voiez pas 
que vous favorisez ces desseins de l'esprit de tenebres, au préjudice des François 
ES des Sauvages, qui ont une entiere confiance em vous, comme Monsieur Richard 
Denys de Fronsac me écrit. Ie ne finirois jamais, mon cher Pere, si je suivois 
le torrent de ma plume sur cette matiere, (3 sur la mortification que me cause votre 
dessein : Cest le Demon qui me traverse dans la personne que je croïois la plus 
intrepide ; mais je prierai Dieu avec tant d’ardeur, pour vous attirer la perse- 


388 NOUVELLE RELATION 


verance, que j'espere encore du changement, ES que du moins vous ne penseserez 
plus à quitter les Missions. 

[301] Aw reste, s'il ne s’agit que de venir hiverner avec nous, vous jugez bien 
que j'y trouverai ma plus grande joie. Vous pourriez retourner PEté prochain, 
si vous reprenez, comme je Vespere, votre premiere resolution, où je vous voiois 
l'année derniere ; sinon vous demeurerez ceans, autant de tems qu’il vous plaira : 
vous en serez toijours le maître, aprés avoir entendu mes raïsons, € ce que Ponction 
de la grace vous inspirera. Si vous venez hiverner avec nous, je vous prie de 
disposer Monsieur Richard Denys, en sorte qu’il nattende personne jusques au 
Printems prochain; waiant a present que quatre Prétres ceans, de seize, dont 
vous êtes douxe partagez aux Missions. Le cher Pere Exuper, dont vous CONNOISSEZ 
le zele €F la vertu, est arri- [302] vé depuis peu à nôtre secours : il faudra même 
que je monte au Fort de Frontenac, PEté prochain, avec Monsieur le Comte de 
Frontenac nôtre Gouverneur, pour ordonner la découverte du Mexique, en vertu 
des ordres de la Cour, €$ visiter nos Missions. Ma presence est encore necessaire 
au Mont-Roïal, où les Peuples démandent, avec plus d’empressement que jamais, 
un établissement de nôtre Ordre; €3 Messieurs du Seminaire, qui en sont les 
Seigneurs, y consentent. Le cher Pere Zenobbe Membré est au Fort dés le Printems 
dernier, avec les Peres Gabriél de la Ribourd, Loitis Hennepin, Luc Buisset, es 
doivent aller en Mission aux découvertes que l’on va faire. Crest, comme vous 
voiez, une grosse Communauté pour ce Pais. Frere Leonard est extré- [303] 
mement malade ; on ne sçait encore quelle en doit être la suite. Le V. P. Luc 
Filliastre est aussi incommodé ; mais il n’y a pas de danger. Nous avons deux 
Freres Laics Novices, qui font assez bien: Pun est cousin de feu Monsieur Bazire ; 
ES Pautre est le fils de Maître George de la Coste de Beaupré. Tous nos chers & 
venerables Peres, 3 Frere Leonard, vous salüent avec affection. Il n’est rien 
arrivé ici de nouveau, qui merite d’être écrit; sinon la mort de Monsieur Filion, 
Prêtre, qui s’est noié dans le fleuve. Il est universellement regretté, comme un 
Missionnaire parfaitement accompli. Priez Dieu pour moi; offrez-luy tous les 
jours les interéts de nôtre pauvre Mission ; € soïez persuadé que je suis [304] avec 
affection, Votre tres-humble & tres-obeissant Serviteur en Jesus-Curist, Frere 
Valentin le Roux, Superieur indigne des Recollets de la nouvelle France. 


Il n’est pas croiable combien la lecture de cette Lettre me donna de con- 
solation. Penetré vivement de la volonté de Dieu, & la reconnoissant visible- 
ment dans celle de mon Superieur, je conçûs de nouvelles esperances pour la 
conversion de ces Peuples, & je pris resolution de me fixer dans cette Mission ; 
en attendant avec d’autant plus de patience les fruits qu’il plairoit au Seigneur 
d’y produire par sa grace & sa misericorde, que parmi le grand nombre de nos 
Sauvages, qui me pa- [305] roissoient insensibles & impenetrables aux veritez 
les plus communes du Christianisme, je voïois quelques Familles Gaspesiennes 
qui travailloient avec application à leur salut, prenoient plaisir 4 se faire instruire, 
assistoient avec devotion à la sainte Messe, & vivoient en assez bons Chrêtiens. 

La vie errante & vagabonde de ces Peuples étant incontestablement un des 
principaux obstacles à leur conversion, je sollicitai Monsieur Denys de Fronsac, 
de nous accorder une espace de terrein à Nipisiguit, propre à la culture de la 
terre ; afin de les rendre sedentaires, les habituer, & les humaniser parmi nous. 
Ce Seigneur, qui souhaitoit avec passion de voir le [306] Christianisme établi 
dans cette vaste étenduë de Païs qu’il possede, y donnoit les mains avec plaisir : 


DE LA GASPESIE 389 


il en avoit fait agréer la proposition, & former la resolution aux principaux de 
nos Sauvages ; mais la perte considerable qu’il fit de son vaisseau, qui perit à 
VIsle Percée, par une tempête la plus violente que l’on ait jamais vûé dans ces 
quartiers, jointe au retardement de deux navires, qui manquerent deux années 
consécutives à luy apporter, selon qu’ils s’y étoient obligez, tout ce qui luy 
étoit necessaire pour l'entretien de ses Habitations, rompit toutes les mesures 
que nous avions prises, non-seulement d’établir une Mission sedentaire à Nipi- 
siguit; mais encore au Cap Breton, où le [307] R. P. Valentin le Roux nôtre 
Superieur, devoit, selon le projet que nous avions fait, envoïer deux de nos 
Missionnaires. 

Ces fâcheux accidens ne me rebuterent pas cependant de continuer ma 
Mission, afin de conserver dans la pieté le petit troupeau de Chrêtiens, qui 
faisoient toute ma consolation, parmi une infinité de chagrins qui m’accabloient ; 
ne voïant d’un côté qu’une insensibilité surprenante des anciens, à recevoir le 
Christianisme ; & de l’autre, une attache & une opiniâtreté invincible dans 
ces Sauvages, à suivre & à croire les erreuts, les superstitions, & les traditions 
fabuleuses de leurs ancêtres, dont la plus extravagante est, à mon avis, celle 
[308] qui regarde l’immortalité de l’ame. 


CHAPITRE XII. 


De la croïance des Gaspesiens, touchant l’immortalité de l'Ame. 


EUX qui ont fait mourir dans leurs opinions erronées, l’ame avec 
le corps, comme un Epicure & un Sardanapale, étoient bien dignes 
de compassion ; puisqu’eux-mêmes vouloient cesser d’être hommes, 
pour devenir semblables aux bêtes : & il faut avotier que Pytagore 

he connoissoit gueres bien, tout sçavant qu’il étoit, l’excellence d’une ame 
raisonnable, lorsqu’il la logeoit aprés la mort, [309] par sa Metampsicose, dans 
le corps des animaux les plus vils & les plus immondes de la terre. Nos Gas- 
pesiens n’ont jamais suivi ni l’une, ni l’autre de ces deux opinions; quoique 
la pensée qu’ils ont euë autrefois, & que plusieurs ont encore aujourd’hui de 
Pimmortalité de ’Ame, ne soit pas moins ridicule que le sujet méme qui leur 
a persuadé que nos ames étoient immortelles : c’est pourquoy, tout abimez 
& ensevelis qu’ils ont été durant plusieurs siecles dans une profonde ignorance 
de nos divins Misteres, jamais ils n’ont connu quelle étoit la dignité, la grandeur 
& la sainteté de l’ame raisonnable, soit par rapport à son principe, soit par 
rapport à sa fin, [310] qui n’est autre que Dieu même; aussi ne faut-il pas 
s’étonner si l’erreur & l’imposture ont été les seuls fondemens de leur croïance 
à son égard, selon la tradition de leurs ancêtres, qui porte : Que l’un des plus 
considerables de la Nation tomba dangereusement malade ; & qu’aprés avoir 
perdu l’usage de tous les sens, dans les étranges convulsions de sa maladie, il 
revint à soi, & dit aux Sauvages qui luy demanderent où il avoit été si long-tems, 
Quw’il venoit du Pais des Ames, ot toutes celles des Gaspesiens qui mouroient 
se retiroient aprés la mort. Il ajoûta, Que par une faveur extraordinaire, qui 
n’avoit encore jamais été accordée à qui que ce soit, la Papkoot- [311] parout, 


390 NOUVELLE RELATION 


Gouverneur & Souverain de ce Pais, luy avoit donné la permission de retourner 
au monde, pour dire aux Gaspesiens des nouvelles du Pais des Ames, qui leur 
avoit été jusqu’alors inconnu, & leur presenter de sa part certains fruits, qu’il 
assûra être la nourriture de ces Âmes, qu’il alloit rejoindre pour toûjours. Il 
expira en effet, en achevant ces paroles : & cette imposture, qu’ils prirent pour 
une verité indubitable, fut plus que suffisante pour les persuader que les Ames, 
aprés la sortie de leurs corps, avoient un lieu où elles alloient demeurer. Il 
n’en falut pas davantage pour déterminer quelques-uns des plus hardis de nos 
Sauvages, d’y faire un voiage en corps & en ame [312] pendant leur vie ; attendu 
que ce Païs n’étoit éloigné & separé du leur, que par le trajet d’un étang de 
quarante à cinquante lieuës, qu’on traversoit facilement à gué. 

Il se presenta bien-tôt une occasion favorable de contenter leur curieuse 
resolution, rendant service à l’un de leurs amis, qui ne se pouvant consoler de 
la mort de son fils unique qu’il aimoit tendrement, les conjura tous, & les 
engagea par les presens ordinaires, à luy tenir compagnie dans le voïage qu’il 
avoit resolu de faire au Païs des Ames, pour en retirer son fils. Il n’eut pas 
beaucoup de peine à persuader ce voïage, à des gens qui ne demandoient pas 
mieux que de l’entreprendre. Ils se trouverent [313] aussi bien-tôt en état de 
partir, & de commencer cette course perilleuse, qui fait encore aujourd’hui 
l’étonnement de toute la Nation Gaspesienne, laquelle pour lors n’avoit jamais 
entendu parler d’une entreprise si extraordinaire. En effet, ces Voïageurs 
s'étant munis de tous les vivres qui leur étoient necessaires, armez de leurs 
arcs, fléches, carquois, casse-têtes, & de plusieurs perches de neuf à dix pieds 
de hauteur, se mirent à l’eau, & marcherent à grandes journées, avec beaucoup 
de peines & de fatigues. Le soir étant venu, ils piquerent dans le sable quelques- 
unes de leurs perches, pour en former une espece de brancart ou de cabanne, 
afin de s’y reposer durant la nuit; ce qu’ils [314] observerent toûjours dans la 
continuation de ce penible voïage, jusqu’à ce que plusieurs d’entr’eux étant 
morts de fatigues, les cinq ou six autres qui restoient encore en vie, enfin, 
arriverent heureusement au Pais des Ames, qu’ils cherchoient avec tant d’em- 
pressement. 

Comme nos Gaspesiens, aussi bien que tous les autres Sauvages de la 
Nouvelle France, ont crû jusqu’à present, qu’il y a un esprit particulier en 
chaque chose, même dans celles qui sont inanimées, qui suivent les défunts 
dans l’autre Monde ; afin de leur rendre autant de service aprés la mort, qu’ils 
en ont reçû pendant la vie: ils disent que nos Voïageurs furent également 
surpris & consolez, d’y voir [315] à leur arrivée une infinité d’esprits d’orignaux, 
de castors, de chiens, de canots, de raquettes, qui voltigeoient agreablement 
devant leurs yeux, & qui par je ne sçai quel langage inconnu, leur firent com- 
prendre qu’ils étoient tous au service de leurs peres; mais qu’un moment 
aprés ils penserent mourir de crainte & de fraieur, lorsqu’approchant d’une 
cabanne semblable à celles qu’ils avoient dans leur Pais, ils apperçûrent un 
homme, ou plûtôt un geant, armé d’une grosse massuë, de son arc, de ses fléches 
& de son carquois, qui leur parla en ces termes, avec des yeux étincelans de colere, 
& un ton de voix qui marquoit toute son indignation : Qui que vous soïez, dis- 
posez- [316] vous à mourir, puisque vous avez eu la temerité de passer le trajet, 
& de venir tout vivans dans le Pais des Morts; car je suis le Papxootparout, le 
Gardien, le Maitre, le Gouverneur & le Souverain de toutes les Ames. En 
effet, outré qu’il étoit jusqu’à la fureur, de l’attentat que nos Sauvages avoient 


DE LA GASPESIE 391 


commis, il les alloit assommer a grands coups de cette horrible massuë qu’il 
avoit en main, lorsque ce pauvre pere vivement penetré de douleur de la mort 
de son fils unique, le conjura plûtôt par ses larmes & par ses soûpirs, que par 
ses paroles, d’excuser la temerité de son entreprise, qui à la verité meritoit tous 
les châtimens de sa juste colere, s’il n’en vouloit adoucir la ri- [317] gueur, 
en consideration d’un pere qui ne se croïoit coupable, que parce qu'il avoit 
trop de tendresse & d’inclination pour son enfant. Décoches contre nous, si 
tu veux, toutes les fléches de ton carquois ; accable-moi, par la pesanteur de ta 
massuë, continua ce pere affligé, en luy presentant son estomac & sa tête, pour 
recevoir les coups de l’un & de l’autre, puisque tu es le maître absolu de ma 
vie & de ma mort : mais enfin, s’il te reste encore quelques sentimens d’humanité, 
de tendresse & de compassion pour les mortels, je te suplie d’agréer les presens 
que nous avons apportez du Païs des Vivans, & de nous recevoir au nombre de 
tes amis. Ces paroles si soûmises & si res- [318] pectueuses, toucherent de 
compassion le cœur de ce petit Pluton, lequel s’étant rendu luy-même sensible 
à la douleur de ce pere affligé, luy dit de prendre bon courage ; qu’il luy par- 
donnoit pour cette fois l’attentat qu’il venoit de commettre; & qu’enfin, pour 
le combler de graces & de consolation, il luy donneroit avant son départ l’ame 
de son fils: mais qu’en attendant cette faveur extraordinaire, il vouloit bien 
se divertir avec luy, & joiier une partie de Ledelstaganne ; c’est le jeu ordinaire 
de nos Gaspesiens. 

Ce discours obligeant dissipa entierement toutes les inquietudes & les appre- 
hensions de nos Voïageurs, qui mirent au jeu tout ce qu’ils avoient apporté de 
plus considerable [319] de la Gaspesie. Papxootparout mit pour son compte 
du bled d’Inde, du petun, & quelques fruits, qu’il assûroit être la nourriture de 
ces Ames. Ils joüerent avec beaucoup d’application, depuis le matin jusques 
au soir. Nos Voïageurs cependant demeurerent les victorieux ; ils gagnerent 
le bled d’Inde & le petun de Paprootparout, qui leur donna l’un & l’autre avec 
d’autant plus de plaisir, qu’il crut que ces hommes meritoient de vivre, qui 
avoient eu le bonheur de gagner tout ce que les Morts avoient de plus precieux 
& de plus rare dans le Païs des Ames. Il leur commanda de les planter dans la 
Gaspesie ; les assûrant que toute la Nation en recevroit un avantage incon- 
cevable : & [320] voila, disent nos Sauvages d’aujourd’hui, la maniere dont le 
bled d’Inde & le tabac sont venus dans leur Païs, selon la tradition de leurs 
ancêtres. 

Pendant que le pere se réjoüissoit de sa bonne fortune, voici que le fils arrive 
invisiblement dans la cabanne. On entendoit bien, à la verité, le chant de 
plusieurs esprits assez distinctement, & la réjoüissance qui se faisoit entre ces 
Ames ; mais ce n’étoit pas là ce que le pere demandoit : il souhaïtoit, suivant 
la promesse qu’on luy avoit faite, d’avoir l’Ame de son fils, qui demeura toûjours 
invisible ; mais qui devint dans un instant, grosse comme une noix, par le 
commandement de Papxootparout, qui la prit entre [321] ses mains, la 
serra bien étroitement dans un petit sac, & la donna à nôtre Sauvage, avec 
ordre de retourner incessamment dans son Païs; d’étendre immediatement 
aprés son arrivée, le cadavre de son fils au milieu d’une cabanne faite exprés ; 
d’y remettre cette ame dans son corps; & sur tout, de prendre garde qu’il n’y 
eût aucune ouverture, de crainte, luy dit-il, que l’ame n’en sorte, & ne retourne 
au Pais, qu’elle ne quittoit qu’avec des repugnances extrémes. 

Le pere reçut ce sac animé avec joie, & prit congé de ce Pluton Sauvage, 


392 NOUVELLE RELATION 


aprés avoir vû & éxaminé curieusement tout ce qu’il y avoit de plus considerable 
dans le Gouvernement de Papkootparout : [322] sçavoir le lieu tenebreux où 
couchoient les Ames méchantes, qui n’étoit couvert que de branches de sapin 
toutes seches & mal arrangées: celuy des bons Sauvages, n’avoit rien que de 
charmant & d’agreable, par une infinité de belles écorces qui ornoient le dehors 
& le dedans de leur cabanne, ot le Soleil venoit les consoler deux fois le jour, 
& renouvelloit les branches de sapin & de cedre, qui ne perdoient jamais leur 
verdure naturelle : enfin, une infinité d’esprit de chiens, de canots, de raquettes, 
d’arcs, de fléches, dont les Ames se servoient pour leur divertissement. 

Remarquez, s’il vous plaît, que depuis ce voïage imaginaire, ils n’ont pas 
crû seule- [323] ment que les Ames étoient immortelles ; mais ils se sont encore 
persuadez, par une étrange rêverie, que dans tout ce qui étoit à leur usage, 
comme canots, raquettes, arcs, fléches, & autres choses, il y avoit un esprit 
particulier, qui accompagnoit toûjours aprés la mort, celuy qui s’en étoit servi 
pendant la vie: & c’est justement pour ce sujet & par cette fole imagination, 
qu’ils enterrent avec les défunts tout ce qu’ils possedoient étant au monde, 
dans la pensée que l’esprit de chaque chose en particulier, leur rend les mêmes 
services dans le Pais des Ames, qu’ils faisoient lorsqu'ils étoient en vie. 

Nos Voiageurs cependant retournerent joieusement dans leur Pais, ou 
étant arrivez, [324] ils firent à toute la Nation Gaspesienne un ample recit des 
merveilles qu’ils avoient vûës dans le Païs des Ames, & commanderent 4 tous 
les Sauvages, de la part de Papkootparout, de planter incessamment le bled 
d’Inde & le petun qu’ils avoient gagné en joüant avec luy à Leldestaganne. 
Les ordres qu’on leur signifioit de la part du Gouverneur des Ames, furent 
éxecutez fidelement ; & ils cultiverent avec succez le bled d’Inde & le petun 
Vespace de plusieurs années: mais la negligence de leurs ancétres, disent-ils, 
les privent aujourd’hui de toutes ces commoditez, si utiles & si necessaires a 
toute la Nation. 

On ne sçauroit exprimer quel fut l’étonnement & la [325] joie de ces 
Peuples, quand ils apprirent toutes ces merveilleuses réveries, & que le pere 
avoit apporté dans un sac l’Ame de son fils, qui les instruiroit de toutes choses, 
dés le moment qu’elle seroit rentrée dans son corps. L’impatience extréme 
où étoient ces Gaspesiens, d’apprendre des nouvelles de l’autre Monde, les 
obligea de faire promtement une cabanne, de la même maniere que le Pap- 
Kootparout l’avoit ordonné. Leurs esperances cependant furent vaines & 
inutiles ; car le pere aïant confié son sac aux soins d’une Sauvagesse, afin d’assister 
& danser plus librement aux festins publics qui se faisoient pour son heureux 
retour ; cette femme eut la curiosité de l’ouvrir, & l’Ame en sortit aussi- [326] 
tôt, & retourna d’où elle étoit venuë. Le pere en aïant appris la nouvelle, en 
mourut de chagrin, & suivit son fils au Païs des Ames, au grand regret de toute 
la Nation Gaspesienne : & voila justement ce qui fait croire à nos Sauvages 
Vimmortalité des Ames. 

De ces faux principes, appuiez sur une tradition aussi fabuleuse que celle-ci, 
ils ont tiré ces consequences extravagantes; Que toutes les choses étoient 
animées, & que les ames n’étoient rien autre chose, que l’ame de ce qui étoit 
animé: Que l’ame raisonnable étoit une image sombre & noire de l’homme 
même : Qu’elle avoit des pieds, des mains, une bouche, une tête, & toutes les 
autres parties du [327] corps humain : Qu’elle avoit encore la même necessité 
de boire, de manger, de se vêtir, de chasser & pêcher, que lorsqu'elle étoit dans 


DE LA GASPESIE 393 


le corps; d’où vient que dans leurs regals & festins ils servoient toûjours la 
portion de ces ames, qui se promenoient, disoient-ils, aux environs des cabannes 
de leurs parens & de leurs amis. Qu’elles alloient à la chasse des ames de castors 
& d’orignaux, avec les ames de leurs raquettes, de leurs arcs, & de leurs fléches. 
Que les méchans, à leur arrivée au Païs des Ames, dansoient & voltigeoient avec 
une grande violence ; ne mangeant que de l’écorce de bois pourri, en punition 
de leur crime, jusqu’à un certain nombre d’années marqué par le Papxoot- 
[228] parou. Que les bons, au contraire, vivoient dans un lieu separé du bruit 
des méchans, dans un grand repos; mangeant quand il leur plaisoit, & se 
divertissant à la chasse des castors & des orignaux, dont les esprits se laissoient 
prendre facilement : & voila le sujet pour lequel nos Gaspesiens ont toûjours 
observé inviolablement la coûtume d’enterrer avec les défunts, tout ce qui 
étoit à leur usage durant la vie, 


[329] CHAPITRE XIII. 
Des Superstitions des Gaspesiens. 


L semble que les Peuples qui ont été les plus adonnez à l’Idolatrie, ont 
aussi été les plus superstitieux : d’où vient que les Romains, pour se dis- 
tinguer de toutes les Nations du Monde par la Religion, aussi-bien que par 
leurs armes victorieuses & triomphantes, ont voulu retenir chez eux les 

Idoles de tous les Peuples qu’ils avoient vaincus, ausquelles ils rendoient leurs 
hommages & leurs adorations. Leur aveuglement même est parvenu jusqu’à 
ce point de superstition, que les [330] vaines observations de leurs Devins, sur 
le vol & sur le manger des oiseaux, ou dans les entrailles des animaux, gou- 
vernoient entierement l’Empire Romain; ne leur étant pas permis d’entre- 
prendre, ou d’abandonner une affaire de consequence, sans consulter ces sortes 
d’Oracles, d’Augures & d’Haruspices, qui étoient à leur égard les Interpretes 
de la volonté des Dieux: maximes criminelles, & observations ridicules, qui 
sont encore aujourd’hui en vigueur chez nos Gaspesiens, qui observent, dans 
les fourberies de leurs Jongleurs, tout ce que les Romains reconnoissoient autre- 
fois par le ministere de leurs Devins, de leurs vaines observations, & de leurs 
superstitions. | 

En effet, ils se persuadent [331] que certains Sauvages d’entre eux ont com- 
munication avec le Demon, duquel ils esperent d’apprendre ce qu’ils desirent, 
ou obtenir ce qu’ils demandent. Ils croïent que dans toutes leurs maladies il 
y a un Demon, ou un ver dans la partie affligée, que ces Barbares que nous 
appellons Jongleurs, ont le pouvoir de faire sortir, & de rendre la santé aux 
malades, par leurs insufflations, leurs chants, & les postures horribles qu’ils font 
dans leurs cabannes. Ils s’imaginent encore que leurs Jongleurs peuvent 
sçavoir de leur Demon, qu’ils appellent Oüahich, les meilleurs endroits de la 
chasse ; & que tous les songes de ces Imposteurs sont autant de revelations & 
de propheties, dont le succez [332] & l’évenement leur semble infaillible. 
Cette credulité d’un Peuple qui est extrémement susceptible de ces sotises, 
& de toutes sortes d’erreurs, a mis tellement ces Jongleurs en credit, que ces 
maîtres Fourbes passent pour les plus considerables de la Nation : en un mot, 


394 NOUVELLE RELATION 


celuy-là est le plus estimé, qui paroît avoir POüahich le plus fort; & qui se 
fait distinguer entre les autres, par des effets les plus extraordinaires & les plus 
infaillibles. ; 4 

Plusieurs de nos François ont crû un peu trop facilement, que ces Jongleries 
métoient que des bagatelles, & un jeu d'enfant: qu’il n’étoit rien moins que 
ce qu’on disoit, de l’invocation qu’ils faisoient du Demon dans ces Jongle- 
[333] ries superstitieuses & criminelles. Je veux bien croire que dans quelques- 
unes, il n’y a bien souvent que de vaines observations ; & c’est aussi, peut-être, 
ce qui a donné lieu à quelques-uns d’inferer trop legerement de ces Jongleries 
particulieres & tout-à-fait pueriles, que les autres n’avoient rien de diabolique. 
Il est vrai que je n’y ai pû découvrir aucun pacte explicite, ou implicite, entre 
les Jongleurs & le Demon; mais je ne puis me persuader aussi, que le Diable 
ne domine dans leurs tromperies, & les impostures dont il se sert pour amuser 
ces Peuples, & les éloigner d’autant plus de la connoissance du vrai Dieu: car 
enfin il est difficile de croire qu’un Jongleur fasse naturelle- [334] ment paroître 
les arbres tout en feu, qui brûlent visiblement sans se consumer ; & donne le 
coup de la mort à des Sauvages, fussent-ils éloignez de quarante à cinquante 
lieuës, lorsqu'il enfonce son coûteau ou son épée dans la terre, & qu’il en tire 
l’un ou l’autre tout plein de sang, disant qu’un tel est mort, qui effectivement 
meurt & expire, dans le même moment qu’il prononce la sentence de mort 
contre luy. 

Il n’est pas encore naturel, qu’avec le petit arc dont ils se servent, & qu’un 
Jongleur me donna avec son sac de Jonglerie, ils blessent & tuent quelquefois 
les enfans dans le sein de leur mere, quand ils décochent leurs fléches dessus la 
simple figure de ces pe- [335] tit innocens, qu’ils craïonnent & marquent tout 
exprés, du mieux qu’ils peuvent, sur quelque morceau de peau de castor, ou 
d’orignac. 

Jugez de-là, s’il ne faut pas avoüer qu’il y a dans ces effets extraordinaires, 
quelque chose de diabolique. Nos Gaspesiens cependant, font tant d’estime 
de leurs Jongleurs, qu’ils recherchent dans leurs incommoditez, ceux qui 
passent pour les plus fameux, (ainsi que parmi nous, les malades ont recours 
dans leurs maux, aux plus habiles Medecins :) ils se persuadent même que ces 
Fourbes peuvent sûrement guerir leurs maladies, & les soulager, en chassant 
le Demon, ou le ver qu’ils croient être renfermé dans la partie affligée. Ils 
appellent [336] & font entrer le Jongleur dans la cabanne du malade : ce Bou- 
hinne s’informe éxactement de son mal; & aprés luy avoir fait esperer qu’il 
luy donnera guerison, il demande & reçoit le present qu’il souhaite, étant en 
droit de choisir ce qu’il y a de plus considerable, de plus beau & de meilleur 
dans la cabanne du malade qui luy demande la guerison, le conjurant de la 
luy obtenir de son Ouhaiche, en luy disant ces paroles, Emkadoui ; comme s’il 
disoit, Préte-moi ton Demon. Le Jongleur luy répond: Si tu veux que je 
Vemploie a ton service, il faut que tu me fasse tels & tels presens. Il ne les a 
pas plûtôt reçûs, qu’il chante quelque chanson à la loüange du Oüahiche, & 
fait des [337] postures & des contorsions épouventables : il s'approche & se 
recule du malade; il souffle par plusieurs reprises sur la partie infirme; il 
plante & fiche un baton bien avant dans la terre; il y attache une corde, dans 
laquelle il passe la tête, comme s’il se vouloit étrangler : c’est-là où il fait des 
invocations, jusqu’à se mettre tout en eau & en écume; faisant croire, par 
toutes ces infames & violentes contorsions, que le Diable est enfin venu, & qu’il 


DE LA GASPESIE 395 


le tient même attaché, pour qu’il luy accorde la santé du malade. Il appelle 
ensuite & fait entrer les Sauvages dans la cabanne, ausquels il montre la corde, 
qui, dit-il, tient le Demon enchaîné : il en coupe un morceau, & le laisse ainsi 
échaper ; pro- [338] mettant que le malade guerira infailliblement. Un chacun 
luy en témoigne sa reconnoissance, par les presens ordinaires, & chantent tous 
d’un commun accord, quelque chanson à la loüange du Demon; afin de le 
rendre propice & favorable, non-seulement au malade, mais encore à la Nation 
Gaspesienne. 

Tout ce qui me paroit encore de plus étrange dans l’aveuglement surprenant 
. de ces Peuples touchant leur Jonglerie, c’est qu’ils jonglent même les corps 
morts, comme s'ils étoient vivans; tant ils sont persuadez que le Demon, ou 
le ver, qu’ils appellent du nom de Tchougis, ou de Malefice, est la cause de 
toutes leurs maladies, & qu’il reste encore quelque-tems dans le [339] corps du 
malade aprés sa mort: ce qu’ils firent assez connoître, par une action qui vous 
paroîtra sans doute bien cruelle, & tout-à-fait inhumaine. 

Un des plus considerables de nos Gaspesiens étant tombé dangereusement 
malade, fit appeller le Bouhinne le plus expert, pour luy rendre la santé : mais 
aïant expiré au milieu du tintamare des invocations & des insufflations de ce 
Jongleur, toute la parenté s’assembla, pour assister aux funerailles de celuy 
qui avoit toûjours fait l’honneur de leur famille ; ils pleurerent ensemble son 
malheur, & firent les festins ordinaires des morts. 

Le plus proche parent fit l’oraison funebre, avec un [340] long discours 
sur actions les plus glorieuses, que le défunt avoit faites en faveur de la Nation : 
il la commença d’un ton de voix fort moderé; mais enfin, outré qu’il étoit, 
par le déplaisir sensible qu’il ressentoit de la mort de son ami, il parut tout à 
coup plein de rage & de fureur, & dit à ceux qui l’accompagnoient: Qu’il 
faloit necessairement se vanger du Demon, qui non content d’avoir fait mourir 
le plus brave & le plus genereux de tous les Gaspesiens, étoit encore resté dans 
le cœur du défunt, pour l’empêcher de revivre, & le tourmenter aprés sa mort, 
comme il l’avoit persecuté cruellement durant sa vie. On le crut; & tous 
d’un commun consentement, descendirent le cadavre, [341] qui étoit exposé 
sur une espece d’échafaut qu’ils avoient fait dans la cabanne. Ils luy ouvrirent 
le ventre : & le Jongleur prenant le cœur entre ses mains, aprés l’avoir arraché, 
par un mouvement d’indignation contre le Tchougis, le découpa en autant de 
morceaux qu’ils étoient de personnes ; & les aïant distribuez à toute l’assemblée, 
ils en mangerent chacun leur part, pour, disoient-ils, se vanger du Demon, 
qui étoit dans le cœur du défunt. Cette action, barbare & cruelle, ne s’est 
faite qu’à quatre à cinq lieuës de l’endroit oti j’étois; & je l’ai sçû de ceux- 
mêmes qui avoient assisté à cet horrible festin, où la colere & la rage firent 
paroître tout ce [342] qu’on se peut imaginer de plus inhumain. 

Nos Gaspesiens sont tellement adonnez à leur Jonglerie, qu’on peut dire 
que ce vice leur est naturel & hereditaire : c’est pourquoy, quand on les en veut 
tirer, ce qui ne se fait qu’avec bien de la peine, ils ont assez de malice pour 
dire aux Missionnaires, Qu’ils n’ont pas d’esprit, de trouver mauvais de ce 
qu’ils soufflent leurs malades; puisqu'ils font eux-mêmes des insufllations, 
lorsqu'ils baptisent les enfans: & que si les Patriarches ont Vintention de 
chasser le Diable ou le peché, par leurs souffles & par leurs exorcismes ; les 
Sauvages n’ont point aussi d’autre dessein, que de chasser le ver, ou le Demon, 
du corps du malade. 


396 NOUVELLE RELATION 


[343] Vous remarquerez que chaque Jongler a son sac particulier, où sont 
toutes les piéces dont il se sert dans sa Jonglerie : les uns ont la figure de leur 
Oüahich, sous la forme d’un Quinquajou; les autres, sous celle de quelque 
monstre, ou d’un homme sans tête. Il m'est tombé entre les mains un de ces 
sacs, qu’un Jongleur me donna, pour me témoigner qu’il vouloit prier Dieu; 
& se faire instruire. Je le reçûs avec d’autant plus de joie, qu’il y avoit déja 
long-tems que je souhaitois de gagner cette ame à Dieu, en luy faisant quitter 
ses erreurs, pour suivre les veritez du Christianisme. Il me le remit entre les 
mains, avec resolution de se faire Chrétien, en me donnant avis, que [344] si 
je le conservois pour l’envoier en France, & luy faire changer de Pais, je ne 
vivrois pas davantage que quatre à cinq jours; & que si je le jettois au feu, je 
devois apprehender que la maison ne fût aussi-tôt reduite en cendres, à cause 
des effets extraordinaires que son Oüahich causeroit, lorsqu'il se verroit dans 
les flames. 

Il est bon de ménager les Sauvages, & de differer quelquefois à les instruire, 
jusqu’à ce qu’ils aïent levé l’obstacle qui s’oppose à leur conversion : cela leur 
donne plus d’estime & de veneration pour le Christianisme, qu’ils croient alors 
ne pouvoir compatir avec leurs erreurs. Celuy-ci m’avoit témoigné plusieurs 
fois, qu’il vouloit se faire baptiser ; [345] afin d’entrer avec les autres dans la 
cabanne de Jesus, pour prier le Dieu du Soleil. Je sçavois cependant qu’il 
étoit un des plus fameux Jongleurs de toute la Nation; ce qui m’obligeoit de 
le traiter assez indifferemment, toutes les fois qu’il me parloit de se faire in- 
struire. Il connut bien que toutes ses poursuites seroient inutiles, s’il ne 
changeoit pas de conduite, & s’il ne renonçoit pour jamais à son Oüahich. Je 
luy dis que toutes les promesses qu’il m’avoit faites jusqu’alors, avoient été sans 
effet ; & que si son cœur parloit tout de bon, il m’en devoit donner des marques 
plus sinceres, que par le passé. Ah! me dit-il; tu crois donc que je te veux 
tromper toûjours, comme j’ai fait jus- [346] qu’à present? Tu te trompes 
toi-même: & pour te persuader efficacement que je suis dans une veritable 
disposition de quitter mes erreurs, & de venir a la Priere; tiens, me dit-il, 
voila mon sac de Jonglerie que je remets entre tes mains, pour ne m’en plus 
jamais servir. 

Voici l'inventaire de ce que je trouvai dans ce petit sac à Diable, qui étoit 
fait de la peau d’une tête entiere d’orignac, à la reserve des oreilles, qui en 
étoient ôtées. 

Il y avoit premierement le Oüahich de ce Jongleur, qui étoit une pierre de 
la grosseur d’une noix, envelopée dans une boéte qu’il appelloit la maison de son 
Demon. Un morceau d’écorce, sur laquelle étoit une figure assez hi- [347] 
deuse, faite avec de la pourcelaine noire & blanche, qui representoit quelque 
monstre, qu’on ne put pas bien distinguer, n’étant ni la representation d’un 
homme, ni d’aucun animal; mais la forme d’un petit Quinquajou, qui étoit 
ornée de rassade noire & blanche: celuy-la, disent les Jongleurs, est le maitre 
Diable, ou Oüahich. Il y avoit de plus, un petit arc d’un pied de longueur, 
avec une corde de deux brasses, entrelassée de porc-épi : c’est de cet arc fatal 
dont ils se servent, pour faire mourir les petits enfans dans le sein de leur mere. 
Je me suis servi de la corde, pour en faire une ligne à pêcher la truite; & jen 
ai pris plus de deux cens, en trois heures de tems, dans un lieu ot elles [348] 
étoient en tres-grande abondante. Cela surprit un peu nos Sauvages, de voir 
que je faisois si peu d’état d’une chose que leurs Jongleurs estiment tant. 


DE LA GASPESIE 397 


Outre cela, ce sac contenoit encore un morceau d’écorce, envelopé d’une 
peau delicate & bien mince, où étoient representez des petits enfans, des oiseaux, 
des ours, des castors & des orignaux; sur lesquels le Jongleur darde sa fléche 
a sa volonté, avec son petit arc, pour faire mourir des enfans, ou quelque autre 
chose, dont la figure est representée sur ce morceau d’écorce. Enfin, j’y 
trouvai un bâton d’un grand pied de long, garni de porc-épi blanc & rouge, 
au bout duquel étoient attachées plusieurs courroies [349] de la longueur d’un 
demipied, & deux douzaines d’ergots d’orignac : c’est avec ce bâton qu’il fait 
un bruit de Demon, se servant de ses ergots comme de sonnettes, qui semblent 
plus propres à divertir les petis enfans, qu’à jongler. En un mot, la derniere 
piece du sac fut un oiseau de bois, qu’ils portent avec eux lorsqu'ils vont à 
la chasse, dans la pensée qu’il leur fera tuer du gibier en abondance. 

Nôtre Sauvage Jongleur étoit cependant fort en peine, de ce qu’étoit devenu 
son sac, & quel usage j’en avois fait : il s’en voulut éclaircir, cinq à six semaines 
aprés me lavoir donné; & vint pour ce sujet a la cabanne ou j’étois. Je luy 
dis, qu’il ne faloit plus [350] songer à son sac, qui avoit merité d’être jetté au 
feu, puisque c’étoit le partage du Diable, qui y avoit demeuré si long-tems ; 
& qu’il ne m'étoit arrivé aucun mal, non plus qu’à la maison, quoiqu’en me le 
donnant il m’eût menacé de quelque malheur. Se persuadant d’abord que je 
Pavois brûlé, Helas! dit-il, je m’en suis bien apperçü, dans les voïages que 
jai fait depuis que je te l’ai donné: car j’ai eu faim, & j'ai été fatigué; ce 
qui ne m’arrivoit jamais, quand j’avois mon sac. Je prenois mon Diable entre 
mes mains, & le pressois fortement contre mon estomac : Hé quoy donc, luy 
disois-je, souffriras-tu que je sois accablé de faim & de fatigue, toi qui ne m’as 
jamais delaissé ? Fais, [351] de grace, que j’aie dequoy manger: donnes-moi 
quelque soulagement dans les fatigues & dans la necessité qui m’accablent. 
Il écoutoit ma priere, & éxauçoit promtement mes vœux. Je luy fis cependant 
avoüer, en luy montrant son Oüahich, que c’étoit encore un reste de ses rêveries, 
& de ses sotes imaginations; luy marquant plusieurs rencontres où il avoit 
beaucoup souffert, sans qu’il eût reçû aucun secours du Demon, dont la vertu 
étoit si foible, qu’il n’avoit pas le pouvoir de s’aider, ni de se soulager luy-même 
dans l’excez de ses souffrances. 

Quelques-uns de ces Jongleurs se mêlent aussi de prédire les choses futures ; 
ensorte que si leurs prédictions [352] se trouvent veritables, comme il arrive 
quelquefois par hazard, les voila en credit & en reputation: si au contraire 
elles se trouvent fausses, comme c’est l’ordinaire, ils en sont quittes pour dire 
que leur Demon est fâché contre toute la Nation. C’est une chose assez 
surprenante, que cette impertinente excuse, bien loin de les décrediter, leur 
procure des presens considerables qu’on leur fait, pour appaiser la colere de 
ce Demon, qui par le ministere de ces Jongleurs, abuse ces Peuples, & se joüe 
aisément de leur simplicité. 

Nos pauvres Gaspesiens étoient autrefois tourmentez du Diable, qui souvent 
les batoit tres cruellement, & même les épouventoit par des [353] spectres 
hideux, & des phantômes horribles ; jusques-là, qu’on a vû autrefois d’effroïables 
carcasses tomber au milieu de leurs cabannes, lesquelles causoient tant de 
terreur aux Sauvages, que quelquefois ils en tomboïent morts sur la place. 

Comme dans les occasions qui font perdre courage aux plus hardis, il se 
rencontre toûjours quelque déterminé, il arriva en celle-ci, qu’un de nos 
Sauvages, se proposa de vanger luy seul les outrages que les Demons faisoient 


398 NOUVELLE RELATION 


à toutes les cabannes de la Nation; il prit en effet le dessein de tuer celuy qui 
les avoit tourmenté cruellement depuis si long-tems: ïil assûra même aux 
Sauvages, qu’il ne doutoit aucunement du suc- [3 54] cez de son entreprise, & 
qu’ils n’avoient qu’à se réjoüir ; parce, disoit-il, qu’il sçavoit précisément Ven- 
droit par lequel il venoit chez eux: c’étoit un petit ruisseau entre deux rochers, 
où il ne manqua pas de se camper avec son fuzil entre ses bras. Un de nos 
François l’aïant trouvé en cette posture, luy demanda ce qu’il faisoit, & qui il 
attendoit. Qui j’attens? répondit-il fierement; j’attens le Diable pour le 
tuer, luy arrracher le cœur du ventre, & ensuite luy enlever la chevelure, en 
punition & en vengeance des outrages & des insultes qu’il nous a faits jusqu’à 
present : il y a trop long-tems qu’il nous tourmente ; & c’est aujourd’hui que 
je veux délivrer tous les Gaspesiens de [355] ces malheurs: qu’il vienne, qu’il 
paroisse, je l’attens de pied ferme. 

Il est constant que depuis qu’ils son instruits de nos sacrez Misteres, par- 
ticulierement ceux que nous avons baptisez, ne sont plus batus, ni tourmentez 
du Demon, de la maniere qu’ils l’étoient auparavant qu’ils eussent reçû le 
premier & le plus necessaire de nos Sacremens. ‘ 

Si ces Peuples, comme vous venez de voir, sont si arrétez 4 leurs Jongleries, 
ils n’observent pas avec moins d’éxactitude certaines coûtumes ridicules & 
superstitieuses ; sçavoir, que les jeunes gens non mariez ne mangent jamais 
de porc-épi rôti, se persuadant qu’ils ne marcheroient non plus que cet animal, 
qui [356] va tres-lentement : il leur est cependant permis de le manger boüilli, 
sans aucun risque. 

Les petits fans d’ours, d’orignac, de loutres, de castors, & de porc-épis qui 
sont encore dans le ventre de leur mere, est le morceau délicat qui est reservé 
pour les anciens, n’étant pas permis aux jeunes gens d’y goûter; parce qu'ils 
auroient, disent-ils, bien mal aux pieds quand ils iroient a la chasse. Parce 
même raisonnement, il leur est aussi défendu de manger des entrailles de l’ours, 
de la moëlle, ou de quelques autres morceaux delicats, ces mets frians étant 
uniquement reservez pour les vieillards. 

Les os du castor ne se donnent pas aux chiens, d’autant [357] qu’ils perdroient, 
selon leur opinion le sentiment de la chasse du castor. On ne les jette point non 
plus dans les rivieres, par ce que les Sauvages apprehendent que l'esprit des 
os de cet animal n’en portent bien-tôt la nouvelle aux autes castors, qui deser- 
teroient le Païs, pour éviter le même malheur. 

Ils ne brûlent jamais encore les os du faon de l’orignac, ni la carcasse des 
martes: & ils se donnent bien de garde aussi de les donner aux chiens; parce 
qu’ils ne pourroient plus prendre aucuns de ces animaux à la chasse, si les esprits 
des martes & des faons d’orignac disoient à leurs semblables, le mauvais traite- 
ment qu’ils auroient reçû chez les Sauvages. 

[358] S’ils prennent quelques castors à la trappe, la coûtume veut qu’il soit 
ouvert en public, & que la viande demeure deux jours sur les perches à la fumée, 
avant que de la mettre à la chaudiere. Il faut bien prendre garde que le 
boüillon ne tombe dans le feu, & conserver les os soigneusemen ; parce que le 
contraire est un presage de malheur, ou de quelque infortune sur toute la Nation. 

Un Chef de la Nation jetta une fois en ma presence, le pied d’un hibou dans 
la chaudiere d’un festin solemnel, comme un pronostic assûré que son fils, 
qui l’avoit tué à l’âge de cinq ans, seroit un jour un grand chasseur, & le plus 
vaillant guerrier du Monde, 


DE LA GASPESIE 399 


[359] Les jeunes gens ne mangent jamais le cœur de Vours, crainte de souffler 
en marchant, & de manquer de courage dans les occasions. Si quelque chasseur 
a tué, ou pris à la trape quelqu'un de ces animaux, on se donne bien de garde 
de le faire entrer par la porte ordinaire de la cabanne : la coûtume veut, & la 
superstition ordonne, d’y faire une ouverture nouvelle, à droite ou à gauche ; 
parce que, disent-ils, les Sauvagesses ne meritent pas de passer par où l’ours 
entre dans la cabanne. Les filles & les femmes qui n’ont pas encore eu d’enfans, 
en sortent au moment que l’ours en approche ; & elles n’y reviennent jamais, 
qu’il ne soit tout mangé. 

Nos Gaspesiens sont encore teliement credules aux rêves, [360] qu’ils donnent 
facilement dans tout ce que l'imagination, ou le Demon leur represente en dor- 
mant; & c’est assez que de rêver chez eux, pour leur faire prendre des resolu- 
tions sur un même sujet, toutes contraires à celles qu’ils auront prises auparavant. 

Ce qui est de plus surprenant, c’est qu’ils observent encore aujourd’hui 
certaines ceremonies dont ils ne connoissent point Porigine, ni ne donnent 
d’autres raisons, sinon que leurs ancêtres ont toûjours pratiqué la même chose. 
La premiere, c’est que les filles & les femmes se reputent immondes, lorsqu’elles 
souffrent les incommoditez ordinaires à leur sexe: & alors il ne leur est pas 
permis de manger avec les autres : mais il faut qu’elles [361] aïens leur chaudiere 
à part, & qu’elles vivent en leur particulier. Il n’est pas permis aux filles, pen- 
dant ce tems-là, de manger du castor, & celles qui en mangent sont reputées 
méchantes ; se persuadant que le castor, disent-ils, qui a de l’esprit, ne se laisse- 
roit plus prendre par les Sauvages, aprés avoir été mangé par leurs filles im- 
mondes. Les veuves ne mangent jamais de ce qui a été tué par les jeunes gens ; 
il faut que ce soit un homme marié, un vieillard, ou un considerable de la 
Nation, qui chasse ou pêche pour leur nourriture. Elles observent si scrupu- 
leusement cette coûtume superstitieuse, qu’elles racontent encore aujourd’hui 
avec admiration, qu’une veuve Gaspe- [362] sienne se laissa mourir de faim, 
plâtôt que de manger de l’orignac ou du castor, qui étoient dans sa cabanne 
jusqu’à Pabondance; parce qu’ils avoient été tuez par des jeunes gens, & 
qwil n’étoit pas permis aux veuves d’en manger. 

J'en ai va une, dans les hivernemens que j’ai fait dans les bois avec nos 
Sauvages, qui demeura trois jours sans manger, avec autant de joie, que si elle 
eût fait la meilleure chere du monde. Je luy dis tout ce qu’il me fut possible, 
pour luy faire rompre son Caréme ; c’est ainsi qu’ils appellent cette abstinence : 
mais ce fut en vain; & je ne pûs jamais la resoudre à manger, quoiqu'il y eût 
de la viande abondamment dans sa caban- [363] ne : ses enfans mêmes murmu- 
murerent contre moi, de ce que je sollicitois leur mere à quitter la coûtume 
de leurs ancêtres ; me disant que les Sauvages avoient leur maniere de vivre; 
aussi-bien que les François ; que nous pouvions suivre nos maximes, sans vouloir 
les obliger à quitter les leurs. Cette femme me pria d’accompagner les Sauvages 
à la chasse du castor, à laquelle ils m’avoient invité, pour m’en donner le diver- 
tissement : & elle m’assûra qu’elle mangeroit volontiers de celuy que je tuérois, 
si j’avois assez d’adresse den surprendre quelqu’un ; parce qu’elle me consideroit 
comme leur pere, & comme un de leurs anciens. Je fus assez heureux d’en 
trouver deux, ausquels je cassai la [364] tête; je les portai à sa cabanne, & je 
luy en fis present : elle les mangea tous les deux en son particulier, ne luy étant 
pas permis de manger avec les autres, ni aux autres de manger avec elle. Elles 
observent la même chose aprés leurs couches, pendant un mois ou deux, suivant 


400 NOUVELLE RELATION 


leur volonté: & pendant tout ce tems-là, c’est une espece d’infamie, & un 
méchant presage, si elles boivent dans la chaudiere, ou dans le plat d’écorce 
qui sont à leur usage, parce que, disent ces Barbares, on ne peut faire bonne 
chasse d’orignac, ni de castor, quand cela arrive. 

Comme nos Sauvages s’apperçoivent qu’on rend beaucoup d’honneur aux 
Missionnaires, & qu’eux-mêmes les [365] ont qualifié, par respect & par rever- 
ence, du titre de Patriarche ; on a souvent vû de ces Barbares s’ingerer & affecter 
l’éxercice & les fonctions de Missionnaire, jusqu’à confesser comme nous, ceux 
de leur Nation. Quand donc ces sortes de gens veulent autoriser ce qu’ils 
disent, & s’ériger en Patriarches, il font acroire 4 nos Gaspesiens, qu’ils ont 
reçû quelque don particulier du Ciel: comme celuy de Kenibexi disoit, qu’il 
avoit reçû une image du Ciel; ce n’étoit cependant qu’un portrait qu’on luy 
avoit donné, lorsqu’il étoit à la traite chez nos François. 

Ce qui est surprenant, c’est que cette ambition de faire le Patriarche, ne 
domine pas seulement sur les hommes ; les [366] femmes mêmes s’en mêlent, 
lesquelles en usurpant la qualité & le nom de Religieuses, disent quelques prieres 
à leur mode, & affectent une maniere de vivre plus retenuë que celle du commun 
des Sauvages, qui se laissant ébloüir à l’éclat d’une fausse & ridicule devotion, les 
considerent comme des femmes extraordinaires, qu’ils croient converser, parler 
familierement, & communiquer avec le Soleil, qu’ils ont adoré tous comme 
leur Divinité. Nous en avions une fameuse il n’y a pas long-tems, qui par ses 
superstitions extravagantes, entretenoit celles de ces pauvres Sauvages. J’avois 
un desir extréme de la voir; mais elle mourut dans les bois, sans le baptéme, 
que j’avois dessein de [367] luy donner, si j’eusse été assez heureux de l’en rendre 
capable. Cette vieille, qui comptoit plus de cent quatorze ans depuis sa 
naissance, avoit, pour toutes ses devotions ridicules & supertitieuses, quelques 
grains de jaie, qui étoient les restes d’un chapelet défilé, qu’elle conservoit 
precieusement, ne les donnant qu’à ceux qui étoient de ses amis; en leur 
protestant cependant, que le don qu’elle leur faisoit étoit venu originairement 
du Ciel, qui luy continuoit toûjours cette même faveur, autant de fois que 
pour adorer le Soleil, elle sortoit de sa cabanne, & luy rendoït ses hommages & 
ses adorations: Je n’ai pour lors, leur disoit-elle, qu’à presenter ma main & 
l'ouvrir, pour faire tomber du [368] Ciel ces grains misterieux, qui ont la vertu 
& la proprieté non-seulement de soulager les Sauvages dans leurs maladies & 
dans toutes leurs necessitez les plus pressantes; mais encore de les preserver 
de la surprise, de la persecution, & de la fureur de leurs ennemis. On peut 
dire veritablement, que si quelqu’un de ce Peuple s’adonnoit tout de bon à 
la vertu, & qu’il prit soin d’instruire les autres, il feroit des prodiges parmi eux ; 
puisqu'ils croiroient aisément tout ce que diroit un homme de leur Nation. 
Cette fourberie donc, que ces grains de chapelet venoient du Ciel, étoit si bien 
reçûé de ceux qui se glorifioient d’en avoir quelques-uns, qu’ils les conservoient 
comme tout ce qu’ils avoient de plus cher au mon- [369] de; & c’étoit les 
aigrir 4 outrance, que de les contredire dans une sotise, qui dans leur estime 
passoit pour quelque chose de divin & de sacré. Tel étoit le sentiment d’une 
Sauvagesse qui m’avoit demandé le Baptème, & que j’instruisois pour ce sujet 
pendant mon hivernement de Nipisiguit: elle avoit, comme parente de cette 
Patriarche, cinq grains de chapelet misterieux, qu’elle tenoit envelopez avec 
beaucoup de soin ; elle me les montra, en me voulant persuader que c’étoit un 
present que le Ciel avoit fait à cette pretenduë Religieuse. Ce trait de super- 


DE LA GASPESIE | 401 


stition, que j’apperçüûs dans cette Catechumene, me fit prendre la resolution 
de differer son Baptême, luy faisant connoître [370] l’obstacle qu’elle y appor- 
toit, par la fausse & fole creance qu’elle avoit touchant ces grains de chapelet, 
qui venoient de France; & que si elle avoit autant d’empressement pour le 
Baptème, qu’elle l’avoit témoigné, elle ne m’en pouvoit donner de preuves 
plus évidentes, qu’en me les remettant entre les mains. Elle fut assez surprise 
de ce discours ; elle me promit neanmoins, quoique d’une maniere assez foible, 
qu’elle feroit tout ce que je souhaiterois en ce rencontre. Elle me les fit voir ; 
& les aiant entre mes mains, j’admirai la simplicité de cette creature. J’en 
cachai un; & de cinq qu’elle m’avoit donné, je ne luy en rendis que quatre. 
Elle me demanda, bien embarrassée, [371] où étoit le cinquiéme? J’affectai 
d'ignorer le nombre qu’elle m’en avoit donné, & je fis semblant de le chercher 
parmi les branches de sapin sur lesquelles j’étois pour lors assis. Cette Cate- 
chumene s’étant donc persuadée, aussi-bien que toute sa famille, que j’avois 
laissé tomber par mégarde ce grain misterieux, elle en fit elle-même, avec tous 
les autres une recherche, si éxacte, qu’il ne resta rien dans sa cabanne qui ne 
fût ôté plusieurs fois de sa place. J’avois assez de peine à garder le serieux, 
voïant tout ce plaisant remuë-ménage; & peu s’en falut, que je n’éclatasse 
de rire, lorsqu’une vieille Sauvagesse considerant que toutes ces recherches 
étoient inutiles, commença à se plaindre [372] du peu de soin que j’avois eu 
de conserver une chose si precieuse ; elle me dit, les larmes aux yeux: Qu’elle 
avoit un regret mortel, d’une perte si considerable : qu’il étoit bien aisé de 
voir que ce grain étoit venu du Ciel; puisqu’il avoit quitté si subitement leur 
cabanne, pour s’envoler dans le sein du Soleil, duquel il descendroit une seconde 
fois, quand la Patriarche feroit sa priere accoûtumée : que tout incredule que 
j’avois paru jusqu’alors, 4 tout ce que me disoient les Gaspesiens, de la sainteté 
de cette vieille, & de la conversation familiere qu’elle avoit tous les jours avec 
Dieu, elle m’en feroit cependant connoitre la verité, lorsque nous irions au 
Printems, comme nous nous le propo- [373] sions, dans la cabanne de cette 
Patriarche, ot je trouverois infailliblement le grain que j’avois perdu. Elle 
me reitera la méme chose pendant plusieurs jours, avec tant d’importunité, que 
jadmirois son extravagance & ses superstitions. Les raisons les plus convain- 
cantes que je luy alleguois pour la détromper, furent inutiles; car fermant 
Poreille 4 tout ce que je pis dire pour luy inspirer des sentimens plus justes, 
elle s’emportoit contre moi avec tant de colere & de violence, que je jugeai à 
propos de la détromper dans le moment, & de la convaincre de l’erreur où elle 
étoit: ce qui me fut bien facile, en luy montrant ce grain de chapelet, & l’abus 
surprenant dont elle étoit [374] coupable. Elle fut extrémement surprise, & 
m’avoüa franchement qu’elle n’avoit pas d’esprit. Chacun profita de mes in- 
structions ; & nôtre Catechumene me donna d’un grand cœur les quatre autres, 
qu’elle conservoit precieusement, parmi tout ce qu’elle avoit de plus consider- 
able. Quelques-uns de nos François, qui avoient été dans la cabanne de cette 
vieille Gaspesienne, m’assûrerent qu’elle avoit encore en singuliere veneration 
un Roi de cœur, le pied d’un verre, & une espece de medaille : qu’elle adoroit 
ces bagatelles avec tant de respect, qu’elle se prosternoit devant elles, comme 
devant ses Divinitez. Elle étoit de la Nation des Porte-Croix, selon qu’il étoit 
aisé [375] de voir par la sienne, qu’elle avoit placée dans l'endroit le plus honor- 
able de sa cabanne ; l’aïant enjolivée de rassade, de pourcelaine, de matachias, 
& de porc-épi, dont le mélange agreable representoit plusieurs & differentes 
2 C 


402 NOUVELLE RELATION 


figures de tout ce qui étoit à sa devotion. Elle la mettoit ordinairement entre 
elle & les François ; les obligeant de faire leurs Prieres devant sa Croix, pendant 
que de son côté elle faisoit les siennes, selon sa coûtume, devant son Roi de cœur 
& ses autres Divinitez, que les Sauvages enterrerent avec elle aprés sa mort, 
persuadez qu’ils étoient, qu’elle iroit faire la Patriarche dans l’autre Monde, & 
qu’elle n’auroit pas la destinée des autres hommes [376] mortels dans le Païs 
des Âmes, qui dansent sans cesse à leur arrivée, & sont toujours dans un continuel 
mouvement ; mais qu’elle joüiroit d’un repos perpetuel, & d’une heureuse 
tranquillité. 

Je n’aurois jamais fait, si je voulois vous rapporter ici tous les traits de super- 
stition de ces Barbares : ce que j’en ai dit suffit, pour vous faire voir jusqu’où 
va l’abus & la simplicité de ce Peuple aveugle, qui a vêcu dans les tenebres du 
Christianisme, sans Loi, sans Foi, & sans Religion. 


[377] CHAPITRE XIV. 
Des Souverains ES des Loix des Gaspesiens. 


L est constant que les Loix ont fondé les Monarchies les plus florissantes 
du monde; c’est pourquoy on les appelle avec justice l’ame des Re- 
publiques, des Roïaumes & des Empires de l'Univers, parce qu’ils ne sub- 
sistent qu’autant que les Peuples en observent inviolablement les Loix : 

aussi ne peut-on, s’il me semble, donner aujourd’hui de raison plus convain- 
cante de la décadance de la Nation Gaspesienne, autrefois l’une des plus nom- 
breuses & des plus florissantes du Canada, que le mé- [378] prix des Loix fonda- 
mentales que les Anciens avoient établies, mais que nos Sauvages n’ont observées 
et n’observent encore à present, qu’autant qu’il leur plaît; étant veritable de 
dire, qu’ils n’ont ni Foi, ni Roi, ni Loix. L’on ne voit plus en effet parmi ces 
Peuples, des assemblées nombreuses en forme de Conseil, ni cette Domination 
souveraine des Chefs, des Anciens & des Capitaines, qui regloient les affaires 
civiles & criminelles, & decidoient en dernier ressort de la guerre & de la paix ; 
donnant les ordres qu’ils jugeoient absolument necessaires, & les faisant observer 
avec beaucoup de soûmission & de fidelité. Il n’y a plus que deux ou trois 
Sauvages, qui dans leur district [379] conservent encore, quoiqu’assez foible- 
ment, une espece de puissance & d’autorité, si on peut dire qu’il s’en trouve 
parmi ces Peuples. Le plus considerable est suivi de quelques jeunes guerriers, 
et de plusieurs chasseurs, qui luy font toûjours escorte, & qui se rangent sous les 
armes, lorsque ce Souverain se veut faire distinguer dans quelque occasion ; 
mais enfin, tout son-pouvoir & son autorité est bornée sous le bon plaisir de ceux 
de sa Nation, qui n’éxecutent ses ordres, qu’autant qu’il leur plaît. Nous 
avions parmi nous, à la Riviere de Saint Joseph, un de ces anciens Capitaines, 
que nos Gaspesiens consideroient comme leur Chef & leur Souverain, plûtôt 
par rapport à sa [380] famille, qui étoit fort nombreuse, qu’à la puissance 
Souveraine, dont ils ont secoüé le joug, & qu’ils ne veulent plus reconnoître. 
Loccupation de ce Capitaine étoit de regler les lieux de chasse, de prendre 


DE LA GASPESIE 408 


les pelleteries des Sauvages, en leur donnant ce dont ils avoient besoin. Celuy-ci 
se faisoit un point d’honneur, d’être toûjours le plus mal habillé, & d’avoir soin 
que tous ses gens fussent mieux couverts que luy : aïant pour maxime, à ce qu'il 
me dit un jour, qu’un Souverain, & un grand cœur comme le sien, devoit avoir 
plûtôt soin des autres, que de soi-même ; parce qu’étant bon chasseur comme il 
étoit, il auroit toûjours facilement tout ce qui luy seroit necessai- [381] re pour 
son usage; & qu’au reste, s’il ne faisoit pas bonne chere, il trouveroit dans 
Paffection & dans le cœur de ses Sujets, ce qu’il souhaiteroit : comme s’il eût 
voulu dire, que ses tresors & ses richesses étoient dans le cœur & dans l’amitié 
de son Peuple. 

Ïl arriva qu’un Etranger voulut disputer le droit de commander, ou du 
moins, partager avec ce Souverain cette Domination & cette Grandeur imagi- 
naire, dont il faisoit autant d’estime, que du plus grand Empire du Monde. Ce 
concurrent arriva, bien équipé de haches, de fuzils, de couvertures, de castors, 
& de tout ce qui luy pouvoit donner quelque faste, & quelque entrée à la Sou- 
veraineté, qu’il [382] pretendoit luy être dûë legitimement par droit de suc- 
cession hereditaire, à cause que son pere avoit été autrefois Chef & Capitaine 
de la Nation Gaspesienne. Hé bien, luy dit nôtre Sauvage, fais paroître que ton 
cœur est un veritable cœur de Capitaine, & digne de l’Empire absolu sur les 
Peuples que je gouverne: Voila, continua-til, quelques pauvres Sauvages qui 
sont tout nuds; donne leur tes robes de loutre & de castor. ‘Tu vois encore 
que je suis le plus mal habillé de tous, & c’est aussi par là que je veux paroître 
Capitaine; en me dépoüillant, & en me privant de tout pour assister mes 
Sauvages : ainsi, lorsqu’à mon exemple tu seras aussi pauvre que moi, allons à 
la bonne-heure à la chasse ; [383] & celuy de nous deux, qui tuéra le plus d’orig- 
naux & de castors, sera le Roi legitime de tous les Gaspesiens. Cet Etranger 
accepta genereusement ce défi : il donna tout ce qu’il avoit ; & ne se reservant 
rien, à limitation de nôtre Capitaine, que le necessaire, il alla à la chasse : mais 
il fut assez malheureux pour la faire tres-méchante, & par consequent obligé 
d'abandonner l’entreprise qu’il avoit formée de commander à nos Gaspesiens, 
qui ne voulurent pas reconnoitre d’autre Chef, que leur ancien & brave Capi- 
taine, auquel ils obeïssoient avec plaisir. 

Les Gaspesiens n’ont aucunes Loix fondamentales, qui leur servent de regles 
à present ; ils vuident & terminent toutes [384] leurs querelles & leurs differens 
par amis, & par arbitres. S'il est cependant question de punir un criminel, 
qui ait tué ou assassiné quelque Sauvage, il est condamné à mort, sans autre 
forme de procez : Prens garde, mon frere, disent-ils, si tu tuës, tu seras tué: 
ce qui s’éxecute quelque-fois, par le commandement des Anciens, que s’assem- 
blent au Conseil pour ce sujet, & souvent par l’autorité privée des particuliers, 
sans qu’on en fasse aucune recherche, pourvû qu’il soit évident que le criminel 
ait merité la mort. 

Les prisons, les tortures, les roiies, niles gibets, ne sont pas en usage chez 
ces Peuples, comme en Europe: on se contente de casser la téte au coupable, a 
coups de hache, [385] ou de massué. Les autres suplices sont reservez unique- 
ment pour tourmenter & faire mourir les prisonniers de guerre. 

C’est au Chef de la Nation, selon les Cofitumes du Pais, qui servent de Loix 
& de Regles aux Gaspesiens, de distribuer les endroits de la chasse 4 chaque 
particulier; & il n’est pas permis 4 aucun Sauvage d’outre-passer les bornes & 
les limites du quartier qui luy aura été prescrit dans les Assemblées des Anciens, 


404 NOUVELLE RELATION 


qui se tiennent l’Automne & le Printems, expressément pour en faire le 
partage. nen : 

La jeunesse doit obeér ponctuellement aux ordres des Capitaines : quand il 
est question d’aller en guerre, il faut qu’ils se laissent conduire, qu’ils at- [386] 
taquent, & combatent la Nation qu’ils veulent détruire, de la maniere qu’il a 
été concerté par le Chef de leur Conseil de guerre. 

Il n’est pas permis à aucun Sauvage d’épouser sa parente : & on ne voit pas 
chez nos Gaspesiens, de ces mariages incestueux du pere avec sa fille, du fils 
avec sa mere, de la sœur & du frere, de l’oncle ni de la niéce, ni même du cousin 
avec sa cousine. L’inceste est en horreur chez eux, & ils ont témoigné toûjours 
beaucoup d’aversion pour ce crime. 

Celuy de nos Sauvages qui veut épouser une fille, doit demeurer une année 
toute entiere dans la cabanne du pere de sa maîtresse, auquel il doit servir, 
& donner toutes les [387] pelleteries des orignaux & castors qu’il tuë à la 
chasse. Par la même Loi, il est défendu aux époux futurs de s’abandonner à 
leur plaisir. 

Aprés la mort de leur frere, il leur est permis d’en épouser la femme ; afin 
qu’elle ait des enfans du même sang, si elle n’en a pas eu de son premier époux. 

Le pere de famille étant mort, si la veuve passe à de secondes nôces, il faut 
que l’aîné prenne le soin de ses freres & sœurs, & fasse cabanne à part; afin 
d'éviter les mauvais traitemens de leur beau-pere, & ne point causer aucun 
trouble dans le ménage. 

C’est au Chef & au Capitaine d’avoir soin des orphelins : ils sont obligez 
de les [388] distribuer dans les cabannes des meilleurs chasseurs; afin qu’ils 
soient nourris & élevez, comme s’ils étoient leurs propres enfans. 

Tous les Gaspesiens doivent indispensablement assister les malades; & il 
faut que ceux qui ont de la viande ou du poisson en abondance, en donnent à 
ceux qui sont dans la necessité. 

C’est un crime chez nos Sauvages, de n’être pas hospitalier : ils reçoivent 
charitablement dans leurs cabannes, les Etrangers qui ne sont pas de leurs 
ennemis. 

Ils doivent avoir un grand soin des os des morts, & d’enterrer tout ce qui 
étoit à l’usage du défunt ; afin que les esprits de chaque chose, comme de ses 
raquettes, fuzils, ha- [389] ches, chaudieres, &c. luy rendent service dans le Païs 
des Ames. 

Il est permis de rompre les mariages & les déclarer nuls, selon les Loïx Gas- 
pesiennes, quand ceux qui sont mariez n’ont plus d’amitié les uns pour les 
autres. 

Il est honteux de se fâcher ou de s’impatienter, pour les injures qu’on peut 
dire, ou les disgraces qui arrivent aux Sauvages ; à moins que ce ne soit pour 
défendre l’honneur & la reputation des morts, qui ne peuvent, disent-ils, se 
vanger eux-mêmes, ni tirer raison des insultes & des affronts qu’on leur fait. 

Il est défendu par les Loix & Coûtumes du Païs, de pardonner, ni de faire 
grace à aucun de leurs ennemis ; à moins [390] qu’on ne fasse pour eux de grands 
presens à toute la Nation, ou à ceux qui ont été offensez. 

Les femmes n’ont aucun commandement parmi les Sauvages ; il faut qu’elles 
obeïssent indispensablement aux ordres de leurs maris : elles n’ont aucun droit 
dans les Conseils, ni dans les festins publics. Il en est de-même des jeunes gens 
qui n’ont point encore tué d’orignaux, dont la mort ouvre la porte aux honneurs 


DE LA GASPESIE 405 


de la Nation Gaspesienne, & donne à la jeunesse le droit d’assister aux assemblées 
publiques & particulieres. On est tofijours jeune homme, c’est à dire on n’a 
pas plus de droit que les enfans, les femmes & les filles, à moins qu’on n’ait tué 
quelque orignac. En [391] un mot, on peut dire que toutes les superstitions 
que nous avons remarquées, passent pour autant de Loix chez ces Peuplés. Ils 
en ont encore plusieurs autres, dont je ne parle pas ici, mais qu’on pourra voir 
dans le corps de cette Histoire. 


CHAPITRE XV. 
Des Maurs des Gaspesiens. 


OUS avons parlé dans les Chapitres precedens, de l’origine & de la 
naissance des Gaspesiens ; nous avons dit comment ils étoient vêtus, 
logez & nourris; quelles étoient leur Langue, leur Religion, leurs 
Superstitions, les Chefs, les Souverains & les [392] Loixdeces Peuples: 

il est juste à present, pour contenter pleinement la curiosité du Lecteur, de luy 
faire ici un portrait naturel de leurs Mœurs en general, & un abregé des bonnes 
& mauvaises qualitez des Gaspesiens, soit du corps, soit de l'esprit. 

Ils sont tous naturellement bien-faits de corps, d’une riche taille, haute, 
bien proportionnée & sans aucune difformité; puissans, robustes, adroits, & 
d’une agilité surprenante, sur tout quand ils poursuivent les orignaux, dont la 
vitesse ne cede point à celle des daims & des cerfs. Les hommes sont plus 
grands que les femmes, qui sont presque toutes petites; mais les uns & les 
autres d’un maintien grave, serieux, & fort modeste; mar- [393] chant posé- 
ment, comme s’ils avoient toûjours quelque grosse affaire à ruminer, & à décider 
dans leur esprit. Leur couleur est brune, olivâtre & bazanée ; mais leurs dents 
sont extrémement blanches, peut-être à cause de la gomme de sapin, qu’ils 
mâchent fort souvent, & qui leur communique cette blancheur. Cette couleur 
cependant ne diminuë rien de la beauté naturelle des traits de leur visage: & 
on peut dire avec verité, qu’on voit dans la Gaspesie d’aussi beaux enfans, & 
des personnes aussi bien faites qu’en France ; entre lesquelles il n’y a pour l’or- 
dinaire ni bossus, boiteux, borgnes, aveugles, ni manchots. 

Ils joüissent d’une santé parfaite, n’étant pas sujets à une [394] infinité de 
maladies comme nous : ils ne sont ni trop gras, ni trop maigres ; & l’on ne voit 
pas chez les Gaspesiens, de ces gros ventres pleins d’humeurs & de graisse : aussi 
les noms de gouttes, de pierre, de gravelle, de galle, de colique, de rhumatisme, 
leur sont entierement inconnus. 

Ils ont tous naturellement de l'esprit, & le sens commun au-delà de ce qu’on 
se persuade en France; ils conduisent adroïtement leurs desseins, & prennent 
des moïens justes & necessaires, pour y parvenir heureusement; sont fort 
éloquens & persuasifs parmi ceux de leur Nation, usant de metaphores & de 
circonlocutions fort agreables dans leurs harangues, qui sont tres-éloquentes, 
particulierement quand [395] elles sont prononcées dans les Conseils & les 


Assemblées publiques & generales. 


406 NOUVELLE RELATION 


Si c’est un grand bien, que d’être délivré d’un grand mal, nos Gaspesiens 
se peuvent dire heureux; parce qu’ils n’ont point d’avarice, ni d’ambition, qui 
sont les deux cruels boureaux, qui donnent la gêne & la torture à une infinité 
de personnes. Comme ils n’ont ni Police, ni Charge, ni Dignité, ni Com- 
mandement qui soit absolu, n’obeïssant, comme nous avons dit, à leurs Chefs 
& à leurs Capitaines, qu’autant qu’il leur plaît ; ils ne se mettent guere en peine 
d’amasser des richesses, ni de se faire une fortune plus considerable, que celle 
qu’ils possedent dans leurs bois. Ils sont assez contens, pourvû qu’ils [396] 
aient dequoy vivre, & qu’ils aient la reputation d’être bons guerriers & bons 
chasseurs, en quoy ils mettent toute leur gloire & leur ambition. Ils aiment 
. naturellement leur repos, éloignant d’eux, autant qu’ils peuvent, tous les sujets 
de chagrin qui les pourroient troubler : d’où vient qu’ils ne contredisent jamais 
à personne, & qu’ils laissent agir chacun selon sa volonté; jusques-là même, 
que les peres & les meres n’osent pas corriger leurs enfans, & les souffrent dans 
leurs desordres, de peur de les chagriner en les châtiant. 

Jamais ils ne se querellent & ne se fâchent entr’eux, non pas à cause de 
Vinclination qu’ils ont à pratiquer la vertu; mais pour leur propre satis- [397] 
faction, & dans la crainte, comme nous venons de dire, de troubler leur repos, 
dont ils sont tout à-fait idolatres. 

En effet, s’il se trouve quelque antipathie naturelle entre le mari & la femme, 
ou s’ils ne peuvent vivre ensemble en parfaite intelligence, ils se separent tous 
les deux, pour chercher ailleurs la paix & l’union qu’ils ne peuvent avoir l’un 
avec l’autre: aussi ne peuvent ils comprendre comment on peut s’assujettir à 
Vindissolubilité du mariage. Ne vois-tu pas bien, vous diront-ils, que tu n’as 
pas d’ésprit ? ma femme ne s’accommode point de moi, & je ne m’accommode 
point d’elle ; elle s’acordera bien avec tel, qui ne s’accorde pas avec la sienne : 
pourquoy veux tu que nous soions [398] quatre malheureux pour le reste de nos 
jours? En un mot, ils ont pour maxime, que chacun est libre ; que l’on peut 
faire ce que l’on veut; & que ce n’est pas avoir d’esprit, de contraindre les 
hommes. Il faut, disent-ils, vivre sans chagrin & sans inquietude, se contenter 
de ce que l’on a, & souffrir constament les disgraces de la Nature ; parce que le 
Soleil, ou celuy qui a tout fait & qui gouverne tout, l’ordonne ainsi. Si quel- 
qu’un d’entr’eux pleure, s’afflige, ou se fâche, voici tout leur raisonnement pour 
le consoler: Dis-moi, mon frere, pleureras-tu toûjours ? seras-tu toûjours 
fâché? ne viendras-tu plus jamais aux danses & aux festins des Gaspesiens ? 
mourras-tu, enfin, en pleurant, & [390] dans la colere où tu es à present? Si 
celuy qui pleure & qui s’afige, luy repond que non, & que dans quelques jours il 
reprendra sa belle humeur & sa douceur ordinaire : Hé mon frere, luy dira-t’on, 
tu n’as pas d'esprit: & puisque que tu n’es pas dans la volonté de pleurer, ni 
d’être toûjours fâché, pourquoy ne commences-tu pas dés à present à bannir 
toute l’amertume de ton cœur, & à te réjoüir avec ceux de ta Nation? En 
voila assez pour rendre au plus affligé de nos Gaspesiens, son repos & sa tran- 
quillité ordinaire. En un mot, ils font état de ne rien aimer, & de ne point 
s’attacher aux biens de la terre ; afin de ne point avoir de douleur, ni de tristesse 
quand ils les perdent. Ils sont, [400] pour l’ordinaire, toûjours joïeux, sans se 
mettre en peine qui païera leurs dettes. 

Ils ont de la force, & beaucoup de constance pour souffrir genereusement les 
disgraces ordinaires, & communes à tous les hommes. Cette grandeur de 
courage éclate merveilleusement dans les fatigues de la guerre, de la chasse, & 


DE LA GASPESIE 407 


de la pêche, dont ils supportent les travaux les plus rudes, avec une constance 
admirable. Ils ont de la patience, à faire confusion aux Chrétiens, dans leurs 
maladies: qu’on crie, qu’on tempête, qu’on chante & qu’on danse dans la 
cabanne, il est bien rare que le malade s’en plaigne ; il se contente de ce qu’on 
luy donne, & prend sans repugnance ce qu’on luy presente, pour le [401] rétablir 
dans sa premiere santé. Ils souffrent encore patiemmét les châtimens les plus 
rigoureux, lorsqu'ils sont convaincus qu’ils les ont meritez, & qu’on a sujet 
d’être fâché contr’eux : ils font même des presens considerables à ceux qui les 
châtient severement de leurs desordres ; afin, disent-ils, de leur ôter du cœur 
toute l’amertume que leur cause le crime dont ils sont coupables ; alleguant 
toûjours pour leur excuse ordinaire, qu’ils n’avoient point d’esprit, quand ils 
ont fait telles & telles actions. Convaincus enfin de leur faute, on a beau les 
menacer de les roüer à coups de bâton, de leur percer le corps avec une épée, ou 
de leur casser la tête avec le fuzil; ils se presentent eux-mêmes, pour [402] 
subir ces châtimens : Frapes-moi, disent-ils, & tuës moi si tu le veux : tu as raison 
d’être fâché ; & moi, j’ai tort de t’avoir offensé. 

Il n’en est pas de-même cependant, quand on les maltraite sans sujet; car 
pour lors tout est 4 apprehender: & comme ils sont extrémement vindicatifs 
envers les Etrangers, ils en conservent le ressentiment dans le cceur, jusqu’a ce 
qu’ils se soient entierement vangez de l’injure ou de l’affront qu’on leur aura 
fait mal à propos. Ils s’enyvreront même tout exprés, ou ils feront semblant 
d’être saouls d’eau-de-vie, pour éxecuter leur pernicieux dessein; se per- 
suadant qu’ils seront toûjours suffisamment justifiez du crime qu’ils auront 
commis, [403] quand ils diront aux Anciens & aux Chefs de la Nation, qu’ils 
étoient saouls ; & qu’ils n’avoient ni raison, ni jugement durant leur yvresse. 

Ils ne sçavent, pour l’ordinaire, ce que c’est que de relâcher d’une entre- 
prise qu’ils auront formée, principalement si elle est publique, & connnuë de 
leurs compatriots; à cause qu’ils apprehendent d’encourir le reproche qu’on 
leur feroit, de n’avoir pas eu assez de cœur pour l’effectuer. 

Ils sont tellement genereux & liberaux, les uns avec les autres, qu’ils semblent 
n’avoir aucune attache au peu quils possedent; s’en privant tres-volontiers 
& d’un grand cœur, dés le moment qu’ils connoissent que leurs amis en ont 
[404] besoin. Il est vrai que cette inclination genereuse souffre 4 present 
quelque alteration, depuis que les François, par le commerce qu’ils ont avec 
eux, les ont insensiblement accoûtumez à troquer, & à ne donner rien pour 
rien: car avant que la traite fût en usage parmi ces Peuples, c’étoit comme le 
siecle d’or, & tout étoit commun entr’eux. 

L’hospitalité est en si grande estime chez nos Gaspesiens, qu’ils ne font 
presque point de distinction entre le Domestique & l’Etranger : ils logent 
également les François, & les Sauvages qui viennent de loin ; &ils distribuent de 
grand cœur, aux uns & aux autres, ce qu’ils ont pris à la chasse, ou à la pêche ; 
se mettant peu en peine qu’on demeure chez [405] eux des semaines, des mois, 
& même des années toutes entieres. Ils montrent toûjours bon visage à leurs 
hôtes, qu’ils considerent pour lors comme s’ils étoient de la cabanne, principale- 
ment si on entend tant soit peu la langue Gaspesienne. Vous leur verrez 
nourrir leurs parens, les enfans de leurs amis, des femmes veuves, des orphelins, 
& des vieillards ; sans jamais leur faire aucun reproche de la nourriture, ou des 
autres secours qu’ils leur donnent. Il faut assûrément avotüer que c’est-là une 
veritable marque d’un bon cœur, & d’une ame genereuse : aussi est-il vrai de 


408 NOUVELLE RELATION 


dire, que l’injure la plus sensible parmi eux, c’est de reprocher à un Sauvage, 
qu’il est Medousaoüek, c’est à dire qu’il [406] est avare. Voila pourquoy, 
quand on leur refuse quelque chose, ils disent fierement, Tu es un avare: ou 
bien, Tu aimes cela, aimes-le donc tant que tu voudras ; mais tu seras toûjours 
un avare, & un homme sans cœur. 

Ils sont cependant ingrats envers les François, & ils ne leur donnent ordi- 
nairement rien pour rien. Leur ingratitude va même jusqu’à ce point, qu’aprés 
les avoir nourris & entretenus des choses necessaires à la vie, dans leurs besoins 
& leurs necessitez, ils vous demanderont le salaire du moindre service qu’ils 
vous rendront. 

Ils aiment l’honneur, & ils sont bien-aises d’en recevoir, lorsqu'ils viennent 
en traite aux Habitations Françoises ; [407] & c’est aussi pour les contenter, 
qu’on tire quelquefois les fuzils, & même du canon à leur arrivée. Le Chef 
luy-même assemble tous les canots auprés du sien, & les range dans un bel ordre, 
avant que de descendre à terre, pour attendre le salut qu’on luy fait, & que 
tous les Sauvages rendent aux François, par la décharge de leurs fuzilss On 
admet quelquefois à table les Chefs & les Capitaines, pour montrer à tous les 
Sauvages de la Nation, qu’on les aime & qu’on les honore. On leur donne 
même assez souvent, quelque bel habit, pour les distinguer du commun, & dont 
ils font une estime particuliere, principalement s’il a été à l’usage du Com- 
mandant des François. [408] Ce fut peut-être pour cette raison, qu’un bon 
vieillard qui m’aimoit tendrement, ne vouloit jamais paroître en aucune cere- 
monie, soit publique, soit particuliere, qu’avec une calotte, une paire de gands 
brochez, & un chapelet que je luy avois donnez : il faisoit tant d’état de mon 
present, qu’il se croïoit quelque chose de plus grand qu’il n’étoit, quoiqu’il 
fût alors tout ce qu’il pouvoit être parmi son Peuple, dont il étoit encore le 
Chef & le Capitaine, à l’âge de plus de cent quinze ans. Ce bon homme se 
glorifioit, & se vantoit par tout, d’être mon frere, & disoit que nous étions 
tellement liez d’amitié lun avec l’autre, que son cœur & le mien n’étoit plus 
qu’une même chose; jusques-là mê- [409] me, qu’il vouloit me faire com- 
pagnie par tout où j’allois, peut-être autant pour profiter de ce que l’on 
me donnoït parmi les François, que pour contenter son amitié. 

Les Gaspesiens, cependant, sont si sensibles aux affronts qu’on leur fait, 
qu’ils s’abandonnent quelquefois au desespoir, & attentent même sur leur vie ; 
se persuadant que l’insulte qu’on leur a faite, ternit l’honneur & la reputation 
qu'ils se sont acquis, soit à la guerre, soit à la chasse. 

Tels furent les sentimens d’un jeune Sauvage, qui pour avoir reçû un coup 
de balet par mégarde, de la servante qui balaïoit la maison ; se persuada qu’il 
ne devoit plus survivre à cet affront imaginaire, [410] qui grossissoit dans son 
idée, à mesure qu’il y faisoit reflexion. Quoy, disoit-il en soi-même, avoir 
été chassé d’une maniere si honteuse, & en presence d’un si grand nombre de 
Sauvages mes compatriotes, & aprés cela paroître encore devant leurs yeux ? 
Ah, j'aime mieux mourir! Quelle apparence de me trouver doresnavant dans 
les Assemblées publiques de ma Nation? Et quelle estime aura-t’on de mon 
courage & de ma valeur, quand il sera question d’aller en guerre, aprés avoir 
été batu & chassé confusément par une Servante, de l’Habitation du Capitaine 
des François? Il vaut mieux, encore un coup, que je meure. En effet il 
entra dans le bois, en chantant quelques chansons [411] lugubres, qui expri- 
moient lamertume de son cœur : il prit & attacha à un arbre, la courroie qui 


DE LA GASPESIE 409 


luy servoit de ceinture, & commença tout de bon à se pendre, & à s’étrangler. 
Il perdit bien-tôt le jugement, & même il eût perdu infailliblement la vie, si 
sa propre sœur ne se fût rencontrée par hazard, mais par un bonheur particulier, 
dans l’endroit même où son miserable frere s’étoit pendu. Elle coupa la corde 
promtement ; & aprés avoir pleuré comme mort, celuy en qui elle ne voioit 
plus aucune marque de vie, elle vint annoncer cette funeste nouvelle aux 
Sauvages qui étoient chez Monsieur Denys. Ils allerent dans le bois, apporterent 
à l’Habitation ce malheureux Gaspesien, qui respiroit en- [412] core tant soit 
peu. Je luy desserrai les dents; & luy aiant fait avaller quelques cueillerée 
d’eau-de-vie, il revint à luy : & peu de tems aprés, il recouvra sa premiere santé. 

Son frere s’étoit autrefois pendu & étranglé tout-à fait, dans la Baye de 
Gaspé, à cause du refus qu’on luy fit, d’une fille qu’il aimoit tendrement, & 
qu’il recherchoit en mariage: car enfin, quoique nos Gaspesiens, comme nous 
avons dit, vivent joïeux & contens, & qu’ils éloignent avec application, autant 
qu’ils peuvent, tout ce qui peut les affliger ; cependant, plusieurs d’entr’eux 
tombent quelquefois dans une melancolie si noire & si profonde, qu’ils entrent 
tout d’un coup dans un cruel desespoir, & attentent [413] même sur leur vie. 

Les femmes & les filles ne sont pas éxemtes, non plus que les hommes, de cette 
phrenesie, s’abandonnant entierement à la douleur & à la tristesse, causée par un 
déplaisir qu’elles auront reçû, ou par le souvenir de la mort de leurs parens, & 
de leurs amis : elles se pendent & s’étranglent, comme autrefois les femmes & 
les filles Millesiennes, que la seule apprehension d’être exposées toutes nuës 
dans les places publiques, selon la Loi que l’on fit exprés, empêcha de com- 
mettre de semblables cruautez. Rien cependant n’a encore été capable 
jusques-ici, d’arrêter la manie de nos Gaspesiennes, dont plusieurs finiroient 
miserablement leur vie, si dans le tems qu’on a connoissance [414] de leurs 
chagrins & de leur desespoir, par les chansons tristes & lugubres qu’elles chan- 
tent, & qu’elles font retentir dans les bois, d’une maniere tout-à-fait douloureuse, 
on ne les suivoit par tout, pour empécher & prévenir les effets funestes de leur 
rage & de leur fureur. Il est cependant surprenant, de voir que ce chagrin 
& ce desespoir se dissipent presque dans un moment, & que ces Peuples, quelque 
afigez qu’ils paroissent, essuient tout 4 coup leurs larmes, arrêtent leurs soupirs, 
& reprennent leur premiere tranquillité ; protestant à tous ceux qui les accom- 
pagnent, qu’ils n’ont plus d’amertume dans le cœur: Mdegouche, disent-ils, 
apche mou, adadaseou, apche mou oiiahga- [415] hi, apche mou kedoukichtone- 
bilchi. _ Voila mon chagrin passé ; je t’assiire que je ne pleurerai plus, & que 
jai perdu le dessein de me pendre & de m’étrangler. 

Ils sont doux, paisibles, traitables: aiant beaucoup de charité, d’amour & 
de tendresse les uns pour les autres: bons à leurs amis, cruels & impitoïables 
a leurs ennemis: errans & vagabons, industrieux cependant, & fort adroits 4 
tout ce qu’ils entreprennent ; jusqu’à faire des fûts de fuzils, aussi bien qu’on 
en peut faire en France. J’en ai vû quelques-uns qui avoient fait des serrures 
de bois, & les clefs de-même, sur le modele de celle qui servoit à fermer nôtre 
cassette, dans laquelle étoient renfermez les orne- [416] mens de la la Chapelle 
qui étoit à mon usage. x 

On peut dire, à la loüange & à la gloire de nos Gaspesiennes, qu’elles sont 
fort modestes, chastes & retenuës, au delà de ce qu’on peut s’imaginer ; & je 
peux dire, avec verité, que je me suis particulierement dévoüé à la Mission de 
la Gaspesie, à cause de l’inclination naturelle que les Gaspesiens ont pour 


410 NOUVELLE RELATION 


l'honnêteté. On n’entend pas dans leurs cabannes, aucunes paroles deshon- 
nêtes, ni même de ces discours qu’on appelle à double entente. Jamais ils ne 
prennent devant le monde, aucune liberté, je ne dirai pas criminelle, mais 
même les plus indifferentes ; point de baisers, point de badinerie parmi les 
jeunes gens de diffe- [417] rent sexe: en un mot, tout se dit, & se fait dans 
leur cabanne, avec beaucoup de modestie & de reserve. 

Il n’en est pas de nos Sauvagesses, comme de ces filles de quelques Nations 
de ce nouveau Monde, qui font gloire de se prostituer au premier venu, & que 
les peres & les meres presentent eux-mémes aux Chasseurs & aux Guerriers les 
plus fameux & les plus considerables: toutes ces prostitutions honteuses sont 
en horreur & en abomition parmi nos Gaspesiens ; & on voit sans admiration 
des jeunes Sauvagesses assez chastes & pudiques, pour servir d’éxemple, & 
apprendre à celles de leur sexe, l’amour & l’estime qu’elles doivent avoir pour 
la pudeur & la chasteté. [418] J’en ai vû une, qui sollitée puissamment de se 
rendre aux poursuites & aux prieres d’un jeune Guerrier, qu’elle ne pouvoit 
aimer sans la perte de son honneur, qui luy étoit aussi-cher que sa vie; & 
voulant en éviter les poursuites insolentes, se déroba de la cabanne de son pere, 
& s’en éloigna de plus de cinquante lieuës, avec une de ses compagnes, mar- 
chant sur les glaces & dans la neige, où elle aima mieux passer les nuits en plein 
Hiver, sur quelques branches de sapin, que de s’exposer à commettre un crime 
qu’elle detestoit infiniment dans son cœur. Le jeune Sauvage la chercha 
inutilement dans la compagnie des autres Sauvagesses, qui ne pouvant s’imaginer 
ce qu’étoit deve- [419] nuë leur compagne, apprehenderent qu’elle ne. fût 
tombée dans quelque precipice, ou qu’elle n’eût attenté sur sa vie, dans le 
déplaisir & le chagrin qu’elle avoit, de se voir persecutée par la brutalité de son 
amant: tous les Sauvages cependant, furent agreablement surpris, quand 
cette fille parut quelque-tems aprés, à la cabanne de son pere, auquel elle fit 
le recit du sujet & de la cause de son absence. 

Je ne pretens pas cependant conclure, par tout ce que je viens de dire, que 
la chasteté ait un empire absolu sur tous les cœurs de nos Gaspesiennes ; puis- 
qu’on voit chez elles quelques filles & des femmes libertines, qui vivent sans 
honneur : mais enfin, il est vrai que la boisson d’eau-de- [420] vie & l’yvrognerie, 
causent ces déreglemens, selon le proverbe, n vino Venus ; puisque celles qui 
n’en boivent pas font si jalouses de leur honneur, que non-seulement elles ne 
s’abandonnent pas au mal; maïs au contraire, elles vont même jusques à défaire 
& rendre tout confus, par leur forte & genereuse resistance, ceux qui ont l’in- 
solence & la temerité de les solliciter à la moindre action criminelle, qui peut les 
écarter de leur devoir. 

Ils sont naturellement volages, moqueurs, médisans, & dissimulez: ils ne 
sont fideles 4 leurs paroles, qu’autant qu’ils sont retenus ou par la crainte, ou 
par Pesperance ; & ils croiroient qu’on n’auroit pas d’esprit, d’étre fi- [421] 
dele contre son interét. 

Leurs juremens se font comme ceux des Romains; ils jurent par le Soleil, 
qu’ils ont adoré comme leur Divinité ; par leurs enfans, par leurs peres, & par 
tout ce qu’ils estiment de plus cher & de plus considerable : comme les Romains, 
qui juroient autrefois par Jupiter, par Cesar, & par les Dieux immortels. Il 
est vrai que nos Gaspesiens mettent quelquefois les doigts en croix, en invo- 
quant le saint Nom de Jesus, quand ils jurent pour quelque chose de la derniere 
consequence : il y en a même quelques-uns qui jurent & blasphement le saint 


DE LA GASPESIE 411 


Nom de Dieu comme les François, qui servent, par leurs mauvais éxemples, de 
pierres de scandale à ces Peuples, [422] par les blasphémes éxecrables qu’ils 
vomissent contre celuy que les Anges adorent dans le Ciel, & que les Demons 
reverent dans les abimes de l'Enfer. 

Jamais on n’a pi mieux appliquer qu’a nos Gaspesiens, les paroles du Dis- 
tique, Rustica progenies nescit habere modum ; parce qu’en effet ils ne scavent 
ce que c’est de civilité, ni de bien-seance. Comme ils s’estiment tous égaux, 
aussi grands, aussi riches, aussi puissans les uns que les autres, ils se moquent : 
ouvertement de nos reverences, de nos complimens, & de nos accolades: ils 
n’6tent jamais leur bonnet, quand ils entrent dans nos Habitations, cette cere- 
monie leur paroit trop embarrassante ; ils jettent leurs presens par [423] terre, 
au pied de celuy auquel ils les veulent donner, & fument une pipe de tabac, 
auparavant que de parler: Tiens, disent-ils, prens le present que je te donne 
dz tout mon cœur. Voila l’unique compliment qu’ils font en ce rencontre : 
& cependant tout est civil chez eux; car tout ce qui donne du contentement 
aux sens, passe pour honnête. 

Ils sont sales & vilains dans leurs cabannes, dont les avenués sont remplies 
d’ordures, de plumes, de copeaux, de raclures de peaux, & assez souvent des 
entrailles des animaux ou des poissons qu’ils prennent, à la chasse, ou à la pêche : 
dans leur manger, ils ne lavent que superficiellement la viande avant que de la 
mettre au feu, & n’écurent [424] jamais la chaudiere, que la premiere fois qu’ils 
s’en servent : leurs habits sont tous crasseux par le dehors & par le dedans, & 
remplis d’huile & de graisse, dont la puanteur fait souvent mal au cœur. Ils 
cherchent la vermine devant tout le monde, sans se détourner tant soit peu : 
ils la font marcher par divertissement sur leurs mains; & ils la mangent, comme 
si c’étoit quelque chose de bon. Ils trouvent l’usage de nos mouchoirs ridicule : 
ils se moquent de nous, & disent que c’est mettre des ordures dans sa poche. 
Enfin, quelque calme qu’il fasse au dehors de la cabanne, il y regne toñjours un 
vent du ponant tres-incommode, que ces Sauvages lâchent fort librement, sur 
tout lors- [425] qu’ils ont mangé beaucoup d’orignac, duquel on peut dire, 
Corruptio optimi pessima. 

L'opposition est grande au Christianisme, du côté de leur indifference, de 
leur insensibilité, & des autres défauts que nous avons remarquez: mais elle 
ne l’est pas moins aussi du côté de l’yvrognerie, qui est le vice prédominant de 
nos Gaspesiens ; & je peux dire même, avec verité, que c’est un des plus puissans 
obstacles à la conversion de ces Peuples. 

Ces Barbares, qui prenoïent autrefois le vin pour du sang, l’eau de vie pour 
du poison, & qui fuioient avec horreur les François qui leur presentoient ces 
liqueurs, sont aujourd’hui si passionnez pour ces sortes de boissons, qu’ils [426] 
se font un principe d’honneur, de se saouler comme des bêtes, & ne boivent, à 
proprement parler, que pour s’enyvrer: ce qui oblige les Missionnaires de 
regarder avec douleur la traite immoderée de l’eau-de-vie dans le Canada, comme 
Pun des obstacles le plus pernicieux que le Demon pouvoit susciter, au salut 
des François, & à l’établissement de la Foi parmi ces Nations infideles & bar- 
bares; attendu que tous les vices & les crimes qui se trouvent ordinairement 
separez les uns des autres, se reünissent dans la seule traite d’eau-de-vie, lors- 
qu’elle se fait sans regle & sans moderation. 

L’avarice, l’interêt, & la cupidité déreglée d’amasser des richesses que le 
Fils de Dieu a [427] condamnées, par le choix qu’il a fait de la pauvreté 


412 NOUVELLE RELATION 


Evangelique, est la source malheureusemêt feconde, des desordres surprenans 
que commettent ceux qui commercent & qui traitent de Veau-de-vie aux 
Sauvages : car vous remarquerez, s’il vous plaît, qu’ils les enyvrent tout exprés ; 
afin que ces pauvres Barbares étant privez de l’usage de raison, ils les puissent 
tromper plus facilement, & avoir presque pour rien leurs pelleteries, qu’ils ne 
leur donneroient que pour un prix juste & raisonnable, s’ils étoient dans leur 
bon sens. Ce commerce est frauduleux, & oblige à restitution, au prorata de 
ce que la chose peut valoir, selon les formalitez de la traite; ces Barbares 
n’aïant pas dans leur yvresse la liberté, [428] ni le jugement qu’il faut pour 
conclure un marché de vente ou d’achat, qui demande un consentement libre 
& mutuel de part & d’autre. 

Comme il n’est pas permis de vendre de l’eau pour du vin, ou pour de leau- 
de-vie, selon qu’il arrive assez souvent, par le mélange de ces liqueurs dans la 
vente & la distribution de ces sortes de boissons : c’est aussi le second déregle- 
ment dont sont coupables nos Traiteurs d’eau-de-vie, qui colorent cette in- 
justice du titre de charité; alleguant pour raisons, qu’ils font cette mixtion 
afin de ne pas enyvrer les Sauvages. Il est vrai qu’ils seroient en quelque 
maniere excusables, s’ils les récompensoient par d’autres marchandises : mais 
on sçait bien qu’ils n’en font [429] rien du tout ; qu’ils retirent le même profit, 
que s’ils vendoient loïalement, & qu’ils les enyvrent encore par ces liqueurs 
mixtionnées ; se rendant ainsi, par ce malheureux commerce, les maîtres non- 
seulement des pelleteries des Sauvages, mais même des couvertures, fuzils, 
haches, chaudieres, &c., qu’ils leur auront vendu bien cherement: en sorte 
que ces pauvres Barbares se voïent tout nuds, & dépoüillez des pelleteries & 
des marchandises qu’ils avoient apportées, & traitées pour leur usage, & pour 
l'entretien de leur famille. 

L’impureté, les adulteres, les incestes, & plusieurs autres crimes que la 
pudeur m’empéche de nommer, sont les déreglemens ordinaires qui se [430] 
commettent par la traite d’eau-de-vie, de laquelle plusieurs Traiteurs se servent 
pour abuser des Sauvagesses, qui s’abandonnent facilement durant leur yvresse, 
à toute sorte d’impudicité ; quoique d’ailleurs, comme nous avons dit, elles 
donneroient plûtôt un soufflet, qu’un baiser, à quiconque les voudroit porter 
au mal, si elles étoient presentes à elles-mêmes. 

Les injures, les querelles, les homicides, les meurtres & les parricides, sont 
encore aujourd’hui les suites funestes de la traite d’eau-de-vie : & on voit avec 
douleur, des Sauvages mourir dans leur yvresse, s’étrangler eux-mêmes ; le frere, 
couper la gorge à sa sœur ; le mari, casser la tête à sa femme ; une mere, [431] 
jetter son enfant dans le feu, ou dans la riviere ; & le pere, étoufer cruellement 
des petits innocens, qu’ils cherissent & qu’ils aiment autant, ou plus qu’eux- 
mêmes, quand ils ne sont pas privez de raison. C’est un jeu pour eux, d’aller 
tout rompre & briser dans les cabannes ; de crier à pleine tête, des heures toutes 
entieres, en repetant toûjours le même mot: ils se batent & se déchirent à 
belles-dents ; ce qui ne leur arrive jamais, ou du moins tres rarement, hors 
de la boisson. Les François mêmes ne sont pas éxemts de la fureur bachique 
de ces Barbares, qui par un effet de la colere de Dieu justement irrité contre 
une conduite si peu Chrêtienne, pillent, ravagent & brûlent quelquefois leurs 
maisons, [432] leur magazin, & en viennent assez souvent à des extrémitez plus 
fâcheuses. 

J'abrege une infinité d’autres desordres de la traite immoderée qui se fait 


DE LA GASPESIE 413 


à nos Sauvages, du vin, de l’eau-de-vie, & de toute autre boisson enyvrante, 
pour justifier le zele de Monseig" l’Evéque de Quebec, des Recollets, & des 
autres Missionnaires, qui se sont hautement déclarez contre ces desordres ; 
avec d’autant plus de justice, qu’ils ont reconnu par une longue experience, 
qu’elle étoit la cause funeste de la perte des biens spirituels & temporels des 
François & des Sauvages de la Nouvelle France ; & que parmi un grand nombre 
d'obstacles, de superstition, d’insensibilité, d’aveu- [433] glement, d’indiffer- 
ence, d’impureté, qui s'opposent à la conversion de ces Nations Infideles, il y 
auroit toûjours bien moins d’apparence d’établir solidement un veritable 
Christianisme chez ces Peuples, aussi long-tems qu’on les saouleroit, & qu’on 
ne garderoit aucune regle, ni aucune moderation dans la distribution & le 
commerce de l’eau-de-vie. C’étoit aussi, peut-être, ce que vouloit me dire ce 
jeune libertin, qui ne se mettant aucunement en peine du salut des Sauvages, 
pourvû qu’il en eût les pelleteries, pour satisfaire à son ambition & à ses interêts, 
se vantoit qu’il feroit plus de mal avec une bouteille d’eau-de-vie, que les 
Missionnaires ne leur sçauroient faire de bien avec une [434] bouteille d’eau- 
benîte ; c’est à dire qu’il damneroit plus de Sauvages en les saoulant, que les 
Missionnaires n’en sauveroient en les instruisant des veritez du Christianisme. 

Je ne veux pas m’arrêter ici, aux raisons que nos Traiteurs alleguent pour 
justifier l'injustice de leur procedé ; disant qu’il faudroit fermer les Cabarets 
en France : que ce n’est pas un peché de saouler un François, encore moins un 
Sauvage, en l’excitant même à boire ; quoique l’on sçache qu’ils ne prennent 
de l’eau-de-vie expressément que pour s’enyvrer, ces Barbares ne trouvant 
pas de plaisir dans cette boisson, qu’autant qu’elle leur fait perdre entierement 
le jugement & la raison : que ce seroit ruiner absolument le [435] commerce 
& le trafic de la Colonie, si on ne donnoit pas d’eau-de-vie aux Sauvages; à 
cause que ces Barbares se retireroient chez les Anglois & les Hollandois, de la 
Nouvelle Angleterre, & de la Nouvelle Hollande: qu’enfin, il faudroit un 
Reglement de Police, & sur tout, point d’acceptation de personnes, ni de parens, 
ni d’amis ; mais que la traite fût accordée à tout le monde, pour en user avec 
moderation : afin que le profit du commerce ne fût pas, comme il avoit été 
autrefois, du côté de ceux ausquels on avoit accordé la traite, privativement à 
tout autre ; sous pretexte, disoit-on, qu’ils n’enyvroient pas les Sauvages, parmi 
lesquels cependant on voïoit beaucoup de desordres [436] & de déreglemens. 

Il seroit fort aisé de répondre à toutes ces raisons ; mais comme la pluspart 
se détruisent d’elles-mêmes, je dirai seulement, qu’il seroit à souhaiter qu’on 
fit un Reglement de police, sous des peines rigoureuses, pour arrêter les de- 
sordres de cette malheureuse boïsson : que la traite fût commune, sans accepta- 
tion de personne, afin d’éviter toute jalousie : & qu’enfin, chacun voulût bien 
relâcher quelque chose de ses interêts ; afin de faciliter la conversion de ces 
Peuples, & l’établissement du Christianisme parmi ces Barbares, en les habituant 
& humanisant avec nous, selon l’ancien projet des RR. PP. Recollets de la 
Province de Paris, qui ont l’honneur d’avoir [437] été les premiers Apôtres de 
ce nouveau Monde, comme je l’ai fait voir dans le premier établissement de 
la Foi dans la Nouvelle France. 


414 NOUVELLE RELATION 


CHAPITRE XVI. 
Du Mariage des Gaspesiens. 


ES garçons, selon la coûtume ordinaire du Païs, ne sortent jamais de 
la cabanne de leur pere, que pour aller demeurer chez quelques-uns 
de leurs amis, où ils esperent de trouver une fille, pour se marier avec 
elle : ils n’ont pas plûtôt formé le dessein de l’épouser, qu’ils en font eux 

mêmes la proposition au pere de la Sauvagesse; parce qu’ils sçavent bien que lafille 
[438] n’approuvera jamais leur recherche, à moins qu’elle ne soit agreable à son 
pere, auquel il demande s’il juge à propos qu’il entre dans sa cabanne, c’est à 
dire dans son alliance, en épousant sa fille, pour laquelle il luy proteste avoir 
beaucoup d’inclination. Si le pere n’agrée pas la recherche du jeune Sauvage, 
il luy dit, sans autre compliment, que cela ne se peut faire: & cet amant, tout 
passionné qu’il puisse être, reçoit paisiblement cette réponse, comme larrêt 
decisif de son sort & de ses amours, & cherche ailleurs quelqu’autre maîtresse. 
Il n’en est pas de-même, si le pere trouve que le parti qui se presente soit avan- 
tageux pour sa fille: car pour lors, aprés avoir donné son agrément à [439] cet 
amant, il luy dit de parler à sa maîtresse, pour sçavoir sa volonté sur une affaire 
qui la regarde uniquement ; ne voulant pas, disent ces Barbares, violenter les 
inclinations de leurs enfans en fait de mariage, & les obliger d’épouser un homme 
qu’elles ne sçauroïent se résoudre d’aimer, ni par force, ni par complaisance, ni 
par inclination. Cest ainsi que les peres & les meres de nos Gaspesiens, laissent 
une entiere liberté à leurs enfans, de se choisir le parti qu’ils jugent le plus con- 
venable à leur humeur, & plus conforme à leurs amitiez; quoique cependant 
les parens se reservent toûjours le droit de leur indiquer celuy qu’ils croient 
raisonnablement leur être plus avantageux : mais [440] enfin, il n’en est que 
ce que veulent ceux qui se doivent marier ; & ils sçavent fort bien dire, qu’ils 
ne se marient pas pour les autres, mais pour eux-mêmes. 

Le garçon donc, aprés le consentement du pere, s’adresse à la fille, pour 
sonder ses inclinations: il luy fait un present, de tout ce qu’il peut avoir de 
considerable ; en sorte que si elle agrée se recherche, elle le recoit, Paccepte 
avec plaisir, & luy offre reciproquement de ses plus beaux ouvrages; n’aiant 
garde, disent-elles, de recevoir la moindre chose de ceux qui les recherchent 
en mariage, pour ne pas contracter aucun engagement avec un jeune homme 
qu’elles n’ont pas dessein d’épouser. 

[441] Les presens reçûs & acceptez de part & d’autre, le Sauvage retourne 
chez luy, prend congé de ses parens, & vient demeurer une année toute entiere 
dans la cabanne du pere de sa maitresse, auquel, selon les Loix du Pais, il doit 
servir, & donner toutes les pelleteries qu’il fait à la chasse ; à peu prés comme 
fit autrefois Jacob, qui servit son beau-pere Laban, avant que d’épouser 
Rachel. Il faut ensuite, qu’il se montre bon chasseur, & capable de nourrir 
une grosse famille ; qu’il se rende agreable, obeïssant, promt à faire tout ce qui 
regarde le bien & l’utilité de la cabanne, & adroit aux éxercices ordinaires de la 
Nation: afin de meriter l'estime de sa maîtresse, & luy faire connoître [442] 
qu’elle sera parfaitement bien-heureuse avec luy. La fille, de son côté, fait 


DE LA GASPESIE 415 


aussi de son mieux ce qui est du ménage, & s’applique entierement durant cette 
année, si la recherche du garçon luy plaît, à faire des raquettes, coudre les canots, 
accommoder des écorces, passer les peaux d’orignaux & de castors, aller à la 
traîne, en un mot, faire tout ce qui luy peut donner la réputation d’être une 
bonne ménagere. 

Comme ils sont tous également pauvres & riches, l’interêt ne preside jamais 
à leurs mariages ; aussi n’est-il pas question de doüaire, de possession, ni d’heri- 
tage, de contract, ni de Notaire, qui reglent les biens des deux parties en cas 
de divorce : c’est assez qu’ils [443] aïent une couverture, ou quelque robe de 
castor pour se mettre en ménage ; & tout ce que les plus riches peuvent esperer, 
c’est une chaudiere, un fuzil, un bate-feu, un coûteau, une hache, un canot, 
& quelques autres bagatelles, qui sont toutes les richesses de ces nouveaux 
mariez, lesquels ne laissent pas cependant de vivre contens, lorsque ce peu 
leur manque; parce qu’ils esperent de trouver en chassant, dequoy avoir abon- 
damment leur besoin & leur necessité, 

Plusieurs se sont persuadez trop facilement, que le jeune homme abusoit 
de son épouse future, durant cette année qu’il est obligé de demeurer dans la 
cabanne de sa maîtresse; car outre que c’est une [444] coûtume & une Loi 
inviolable chez nos Gaspesiens, qu’il n’est pas permis de transgresser, sans ex- 
poser toute la Nation à quelque malheur considerable, il est veritable de dire 
que ces deux amans vivent l’un avec l’autre comme frere & sœur, avec beaucoup 
de reserve ; n’aïant jamais appris, tout le tems que j’ai demeuré dans la Gas- 
pesie, qu’il se soit passé quelque desordre entre eux: attendu même que les 
femmes & les filles, comme nous avons dit, sont assez modestes d’elles-mêmes, 
pour n’accorder en ce rencontre aucune liberté qui soit contraire à leur devoir. 

Lors donc que deux parties symbolisent d’humeurs & d’inclinations, on’ 
convoque sur la fin de l’année, les plus an- [445] ciens de la Nation, les parens 
& les amis des époux futurs, au festin qui se doit faire, pour celebrer publique- 
ment leur mariage. Le jeune homme est obligé d’aller à la provision; & le 
regale est plus ou moins magnifique, qu’il fait une chasse, ou une pêche, plus 
ou moins avantageuse : on fait les harangues ordinaires, on chante, on danse, 
on se divertit ; & on donne, en presence de toute l’assemblée, la fille au garçon, 
pour sa femme, sans aucune autre ceremonie. S’ilarrive pour lors, que l'humeur 
de l’un, soit incompatible avec le genie de l’autre, le garçon ou la fille se retire 
sans bruit ; & tout le monde est aussi content & satisfait, que si le mariage 
avoit reüssi: parce, disent-ils, qu’il ne faut pas se marier [446] pour être 
malheureux le reste de ses jours. 

Il y a cependant beaucoup d’instabilité dans ces sortes d’alliances; & les 
jeunes mariez changent assez facilement d’inclination, lorsqu'ils passent quel- 
ques années sans avoir d’enfans : car enfin, disent-ils, à leur femme, je ne me 
suis marié avec toi, que dans l’esperance de voir dans ma cabanne une famille 
nombreuse ; & puisque je ne peux avoir d’enfans avec toi, separons-nous, & 
cherchons ailleurs chacun nôtre avantage. En sorte que s’il se trouve quelque 
solidité dans les mariages de nos Gaspesiens, c’est seulement lorsque la femme 
donne à son mari des marques de sa fecondité; & on peut dire avec 
verité, que les enfans sont pour [447] lors comme les liens indissolubles, 
& la confirmation du mariage de leurs pere & mere, qui se tiennent 
fidele compagnie, sans jamais se separer, & qui vivent en si grande union l’un 
avec Pautre, qu’ils semblent n’avoir plus qu’un même cœur, & qu’une même 


416 NOUVELLE RELATION 


volonté. Ils s’aiment cordialement, & s’accordent admirablement bien ; vous 
ne voiez point de querelles, d’inimitiez, ni de reproches parmi eux : les hommes 
laissent la disposition du ménage aux femmes, sans les inquiéter : elles coupent, 
elles tranchent, elles donnent comme il leur plaît, sans que le mari s’en fâche ; 
& je peux dire, que je n’ai jamais vû le Chef de la cabanne où je demeurois, 
demander à sa femme, ce que [448] devenoit la viande d’orignac & de castor, 
quoique tout ce qu’il en avoit amassé diminuât assez vite. Je n’ai non plus 
jamais oùi les femmes se plaindre, de ce qu’on ne les invitoit pas aux festins, 
ni aux conseils ; que les hommes se divertissoient, & mangeoient les bons mor- 
ceaux ; qu’elles travailloient incessament, allant querir le bois pour le chaufage, 
faisant les cabannes, passant les peaux, & s’occupant en d’autres travaux assez 
penibles, qui ne se font que par les femmes. Chacun fait son petit devoir 
doucement, paisiblement, & sans dispute: la multiplication des enfans ne les 
embarrasse pas ; tant plus ils en ont, tant plus sont-ils contens & satisfaits. 

On ne peut exprimer la dou- [449] leur d’un Gaspesien, quand il perd sa 
femme. Il est vrai qu’au dehors il dissimule autant qu’il peut, l’amertume 
qu’il en a dans le cœur ; parce que ces Peuples estiment que c’est une marque 
de foiblesse, indigne d’un homme qui est tant soit peu brave & genereux, de 
pleurer en public. Si donc le mari verse quelquefois des larmes, c’est seule- 
ment pour montrer qu’il nest pas insensible à la mort de sa femme, qu’il aimoit 
tendrement ; quoique dans son particulier il est vrai de dire, qu’il s’abandonne 
entierement à la melancolie, qui le fait mourir assez souvent, ou qui le porte 
jusques aux Nations les plus éloignées, pour y faire la guerre, & noier dans 
le sang de ses ennemis, la tristesse & la douleur qui l’accable. 


[450]' CHAPITRE XVII. 
De la maniere dont les Gaspesiens fort la guerre. 


I nous recherchons les motifs & les sujets particuliers qui ont animé 
ces Peuples à la guerre, nous n’en trouverons pas d’autres, que le desir 
de vanger une injure qu’ils ont reçûé, ou plûtôt l’ambition de se faire 
craindre & redouter des Nations étrangeres : d’où vient qu’on a vû 

des Sauvages traverser de grands Pais, avec quelques poigneées de bled d’Inde 
pour toute provision ; coucher sur la neige, souffrir la faim & la soif, & s’exposer 
aux injures du tems, dans les [451] saisons les plus rigoureuses ; attendre des 
dix à quinze jours derriere un arbre, pour trouver l’occasion de surprendre, 
combatre, vaincre leurs ennemis, leur enlever la chevelure, & retourner au Païs 
chargez de ces cruelles dépoüilles : afin de marquer à toute la Nation, qu’ils 
ont assez de courage pour se vanger eux-seuls des insultes qu’on leur aura faites, 
lorsqu’elle ne se met pas en état d’entrer elle-même dans leur ressentiment. 
L’interêt, ni le desir d’étendre les limites de leur Province, ne president 
jamais dans le Conseil de guerre, & ils n’attaquent pas leurs ennemis dans le 
dessein de s’emparer de leur Pais, ou de les assujettir aux Loix & aux Coûtumes 
de la [452] Gaspesie : ils sont trop contents, pourvû qu’ils puissent avoir l’avan- 
tage de dire, Nous avons vaincu telles & telles Nations; nous nous sommes 


DE LA GASPESIE 417 


vangez de nos ennemis; & nous en avons enlevé une infinité de chevelures, 
aprés en avoir fait un grand carnage dans la chaleur du combat. 

Quoique nos Gaspesiens joüissent des douceurs de la paix, & que je parle 
ici plûtôt de la guerre des anciens de cette Nation, que de ceux d’à present, 
qui semblent avoir entierement perdu cette humeur belliqueuse avec laquelle 
leurs ancêtres ont dompté autrefois, & triomphé glorieusement des Nations les 
plus nombreuses de la Nouvelle France; ils conservent cepen- [453] dant 
encore un reste de cruauté, & un desir d’aller en guerre contre les anciens ennemis 
de la Nation, & particulierement contre les Sauvages situez au Nord de l’em- 
bouchüûre du fleuve de Saint Laurent, qui redoutent nos Gaspesiens, comme les 
plus terribles & les plus cruels de leurs ennemis. . 

Nous appellons ces Barbares les petits Esximaux, pour les distinguer des 
grands, qui demeurent à la Baye des Espagnols, où les Basques vont faire la 
pêche de Moruë, avec beaucoup de perils & de dangers, à cause de la guerre 
implacable qu’ils ont avec ces Sauvages. 

La source & l’origine de cette guerre vient, de ce qu’un Matelot Basque 
ou Espagnol [454] s’etant égaré dans les bois, sans pouvoir se ranger à bord 
avant le départ des navires, qui le chercherent & l’attendirent inutilement, se 
vit obligé de rester dans les cabannes des Sauvages, qu’il rencontra heureuse- 
ment, aprés beaucoup de peines & de fatigues. Ces Barbares firent tout ce 
qu’ils pûrent, pour le consoler de ses disgraces : ils luy donnerent même la fille 
du plus considerable de leurs Capitaines, laquelle il épousa, & vêcut paisible- 
ment avec elle. Cette Sauvagesse avoit pour luÿ toute la complaisance imagin- 
able, principalement depuis qu’elle se vid en état d’être bien-tôt la mere 
d’un enfant, qu’elle souhaitoit avec passion, pour engager son mari à 
Vaimer cordialement. [455] L’Hiver se passa fort agreablement ; les navires 
arriverent à l’ordinaire ; le Capitaine fut réjoüi de trouver son Matelot en 
parfaite santé, & d’apprendre la maniere obligeante dont les Sauvages en avoient 
agi à son égard : il fit à tous les Esxkimaux un festin solemnel de reconnoissance ; 
& il n’y eut que ce miserable, qui fut non seulement insensible aux amitiez 
qu’il avoit reçûës de ces Peuples, mais qui prit même la resolution funeste de 
couper la gorge à sa femme, avant que de retourner en France. Animé de rage 
& de fureur, & dissimulant cependant le cruel dessein qu’il avoit conçû contre 
celle qui luy avoit sauvé la vie, il fit semblant de vouloir aller à la chasse, pour 
regaler [456] les Francois: à cet effet, il s’éloigne des navires, il s’écarte des 
cabannes, s’embarque en canot avec sa femme ; & étant arrivé dans un endroit 
où couloit un agreable ruisseau entre deux rochers, il y débarque avec elle, la 
querelle, la jette par terre, la tuë, l’assomme, & pour comble de sa cruauté, il 
luy ouvre le ventre avec son coûteau, pour voir si les enfans étoient conçûs & 
formez dans le sein des Sauvagesses, comme dans le sein des femmes de l’Europe. 
Il semble que la Nature luy reprocha tout aussi-tôt l’horreur de sa cruauté, & 
l’énormité de son attentat, en luy faisant voir le corps d’un petit enfant qui se 
plaignoit tacitement, de ce qu’il le faisoit mourir si cruellement, [457] aprés 
luy avoir donné la vie. aa 

Je ne sçai pas si ce Matelot dénaturé, qui s’embarqua aprés une action si 
noire & si méchante, conçut tout le regret qu’il en devoit avoir dans le cœur ; 
mais je sçai bien que les Sauvages en furent si sensiblement outrez de douleur, 
qu’ils ont fait passer fur les Espagnols & sur les Basques, la vengeance qu’ils 
jurerent tous contre l’auteur d’un meurtre si détestable : ils en ont en effet tué 

220 


418 NOUVELLE RELATION 


& mangé un grand nombre depuis ce tems-là, sans distinction de l’innocent, 
ou du coupable. Les armes de ces Antropophages sont ordinairement larc & 
la fléche, avec lesquelles ils sont tellement adroits, qu’ils tuent au vol toute 
sorte d’oiseaux, & [458] qu’ils transpercent assez souvent leurs ennemis de part 
en part : les coups en sont tres-dangereux ; par ce qu’il y a toûjours au bout de 
ces fléches une espece de dard, qui reste dans la plaie, quand on les veut retirer. 
Quelques-uns cependant ont l’usage des fuzils, aussi-bien que nos Gaspesiens, 
qui ont désolé deux ou trois fois la Nation des petits Eskimaux. 

On ne voit pas de bagage, ni de femmes dans leur armée, comme dans celle 
de Darius, à qui un trop grand attirail fit perdre la vie, avec le Roïaume. Nos 
Guerriers n’ont rien de superflu : ils se contentent, comme les Soldats d’Alex- 
andre, d’avoir de bonnes armes, & fort peu de provisions, quoiqwils portent 
[459] la guerre dans les Pais les plus éloignez, où ils trouvent abondamment ce 
qui leur est necessaire ; parce qu’il y a tous les jours une bande de Sauvages 
qui chassent, pour nourrir le corps de l’armée, qui gagne tofijours pais. 

Jamais ils n’implorent le secours de leurs alliez, que dans la derniere neces- 
sité; trouvant dans leur ambition assez de courage, pour combatre & vaincre 
leurs ennemis, lorsqu'ils ne sont pas invincibles: ils demandent cependant 
des troupes auxiliaires à leurs alliez, s’ils ne peuvent terminer eux-mêmes leurs 
differens ; & ils députent des Ambassadeurs, avec de coliers de pourcelaine, 
pour les inviter à lever la hache contre les ennemis de la Nation. 

[460] Jamais encore on ne déclare la guerre, que par le conseil des Anciens, 
qui seuls decident en dernier ressort des affaires du Pais, & prescrivent l’ordre 
qu’il faut tenir dans l’éxecution de leurs entreprises militaires: ils fixent le 
jour du départ, & convoquent au festin de guerre les jeunes Guerriers, qui s’y 
trouvent avec leurs armes ordinaires, bien resolus de combatre genereusement 
pour les interêts de la Nation. Ils se matachient la face de rouge, avant que de 
partir; afin, disent-ils, de cacher à leurs camarades & à leurs ennemis, les differens 
changemens de couleur, que la crainte naturelle du combat fait paroître quelque- 
fois sur le visage, & dans le cœur des plus bra- [461] ves & des plus intrepides. 

Les harangues, les festins, les chansons & les danses ne sont pas plûtôt 
achevez, qu’ils s’embarquent dans des chaloupes, & traversent aux Isles de 
Maingan, pais des petits Eskimaux: il n’est pas de femmes, ni de filles qui 
n’excitent leurs maris & les jeunes gens a bien faire leur devoir. 

Etant arrivez chez les ennemis, ils reconnoissent le terrein, observent les 
endroits où sont cabannez les Esximaux ; ils les attaquent vigoureusement, & 
levent la chevelure à tous ceux qui succombent sous la force de leurs armes, 
s’ils sont assez heureux pour demeurer les maîtres du champ de bataille. 

C’est pour satisfaire à leur [462] cruauté, que tous ces Barbares portent 
toûjours un coûteau pendu à leur col, avec lequel ils font des incisions à la tête 
de leurs ennemis, & enlevent la peau à laquelle sont attachez les cheveux, qu’ils 
emportent, comme les monumens glorieux de leur valeur, & de leur generosité : 
semblables en cela à nos anciens Gaulois, qui ne faisoient pas moins de trophée 
que nos Gaspesiens, de la tête de leurs ennemis, qu’ils laissoient pendre au 
poitrail de leurs chevaux, au retour de la guerre. Ils les attachoïent même à 
leurs portes, à peu prés comme on fait encore aujourd’hui les hures des ours 
& des sangliers. 

Le combat fini, tous nos Guerriers s’embarquent pour [463] retourner au 
Païs, où tous ceux de la Nation les reçoivent, avec des réjoüissances extraor- 


DE LA GASPESIE 419 


dinaires. Les filles & les femmes paroissent toutes matachiées, & parées de leurs 
coliers de rassade & de pourcelaine, sur le bord de l’eau, aussi-tôt qu’on apperçoit 
les chaloupes victorieuses des Gaspesiens ; afin de recevoir les trophées & les 
chevelures que leurs maris apportent du combat : elles se jettent même à l’eau 
avec precipitation, pour les aller querir, & plongent dans la riviere ou dans la 
mer, à chaque fois que les Guerriers font des huées & cris de joie, qui marquent 
le nombre des ennemis qu’ils ont tué sur la place, & des prisonniers qu’ils amenent, 
pour leur faire souffrir les tourmens & les [464] les suplices ordinaires. 

Si quelqu'un d’entr’eux est resté dans le combat, ils en font un deüil par- 
ticulier, & donnent quelques jours à la douleur & à la tristesse. On fait ensuite 
les festins des morts, où le Chef expose dans sa harangue les belles actions de 
ceux qui se sont distinguez, & qui sont morts dans le combat. Un profond 
silence suit immediatement ; mais il est tout à coup interrompu par les parens 
des défunts, qui s’écrient de toutes leurs forces, & disent : Qu’il ne s’agit pas de 
pleurer davantage un malheur auquel il n’y a plus de remede; mais bien de 
vanger la mort de leurs compatriots, par une entiere desolation de leurs ennemis. 
C’est ainsi que nos Sauvages vivent presque [465] toûjours en guerre avec les 
Eskimaux ; car comme il est impossible qu’il n’en demeure toûjours quelqu’un 
sur la place, lorsqu’ils se batent contre ces Barbares, ils conçoivent aussi toûjours 
de nouveaux desseins de s’en vanger, à quelque prix que ce soit. 

Les prisonniers cependant, sont ceux qui souffrent le plus: en effet, si les 
Diomedes, le Buziris, les Diocletiens, les Nerons, & leurs semblables, vivoient 
encore, je crois qu’ils auroient en horreur la vengeance, les suplices, & la 
cruauté des Sauvages de la Nouvelle France, & sur tout des Iroquois, envers 
leurs prisonniers ; car enfin, couper les doigts à leurs ennemis, ou les brûler avec 
des tisons ardens par tout le corps ; leur arra- [466] cher les ongles ; leur faire 
manger leur propre chair, aprés qu’elle est toute grillée & rôtie par la violence 
du feu ; verser du sable brûlant & tout rouge, sur les plaies du patient ; passer 
des bâtons dans les nerf des bras & des jambes, & les tourner jusques à ce que 
le corps devienne en double, par la retraction de ces nerfs; faire rougir des 
haches, & les mettre en forme de colier embrasées sur le corps: ce ne sont là 
que les suplices ordinaires, que les Iroquois & les autres Nations font souffrir 
à leurs prisonniers. 

Il m’a paru même, que nos anciens Gaspesiens n’ont pas été moins cruels 
que les autres ; puisque de nos Sauvages d’aujourd’hui ont fait [467] voir depuis 
quelques années, un reste de leur cruauté, dans la guerre qu’ils eurent avec 
les Anglois de la Nouvelle Angleterre : en effet, aïant pris dans la chaleur du 
combat, un Officier Anglois qui s’étoit fait distinguer, par le grand nombre 
des Sauvages qu’il avoit couchez sur le carreau ; ces Barbares animez de rage 
& de vangeance, le dépoüillerent tout nud, & firent dessus son corps plusieurs 
incisions, dans lesquelles ils passerent & lierent tous les rubans qu’il avoit dessus 
son habit; mais avec tant d’inhumanité, que ce pauvre Anglois expira dans 
ce cruel suplice. Ils ne sont pas cependant si cruels à l’égard des femmes & 
des enfans : bien au contraire, ils les nourissent & les élevent [468] parmi ceux 
de leur Nation; ou bien ils les renvoïent ordinairement chez eux, sans leur 
faire aucun mal. On leur casse cependant quelquefois la téte, 4 coups de hache, 
ou de massué. 

On auroit peine 4 croire la constance avec laquelle les prisonniers souffrent 
toutes les cruautez de leurs ennemis, qu’ils bravent méme au milieu des suplices ; 


420 NOUVELLE RELATION 


jusqu’à leur reprocher qu’ils n’entendent rien à les faire souffrir, & les menacer 
de les traiter bien plus cruellement, s’ils les tenoient dans leur Païs. Vous 
diriez, à les voir chanter au milieu des brasiers qui les environnent de toutes 
parts, qu’ils sont insensibles à ces ardeurs : Hé bien, vous me tuërez, disent-ils 
à leurs boureaux ; vous [460] me brûlerez : mais aussi il faut que vous sçachiez 
que j’en ai tué & brûlé plusieurs des vôtres : Si vous me mangez, je me console 
d’avoir aussi mangé quelques-uns de vôtre Nation. Faites donc tout ce que 
vous voudrez; j'ai des oncles, j’ai des neveux, des freres & des cousins, qui 
vangeront bien ma mort, & qui vous feront souffrir plus de tourmens, que vous 
n’en sçauriez inventer contre moi. Mourir de cette sorte chez les Sauvages, 
c’est mourir en grand Capitaine, & en homme de cœur: aussi ces Barbares 
font-ils boire à leurs enfans le sang de ceux qui meurent sans se plaindre dans 
les tourmens ; afin de leur en inspirer le courage & la generosité. C’est une 
réjoüissance publique, lorsque le pa- [470] tient pleure, se plaint, ou soûpire 
dans l’excez de ses douleurs : c’est pourquoy ces Bârbares luy font souffrir tous 
les maux imaginables, afin d’obliger celuy qu’ils tourmentent à se plaindre 
& confesser qu’ils sont adroits & ingenieux à tourmenter les prisonniers. 


CHAPITRE XVIII. 
De la Chasse des Gaspesiens. 


OS Sauvages n’ont pas d’employ plus honorable que la chasse, aprés 
la guerre ; & ils ne s’acquierent pas moins de gloire & de reputation, 
par le nombre des orignaux & des castors qu’ils surprennent & qu’ils 
tüent à [471] la chasse, que par le nombre des chevelures qu’ils en- 

levent de dessus la tête de leurs ennemis. | 

La chasse à l’élan ou orignac, se fait en toutes les saisons de l’année : celle 
de l’Hiver est la plus commode & la plus favorable, principalement lorsque la 
neige est haute, ferme, dure & gelée, à cause que les Sauvages aïant des raquettes 
aux pieds, approchent facilement de l’élan, qui enfonce, & ne peut se dérober 
à la poursuite des Chasseurs. Il n’en est pas de-même en Eté, parce que ces 
animaux courent avec tant de vîtesse, qu’il est presque impossible de les joindre, 
quelquefois même aprés dix jours de course. 

L’orignac est haut comme un cheval; il a le poil grison, [472] la tête à 
peu prés comme celle d’un mulet, & porte son bois double comme le cerf, excepté 
qu’il est large comme une planche, & long de deux à trois pieds, garni aux deux 
côtez de cornichons, qui tombent l’Automne, & se multiplient au Printems, 
par autant de nouvelles branches qu’il a d’années. Il broute l’herbe, & paît 
dans les prairies sur le bord des rivieres, & dans les forêts durant l'Eté : il mange 
en Hiver, les pointes des arbres les plus tendres. Il a le pied fourchu: le 
gauche de derriere guerit du haut-mal; mais il faut le prendre, disent les 
Sauvages, dans le tems qu’il tombe luy-même de ce mal, duquel il se guerit 
en portant ce pied gauche à son oreille. On trouve dans [473] son cœur un 
petit os, que les Gaspesiens appellent Oagando hi guidanne, qui est un remede 


DE LA GASPESIE 421 


souverain pour faciliter les couches des femmes, & les délivrer des tranchées & 
des douleurs de l’enfantement, en le prenant dans du boüillon, aprés l’avoir 
réduit premierement en poudre. Il pleure comme les cerfs & les biches, lors- 
qu’il est pris & qu’il ne peut échaper la mort : les larmes luy tombent des yeux, 
grosses comme des pois. Il ne laisse pas cependant de se défendre de son mieux : 
les approches même en sont assez dangereuses ; parce qu’à la faveur d’un chemin 
qu’il a l'adresse de batre avec ses pieds, il s’élance quelquefois avec tant de 
furie sur les Chasseurs & sur les chiens, qu’il ensevelit & les [474] uns & les autres 
dans la neige ; ensorte que plusieurs Sauvages en sont souvent estropiez, leurs 
chiens restant morts sur la place. Les Chasseurs connoissent les endroits où 
les orignaux se retirent, par certaines pointes d’arbres rongées ou rompuës, 
qu’ils appellent Pactagane, c’est à dire le ravage de l’élan : ils mâchent ce bois, 
& ils reconnoissent au goût de ces branches, le tems que ces animaux ont passé 
par ces endroits. Ils les surprennent quelquefois à l'affût, & par de certains 
colets faits de grosses courroies de cuir, & tendus à la passe ordinaire de cet 
animal. 

La maniere la plus industrieuse de nos Gaspesiens pour surprendre l’orignac, 
est celle-ci. Les Chasseurs connoissant [475] l’endroit de la riviere où il se 
retire ordinairement quand il entre en chaleur, s’embarquent la nuit dans leur 
canot ; & approchant de la prairie où il se retire, broute l’herbe, & se couche 
ordinairement, l’un contrefait le cri de la femelle, & l’autre prend en même- 
tems de l’eau dans son plat d’écorce, & la laisse tomber goute à goute, comme 
si c’étoit la femelle même qui quittât son eau. Le mâle approche, & les Sauvages 
qui sont aux aguets le tuent à coups de fuzil : adresse & subtilité dont ils usent 
aussi à l’égard de la femelle, en contrefaisant le mâle. 

La chasse du castor est aussi facile en Eté, qu’elle est penible en Hiver ; 
quoiqu’elle soit également agreable & di- [476] vertissante dans l’une & dans 
Pautre de ces deux saisons, pour le plaisir qu’on à de voir l’industrie naturelle 
de cet animal, laquelle surpasse l’imagination de ceux qui n’en ont pas vû les 
effets surprenans: aussi les Sauvages disent-ils que les castors ont de l’esprit ; 
qu’ils font une Nation à part; & qu’ils cesseroient de leur faire la guerre, s’ils 
parloient tant soit peu, pour leur apprendre s’ils sont de leurs amis, ou de leurs 
ennemis. 

Le castor est de la grosseur d’un chien barbet: son poil est châtain, noir, 
& rarement blanc; mais toûjours fort doux, & propre à faire des chapeaux : 
c’est le grand commerce de la Nouvelle France. Les Gaspesiens disent que le 
castor est le bien-aimé des François & [477] des autres Europeans, qui les recher- 
chent avec avidité ; & je n’ai pû m’empêcher de rire, entendant un Sauvage 
qui me disoit en se gaussant : Taboé messet kogoiar pajo ne daoit dogoiil mkobit. 
En verité, mon frere, le castor fait parfaitement bien toutes choses ; il nous fait 
des chaudieres, des haches, des épées, des coûteaux ; & nous donne à boire & 
à manger, sans avoir la peine de labourer la terre. 

Cet animal a les pieds courts : ceux de devant sont faits en ongles, ceux de 
derriere en nageoires ; à peu prés comme les loups marins. Il marche fort 
lentement. On l’a cri pour un tems amphibie, moitié chair, moitié poisson ; 
parce qu’il a sa queuë à peu prés de la figure d’une sole, garnie [478] d’écailles 
qui ne se levent pas: mais à present, on le mange comme poisson en Carême ; 
soit qu’il le soit en effet, soit pour ôter les abus qui se commettoient, plusieurs 
reduisant en queuë plus de la moitié du corps de cet animal. Il a la tête grosse 


422 NOUVELLE RELATION 


& courte: ses machoires sont armées de quatre grosses dents tranchantes, 
sçavoir deux en-haut, & deux en-bas, qui sont propres à polir l'or & l’argent, 
étant dures & douces tout ensemble. C’est avec ces quatre dents, que le castor 
coupe des petites perches pour faire sa cabanne, & des arbres gros comme la 
cuisse, qu’il fait tomber justement dans l’endroit même où il prévoit qu'ils luy 
seront plus utiles & plus necessaires : il découpe [479] ces arbres par morceaux 
de longueurs differentes, selon l’usage qu’il en veut faire; il les roule sur la 
terre, ou les pousse à l’eau avec ses pates de devant, pour bâtir sa cabanne, & 
fortifier une digue qui arrête le courant d’un ruisseau, & forme un étang con- 
siderable, sur le bord duquel il se loge ordinairement. Ily a toûjours un maître 
castor, qui preside à ce travail, & qui frape même ceux qui ne font pas bien 
leur devoir. Ils charient tous la terre sur leur queuë, marchant sur les pates 
de derriere, & portant dans celles de devant, le bois qui leur est necessaire pour 
achever leur ouvrage : ils mêlent la terre avec le bois, & font une espece de 
maçonnerie avec leur queuë, [480] à peu prés comme les Maçons avec leur 
truelle. Ils élevent des chaussées & des digues larges de deux ou trois pieds, 
hautes de douze ou quinze pieds, & longues de vingt ou trente ; mais si difficiles 
& si mal-aisées à rompre, que c’est veritablement le plus rude travail de la 
chasse au castor, qui par ces digues font d’un petit ruisseau, un étang si con- 
siderable, qu’ils inondent assez souvent une grande étenduë de pais. Ils 
embarrassent même tellement les rivieres, qu’il faut se mettre souvent à l’eau, 
pour monter les canots par dessus les digues ; comme il m'est arrivé plusieurs 
fois, en allant de Nipisiguit à la Riviere de Sainte-Croix, & autres endroits de 
la Gaspesie. 

[481] La cabanne du castor est haute de sept à huit pieds, si bien maçonnée 
& mastiquée avec la terre & le bois, que la pluie, ni le vent n’y peuvent entrer : 
elle est divisée en trois étages, où logent separément les grands, les moiïens, & 
les petits, qui couchent sur de la paille, avec cette circonstance digne de re- 
marque, que le nombre de ces animaux, qui multiplient beaucoup, venant à 
augmenter, les plus vieux cedent la cabanne aux plus jeunes, qui ne manquent 
jamais de les assister à bâtir une maison; comme si ces animaux vouloient 
donner une leçon naturelle aux peres & aux enfans, de se soulager reciproque- 
ment les uns & les autres. 

Le castor ne se nourrit pas [482] dans l’eau, comme quelques-uns se sont 
imaginez : il prend sa nourriture à terre, & mange certaines écorces d’arbre, 
qu’il découpe par morceaux & transporte dans sa cabanne, pour en faire sa 
provision durant l’Hiver. La chair en est delicate, à peu prés comme celle de 
mouton. Les roignons sont recherchez par les Apoticaires ; & on s’en sert avec 
succez, pour soulager les femmes en couche, & appaiser les vapeurs. 

Quelque chasse qu’on fasse du castor, soit en Hiver, ou en Eté, il faut toû- 
jours rompre & briser la cabanne, dont nos Sauvages observent éxactement 
toutes les avenuës ; afin d’assieger & d’attaquer plus seurement cet animal, 
qui est retranché dans son petit fort. 

[483] Au Printems & l'Eté, ils se prennent à la trape, laquelle venant à se 
détendre, une grosse piece de bois leur tombe dessus le corps, & les assomme : 
mais il n’est rien de si divertissant, que la chasse de l’Hiver, qui est cependant 
tres-penible & laborieuse ; & en effet il faut, & on est obligé de troüer la glace 
à plus de quarante ou cinquante endroits, rompre les digues, briser les cabannes, 
& faire écouler les eaux, pour observer & découvrir plus aisément les castors, 


DE LA GASPESIE 423 


qui se joüent, se moquent & se dérobent bien souvent à la poursuite du Chasseur, 
en s’échapant de leur étang, par une sortie secrete que ces animaux ont instinct 
de laisser à leur chaussée, qui a communication avec un [484] autre étang voisin. 

Je passe ici sous silence, les differentes chasses des loutres, des ours, des 
cerfs, & de quantité d’autres animaux de la Gaspesie ; parce qu’elles n’ont rien 
de considerable, & qu’il est plus à propos de donner ici au Lecteur, la connois- 
sance des especes differentes des bêtes-fauves, d’oiseaux, & des poissons qui se 
trouvent dans la Gaspesie : où l’on voit premiérement trois sortes de perdrix, 
dont les unes ont l’œil faizané, & sont d’un plumage mêlé de blanc, de noir, 
de gris, & d’orange : les autres sont grises ; & j’en ai vû plusieurs durant l’Hiver, 
qui étoient toutes blanches. Les perdrix du Canada se perchent & se juchent 
sur les arbres, & mangent le bouleau [485] ou le sapin, qui leur communique 
un peu de son amertume : l’estomac en est blanc & delicat, comme celuy d’un 
chapon ; & celles qui ne mangent que du bouleau sont fort excellentes, en 
quelque maniere qu’on les accommode. La chasse en est facile, principalement 
au Printems, lorsqu'elle veut faire sa ponce ; parce qu’elle fait un bruit avec 
le batement de ses aîles, qui la découvre au Chasseur : & elle est si peu farouche, 
qu’on la chasse comme les poules devant soi, & se laisse approcher, jusqu’à 
souffrir qu’on luy presente un colet attaché au bout d’une perche, dans lequel 
elle passe le tête, & facilite ainsi le moïen de la prendre. 

Les canards Canadiens sont [486] semblables à ceux que nous avons en 
France ; on en voit cependant une espece differente, que nous appellons canards 
branchus, qui se juchent sur les arbres, & dont le plumage est tres-beau, pour 
la diversité agreable des couleurs qui le composent. 

L'oiseau mouche, que quelques-uns appellent l’oiseau du Ciel, est de la 
grosseur d’une noix : il a le bec mince & pointu comme une éguille : il ne vit 
que du suc des fleurs, comme les mouches à miel : son plumage est d’une beauté 
ravissante, principalement celuy de la gorge, qui est embelli d’un azur & d’un 
rouge éclatant, qu’on ne peut assez admirer, sur tout quand il est exposé au 
Soleil. Nos Gaspesiens l’appellent Nirido ; & [487] on n’en fait la chasse 
seulement que par curiosité : on charge même les fuzils de sable; parce que 
le plomb le plus menu seroit assez gros pour écraser ce petit oiseau, que l’on 
fait secher au four & au Soleil, de crainte que la corruption ne se mette dans 
un corps qui paroît tout de plume. 

Les pic-bois, que nous appellons de ce nom, parce qu’ils prennent leur 
nourriture en picotant les troncs des arbres qui sont pourris, se distinguent par 
deux sortes de plumage ; les uns sont mouchetez de noir & blanc; les autres 
sont tout noirs, & portent sur la tête une huppe d’un rouge admirablement 
beau : ils ont la langue extrémement dure, & aiguë comme des éguilles, avec 
laquelle ils font dans les [488] arbres, des trous à y mettre le poing. 

Les aigles, les titiais, les rossignols, dont le chant n’est pas si charmant, à 
beaucoup prés, que ceux de l’Europe ; l’outarde, Voie, les canards, les cignes, 
cormorans, siffleurs, le goislan, la margot, les beccasses, beccassines, ortolans, 
grives, merles, pies, corbeaux, marionnets ; des oiseaux même tout blancs, tout 
rouges, bleus, jaunes, & une infinité d’autres, sont fort communs dans la Gas- 
pesie, mais qu’on ne connoît pas en France, & dont le recit seroit inutile, pour 
navoir rien de plus curieux que les noms qu’on leur donne. 

On voit encore chez nos Gaspesiens trois sortes de loups: le loup servier 
est d’un [489] poil argenté ; il a deux cornichons à la tête, qui sont de poil tout 


424 NOUVELLE RELATION 


noir : la viande en est assez bonne, quoiqu’elle sent un peu trop le sauvagin. 
Cet animal est plus affreux à voir, que cruel: la peau est tres-bonne, pour en 
faire des fourrures. LS 

Le loup marin est une espece de poisson, dont la peau est mouchetée d’un 
poil noir & blanc : il fait ses petits à terre, ou sur quelques rochers ; la mere a 
l'instinct de les porter sur son dos, pour les apprendre à nager, lorsqu'ils sont 
trop fatiguez dans l’eau. Leurs pieds sont fort courts; ceux de devant faits 
en ongles, & ceux de derriere en nageoires. Ils ne marchent pas, mais ils 
rampent sur le sable ; où ils dorment & se divertissent au [490] Soleil, princi- 
palement quand la marée est basse, qui est le tems le plus propre & le plus com- 
mode pour en faire la chasse, qui est d’un tres grand profit, tant à cause de 
l’huile, que pour le debit considerable qu’on fait de la peau de ces poissons, 
dont quelques-uns sont aussi grands & aussi gros que des chevaux & des bœufs. 
Ces loups marins s’appellent Metauh, pour les distinguer d’avec les communs, 
qui s’appellent Oüaspous : la chair en est passablement bonne, & la fressûre 
paroît d’aussi bon goût, que celle du porc. Les autres loups sont à peu prés 
comme ceux de nôtre Europe, excepté qu’ils ne sont pas si méchans, ni si cruels. 

Les liévres de Canada sont [491] fort differens de ceux de France, & ils 
ressemblent aux lapins : la chair cependant en est assez delicate, sur tout quand 
on la met en pâte, ou en civet. Plusieurs ont un goût d’amertume, à cause du 
sapin qu’ils mangent durant l’Hiver, étant assez probable qu’ils paissent l’herbe 
en Eté. Ce qu’on remarque de curieux dans ces animaux, c’est que leur poil 
change de couleur, selon le cours des saisons de l’année : il commence à blanchir, 
aux approches de l’Hiver ; & il est tout-à-fait blanc, quand la terre est couverte 
de neïge: mais il perd cette blancheur & devient tout gris, au Printemps, & 
durant l’Eté. 

Les ours, le quinquajou, les cerfs, les renards, caribous, [492] martes, porcs- 
épis, rats-musquez, écureüils, &c., sont autant d’animaux qu’on trouve com- 
munément dans la Gaspesie ; où l’on voit encore une prodigieuse quantité de 
toute sorte de poisson, moruë, saumon, harans, truites, bar, maquereau, barbué, 
aloze, esturgeon, carpes, brochets, brémes, anguilles, ancornets, poisson doré, 
huîtres, esplan, raie, poisson blanc: en un mot, on peut dire que la chasse & la 
péche y sont abondantes, & qu’on y trouve, sans beaucoup de peines, toutes les 
choses necessaires a la vie. 

C’est un plaisir d’y voir encore ce nombre prodigieux de baleines ; mais sur 
tout, le combat terrible de ce poisson monstrueux avec l’espadon, lequel porte 
dessus son dos une [493] espece d’épée ou de dard, qui luy sert d’armes offensives 
& défensives, pour attaquer & se défendre des aîlerons & de la queuë de la baleine. 
Il est surprenant de voir les approches & les attaques mutuelles de ces deux 
puissans ennemis, qui mugissent comme des taureaux animez de rage & de 
fureur ; l’espadon s’élance hors de l’eau, & tombe de toute sa force à la renverse 
dessus la baleine, afin de la percer de son dard. La baleine se plonge l’eau, & 
se dérobe aux coups de l’espadon, qu’elle tâche de batre & de vaincre avec sa 
queué & ses ailerons, dont le bruit se fait entendre de plus d’une lieuë. La mer 
paroît toute agitée, par les mouvemens & les efforts violens de ces pois- [494] 
sons formidables ; & elle devient toute rouge de leur sang, qui sort en abon- 
dance de leurs plaies, qui les font mourir quelquefois : telle étoit la baleine que 
nous trouvames échotiée 4 la côte, à quinze lieués de la riviere de Saint Joseph, 
dite Ristigouche; le sable qui la couvroit nous empêcha de voir les coups 


DE LA GASPESIE 425 


furieux qu’elle avoit reçûs de l’espadon, nous n’en vimes que deux ou trois, qui 
paroissoient fort larges & profonds. Quoique la baleine soit un poisson d’une 
grosseur & d’une force prodigieuse, elle ne peut cependant renverser, ni briser 
avec sa queué les navires, comme plusieurs se le persuadent un peu trop facile- 
ment. 

Le requin, que quelques-uns appellent requiem, est un [495] poisson fort 
dangereux, armé de deux [à trois] rangées de dents, long de quatre à cinq pieds, 
& gros à proportion. Il est tres-dangereux de se baigner dans les endroits où 
ce poisson se retire ordinairement ; parce qu’il court aprés ceux qu’il apperçoit 
dans l’eau, & leur coupe un bras ou une cuisse, qu’il mange & qu’il devore en 
même-tems. Je me souviens qu’un pauvre passager s’étant jetté à la mer par 
divertissement, pour se baigner dans un tems de calme, beau & serain, fut assez 
malheureux de rencontrer un de ces requiem, qui ne luy fit aucun mal, aussi 
long-tems qu’il fut à l’eau ; mais dés-lors que ceux du navire se mirent en état 
d'enlever ce pauvre miserable, le requin s’élança [496] sur luy, & luy coupa la 
cuisse avant qu’il fût dans le vaisseau, où il mourut deux heures aprés. 


CHAPITRE XIX. 


Les festins, les danses, € les divertissemens des Gaspesiens. 


N ne trouve guere de Nation qui ait les festins plus en usage que les 

Sauvages de la Nouvelle France, mais principalement nos Gaspesiens, 

qui regardent plûtôt l’affection & la sincerité d’une amitié veritable- 

ment cordiale, dans le peu qu’ils donnent, ou qu’ils reçoivent de leurs 

amis, que la quantité & la qualité des viandes ; puisqu’avec un [497] morceau 

de tabac, ou quelqu’autre chose de peu de consequence, ils se regalent les uns 

les autres, comme s’ils se faisoient des festins les plus grands du monde: d’où 

vient que les plus miserables, si on peut dire qu’il y en ait quelques-uns dans 

cette Nation de Barbares, qui ne met aucune, ou fort peu de distinction entre 

le riche & le pauvre, trouvent toûjours, dans le peu qu’ils possedent, dequoy 

rendre la pareille à leurs amis, & faire des festins aussi considerables, que ceux 
ausquels on les a invitez. 

Je me suis servi heureusement de cette grande facilité que l’on a de contenter 
ces Peuples, & de s’insinuer dans leur amitié, par des festins qui ne coûtent pas 
grand’ chose, [498] lorsqu’un Sauvage m’étant venu prier d’aller baptiser une 
petit enfant, qui mourut deux jours aprés son baptéme, dans la Baye de Gachpé, 
je demeurai le reste de l’Hiver avec ces Infideles, pour tâcher de les gagner à 
Jesus-Curist. Monsieur Denys avoit donné à nôtre Gaspesien, des pois & de la 
farine, pour en regaler les cabannes, par deux festins que j’avois dessein de leur 
faire, & qui en effet me gagnerent pour toûjours l’amitié de ces Barbares. Je 
formai avec toute ma farine, autant de cœurs que nous étions de personnes ; 

_& les aïant fait cuire dans une chaudiere, avec de la moëlle d’orignac, je les 
arrangeai tous dans un plat d’écorce, en sorte que le plus grand de ces cœurs, 
qui re- [499] presentoit le mien, cachoit & couvroit les plus petits, qui figuroient 
ceux des Sauvages : je leur fis la harangue ordinaire, qui doit preceder toûjours 


426 NOUVELLE RELATION 


les festins, en leur disant ; Que la nature ne m’aïant donné qu’un cœur, la charité 
& le zele que j’avois pour leur salut, me faisoient souhaiter avec passion, qu’ils 
se multipliât en autant de Gaspesiens, qu’ils étoient presens à mes yeux ; voulant 
bien même y comprendre les absens, pour leur témoigner à tous ègalement, mon 
estime & mon affection : Que par le plus grand de tous ces cœurs qui cachoit 
les autres, je voulois leur faire connoitre qu’ils logeroient doresnavant par in- 
clination dans le mien ; que je les prenois tous sous ma protection, pour [500] 
leur procurer tous les avantages qu’ils en pouvoient raisonnablement esperer, 
soit pour le spirituel, soit pour le temporel : & qu’enfin, je ne les avois arrangez 
tous ensemble dans un même plat d’écorce, qu’afin de leur faire connoître que 
les nôtres ne devoient plus jamais se separer d’inclination, mais bien s’unir 
étroitement par les liens indissolubles de la charité Chrêtienne. Cette petite 
harangue se termina par le present & la distribution que je fis de tous ces cœurs, 
à chaque Sauvage, en luy disant ces paroles: Tahoé nkameramon ignemoulo ; 
nkameramon achkou oüiguidex : Mon frere, je te donne mon cœur; tu de- 
meureras & tu cabanneras doresnavant dans mon cœur. Il n’est [5o1] pas 
croïable combien ces Barbares furent satisfaits de mon regale, qu’ils reçûrent 
avec toute la joie possible : les Chefs me firent des festins publics & particuliers, 
pour me témoigner qu’ils m’enfantoient, c’est à dire qu’ils m’adoptoient & me 
recevoient au nombre des Sauvages Gaspesiens : ils me conjurerent tous de 
rester avec eux, afin de me perfectionner dans la langue ; ce que je leur accordai 
d’autant plus volontiers, que la demande & la priere qu’ils m’en faisoient, étoit 
conforme a mes inclinations. 

Cependant, quoique ces Barbares se passent de peu dans leurs festins, ils ne 
laissent pas quelquefois d’y faire paroitre une grande profusion de viandes, 
particulierement dans [502] ceux qu’ils font le Printems, pour se réjoüir ensemble 
de l’heureux succez de la chasse qu’ils ont faite durant ’Hiver. Ils n’observent 
aucune regle d’œconomie dans ces sortes de festins ; afin de témoigner à leurs 
amis, la joie qu’ils ont de les posseder. Les femmes, les enfans, ni les jeunes 
garçons qui n’ont pas encore tué d’orignac, & tous ceux qui ne sont pas en état 
d’aller en guerre contre la Nation, n’entrent pas ordinairement dans les cabannes 
de festin : il faut attendre le signal que donne un Sauvage, par deux ou trois 
huées differentes, qui font connoître aux femmes qu’il est tems de venir prendre 
les restes de la portion de leurs maris, dont elles se regalent avec leur famille, & 
leurs amis. 

[503] La façon d’inviter au festin, est sans compliment & sans ceremonie ; 
& on n’invite personne, que tout ce qu’on leur veut donner ne soit cuit aupara- 
vant: celuy qui traite fait à la porte de sa cabanne, le cri du festin, en disant 
ces paroles : Chigoüidah, outkbarlno : Venez ici dans ma cabanne, car je veux 
vous regaler. Ceux ausquels ces paroles s’adressent, ÿ répondent par trois ou 
quatre huées de ho, ho, ho, ho, sortent promtement de chez eux avec leur 
ouragan, entrent dans la cabanne du festin, prennent la premiere place qui se 
presente, fument du tabac dans le calumet du Chef, & reçoivent sans compli- 
ment la portion que celuy qui partage & distribuë la viande, leur jette, ou leur 
donne [504] au bout d’un bâton. 

Jamais les Gaspesiens ne font festin de deux sortes de viandes à la fois: ils 
ne mélangent pas, par éxemple, le castor avec l’orignac, ni celuy-ci avec l’ours, 
ou quelque autre animal ; ils font même des regales où l’on y boit la graisse & 
l’huile toute pure. Il y a des festins de santé, d’adieu, de chasse, de paix, de 


DE LA GASPESIE 427 


guerre de remerciment, des festins à tout manger, qui se font expressément pour 
avoir bonne chasse ; c’est à dire qu’il faut tout avaler, avant que de sortir de la 
cabanne ; & il est défendu d’en donner tant soit peu aux chiens, sous peine 
d’être exposé à de grands malheurs : il est cependant permis à ceux qui ne peuvent 
achever leur portion, [505] de les presenter à leurs compagnons, qui en prennent 
chacun ce qu’il en souhaïte ; le reste est jetté au feu, en faisant les éloges de 
celuy qui dans ce rencontre s’est acquis la reputation & la gloire d’avoir mangé 
plus que les autres. 

Tous les festins se commencent par les harangues que le Chef fait aux conviez, 
afin de leur déclarer le sujet pour lequel il a voulu regaler la compagnie; & on 
les finit par les danses & les chansons, qui sont les complimens ordinaires de nos 
Sauvages. Le Maître du festin ne mange pas ordinairement avec les autres ; 
parce. dit-il, qu’il ne les a pas appellez pour diminuer la portion de ce qu’il leur 
presente, le tout etant uni- [506] quement pour eux. 

Leurs chansons & leurs danses sont également desagreables, puisqu'ils n’y 
observent aucune regle, ni mesure, que celle que leur caprice leur inspire: ils 
ont neanmoins communément assez bonne voix, & sur tout les femmes, qui 
chantent fort agreablement les Cantiques spirituels qu’on leur enseigne, & dans 
lesquels elles font consister une bonne partie de leur devotion. Elles n’ont pas 
le même agrément à chanter à la mode des Sauvages, qui poussent du fond de 
leur estomac, certains tons d’ho ho ho, ha ha ha, hé hé hé, ho ho, ha he he, qui 
passent pour des airs également charmans & melodieux, chez nos Gaspesiens. 

Ils dansent ordinairement en [507] rond, à la cadance & au bruit qu’on fait 
en frapant avec un bâton sur un plat d’écorce, ou dessus une chaudiere. Ils 
ne se tiennent pas par la main, mais ils ont tous les poings fermez : les filles les 
croisent l’une sur l’autre, un peu éloignées de leur estomac: les hommes les 
élevent en lair, & font plusieurs mouvemens & postures differentes, comme s’ils 
étoient 4 la guerre pour combatre, vaincre, & enlever les chevelures de leurs 
ennemis. Ils ne sautent pas; mais en récompense ils frapent la terre, tantôt 
avec un pied, tantôt avec tous les deux ensemble. 

Les danses particulieres des femmes & des filles sont beaucoup differentes 
de celles des hommes ; car elles font des [508] contorsions horribles en dansant : 
elles retirent & avancent les bras, les mains & tout le corps d’une maniere tout- 
à-fait hideuse, regardant fixement la terre, comme si elles en vouloient arracher 
quelque chose, par la force & la violence de leurs contorsions, jusqu’à se mettre 
touteneau. Elles ne poussent pas du fond de leur estomac, comme les hommes, 
ces huées & ces cris d’ho ho, d’ha ha, d’hé hé; mais elles font seulement avec 
les levres, un certain sifflement de serpent, qui est l’harmonie ordinaire de leur 
danse, qu’on peut appeller proprement un sabat innocent de Sauvages. 

Outre ces danses & ces festins, ils ont pour leur divertissement ordinaire, les 
jeux de Leldestaganne & du Chagat, [509] qui se joüent avec des petits os noirs 
& blancs : celuy-là gagne la partie, qui fait venir tout blanc, ou tout noir, autant 
de fois qu’ils en font convenus. Ils sont tres-fideles à payer ce qu’ils ont perdu 
au jeu, sans qu’ils se querellent, ou qu’ils avancent la moindre parole d’im- 
patience ; parce, disent-ils, qu’ils ne joüent que pour se divertir, & se consoler 
avec leurs amis. Il y a encore quelques autres sortes de jeux & de divertissemens 
parmi nos Sauvages, mais qui sont de si peu de consequence, qu’ils ne meritent 
pas qu’on en fasse ici aucune mention. 


428 NOUVELLE RELATION 


[510] CHAPITRE XX. 


Des remedes, maladies &5 mort des Gaspesiens. 


LS sont tous naturellement Chirurgiens, Apoticaires & Medecins, par la 
connoissance & par l’experience qu’ils ont de certains simples, dont ils 
se servent heureusement, pour guerir des maux qui nous paroïssent incur- 
ables. 

Il est vrai que nos Gaspesiens joüissent souvent d’une santé parfaite, jusqu’à 
une heureuse vieillesse, n’étant pas sujets à plusieurs maladies qui nous affligent 
en France; comme gouttes, gravelle, écroüelles, galle, &c. soit parce qu’ils 
sont engendrez par des parens [511] qui sont sains & dispos, d’une humeur & 
d’un sang bien temperez ; soit à cause que, comme nous avons dit, ils vivent en 
parfaite union & concorde, sans procez & sans chicane pour les biens du monde, 
qui ne leur font jamais perdre le repos, & leur tranquillité ordinaire. 

Ils previennent les incommoditez & les maladies, par certains vomitifs, com- 
posez d’une racine faite à peu prés comme celle de la chicorée, ou par certaine 
graine qu’ils pennent aux arbres, & qu’ils font infuser dix ou douze heures dans 
un plat d’écorce plein d’eau, ou de boüillon. La suërie, cependant, est le grand 
remede des Gaspesiens ; & on peut dire veritablement, que plusieurs François 
y ont aussi [512] trouvé la guerison des fluxions & douleurs inveterées, qui 
paroissent incurables en France. La suërie est une espece d’étuve, faite en 
forme d’une petite cabanne couverte d’écorce, de peau de castor & d’orignac ; 
en sorte qu’il n’y a aucune ouverture. Les Sauvages mettent au milieu, des 
roches ardentes, qui échaufent tellement ceux qui sont dedans, que l’eau coule 
bientôt de toutes les parties du corps. Ils jettent de l’eau dessus ces pierres 
embrasées, dont la fumée montant jusques au haut de la cabanne, retombe sur 
leur dos, à peu prés comme une pluie chaude & brûlante; jusques-là même, 
que quelques-uns ne pouvant en souffrir la chaleur, se trouvent obligez d’en 
sortir au plus vite. 

[513] Ce qui sert de tourment aux uns, est neanmoins un sujet de divertisse- 
ment pour les autres, qui prennent un plaisir singulier de jetter de l’eau de tems 
en tems sur ces roches, pour voir celuy qui aura plus de constance à souffrir : ils 
chantent même, & se divertissent, faisant des huées à leur ordinaire ; & sortant 
brusquement de cette cabanne, ils se jettent dans la riviere pour se rafraîchir ; 
ce qui causeroit sans doute de grosses maladies, &la mort même, à des gens qui 
serolent moins robustes que nos Gaspesiens, qui mangent avec une avidité 
nonpareille, immediatement aprés qu’ils sont sortis de la suërie & de la riviere. 

Ils sont fort amateurs de la saigné, & s'ouvrent même la [514] veine eux- 
mêmes, avec des pierres à feu, ou la pointe de leur coûteau. S'il paroît quelque 
tumeur, soit au bras, soit à la jambe, ils scarifient les endroits où est le mal; & 
ils font plusieurs incisions avec les mêmes instrumens, afin d’en sucer plus com- 
modément le sang gâté, & en retirer toute la corruption. 

La gomme de sapin, que quelques-uns appellent therebentine, & qui est 
comme une espece de baume souverain pour toute sorte de plaies, & de coups 


DE LA GASPESIE 429 


de hache, de coûteau & de fuzil, est le premier & le plus ordinaire remede dont 
nos Gaspesiens se servent avec succez, pour faire de tres-belles cures. Comme 
cette gomme est quelque-fois un peu trop sensible aux [515] malades, ils ont 
Pindustrie, pour en moderer l’activité, de prendre & de mâcher la pellicule qui 
est attachée au sapin, aprés qu’ils en ont enlevé la premiere écorce : ils crachent 
Peau qui en sort sur la partie malade, & forment du reste une espece de cata- 
plasme, qui adoucit le mal, & guerit le blessé en tres-peu de tems. 

Ils ont encore quantité de racines & de simples qui nous sont inconnus dans 
l'Europe, mais dont les Sauvages connoïssent admirablement bien la vertu & 
les proprietez, pour s’en servir dans le besoin. 

Les Gaspesiens & les Gaspesiennes, hommes, femmes, filles, garçons, prennent 
du tabac : ils le considerent, l’estiment & le regardent comme une manne qui 
leur est venué [516] du Ciel, depuis que le Papxootparout en donna le premier 
usage à la Nation Gaspesienne, comme nous avons remarqué au Chapitre de 
leur croïance touchant l’Immortalité de l’Ame. En effet le tabac, qu’ils 
appellent Tamaboé, leur paroît absolument necessaire pour les aider à souffrir 
les disgraces de la vie humaine : il les délasse dans leurs voiages, leur donne de 
Vesprit dans les Conseils, decide de la paix & la guerre : il leur amortit la faim, 
leur sert de boire & de manger ; & fussent-ils dans la derniere foiblesse, ils es- 
perent toûjours de revoir le malade en sa premiere santé, pourvû qu’il puisse 
encore fumer du tabac : le contraire est un préjugé assûré de sa mort. 

[517] Si les simples, les décoctions & les remedes ordinaires, ne sont pas assez 
efficaces pour guerir les Gaspesiens, les amis de ceux qui sont malades ne manquent 
pas d’appeller au secours le Bouhine, c’est à dire le Jongleur, qui les souffle par 
tout, & principalement sur la partie affligée ; afin de chasser le ver, ou le Demon 
qui le tourmente : il fait ses invocations, ses contorsions & ses huées ordinaires, 
comme nous l’avons déja remarqué, en parlant des superstitions de ces Sauvages. 

Il n’y en a point cependant plus à plaindre, que les malades qui souffrent 
sans se plaindre, le tintamarre, le bruit & le fracas du Jongleur, & de ceux de sa 
cabanne : il semble même que nos Gaspesiens, [518] qui d’ailleurs paroissent 
assez humains & dociles, manquent en ce point de charité & de complaisance 
pour leurs malades ; & on peut dire veritablement, qu’ils ne sçavent ce que c’est 
d’en prendre soin, ni de leur preparer les viandes qui les peuvent soulager, leur 
donnant indifferemment à boire & à manger de tout ce qu’ils desirent, & quand 
ils le demandent. Ils les traînent, portent, ou les embarquent avec eux dans 
leurs voïages, quand il y a apparence de guerison : mais si la santé du malade 
est tout-à-fait desesperée, en sorte qu’il ne puisse plus ni manger, ni boire, ni 
fumer, ils leur cassent la tête quelquefois, tant pour le délivrer du mal qu’il 
endure, que pour se soulager eux- [519] mêmes, de la peine qu’ils ont de le 
traîner par tout. 

Ils ne sçavent non plus ce que c’est, que de consoler un pauvre malade ; & 
dés le moment qu’il ne mange plus, ou ne fume plus du tabac, ou bien qu’il 
perd la parole, ils l’abandonnent entierement, & ne luy disent pas une seule 
parole de tendresse, ni de consolation: parce que ces Barbares estiment que 
c’est une chose tout-a-fait inutile, de parler à une personne qui ne peut pas 
répondre, & qui se met en état de voiageur, pour aller avec ses compatriots & 
& ses ancêtres, dans le Païs des Ames ; d’où vient qu’ils expirent assez souvent, 
sans qu'aucun de ceux qui sont dans la cabanne s’en apperçoive : gardant 
cependant, [520] durant tout le tems de l’agonie, un profond silence ; & faisant 


480 | NOUVELLE RELATION 


paroître dans un visage consterné, Vaffliction & la douleur qu’ils reçoivent de 
cette fâcheuse separation. 

Lorsque le moribond a rendu les derniers soûpirs, les parens & les amis du 
défunt couvrent le corps, d’une belle peau d’élan, ou robe de castor, dans 
laquelle on l’ensevelit & on le garrote avec des courroies de cuir ou d’écorce, 
d’une telle maniere, que le menton touche aux genoux, & les pieds à leur dos ; 
d’où vient que leurs fosses sont toutes rondes, de la figure d’un puits, & pro- 
fondes de quatre à cinq pieds: cependant, le Chef & les Capitaines ordonnent 
de fraper sur les écorces de la cabanne du défunt, en di- [521] sant ces paroles, 
Oué, oué, oué, afin d’en faire sortir l’esprit. On députe ensuite de jeunes 
Sauvages, pour aller annoncer par toute la Nation, & même aux Habitations 
Françoises, la mort de leurs parens & amis. Ces Députez approchant des . 
cabannes ausquelles ils sont envoïez, montent dessus un arbre, & crient par 
trois fois de toute leur force, qu’un tel Sauvage est mort ; aprés quoy ils s’appro- 
chent, & font à ceux qu’ils trouvent, le recit des circonstances de la maladie & 
de la mort de leur ami, les invitant d’assister à ses funérailles, qui se celebrent 
en cette maniere. 

Tout le monde étant assemblé dans la cabanne du défunt, on transporte le 
corps au Cimetiere commun de la [522] Nation ; on le met dans la fosse, & on 
le couvre d’écorce, & des peaux les plus belles : on l’embellit même avec des 
branches de sapin & des rameaux de cedre, & ils y mettent ensuite tout ce qui 
est à l’usage du défunt; si c’est un homme, son arc, ses fléches, son épée, son 
casse-tête, son fuzil, poudre, plomb, écuelle, chaudiere, raquettes, &c. si c’est 
une femme, son colier pour aller à la traîne ou porter le bois, sa hache, son 
coûteau, sa couverture, ses coliers de pourcelaine & de rassade, & ses utensiles, 
tant à matachier & peindre leur robe, que les éguilles à coudre les canots & à 
lasser les raquettes. On comble la fosse de terre, & on y met par-dessus quantité 
de bâches en [523] forme de mausolee, élevé de trois ou quatre pieds, sur lequel 
paroît une belle Croix, si le défunt est un de nos Gaspesiens Porte-Croix. L’en- 
terrement se fait dans le silence ; pendant que le Chef & les Anciens forment 
un cercle auprés de la fosse, les femmes pleurent & font des cris lugubres, qui 
finissent par le commandement du Chef, lequel invite tous les Gaspesiens au 
festin de mort, où il expose dans sa harangue les belles qualitez & les actions les 
plus memorables du défunt: il represente même à toute l’assemblée, par des 
paroles aussi touchantes qu’elles sont energiques, l’instabilité de la vie humaine, 
& la necessité qu’ils ont de mourir, pour aller rejoindre dans le Pais des Ames, 
[524] leurs amis & leurs parens, dont ils renouvellent la memoire. Il s’arrête 
un moment, & paroit tout 4 coup avec un visage plus gai & moins triste, & 
ordonne la distribution de ce qui est apprété pour le festin, qui est suivi de 
danses & des chansons ordinaires. Les parens cependant & les amis du défunt 
prennent le deüil, c’est à dire qu’ils se barboüillent le visage de noir, & coupent 
le bout de leurs cheveux, qu’il ne leur est plus permis de porter en cadenettes, 
ni de les orner de colier de rassade & de pourcelaine, autant de tems qu’ils sont 
en deüil, qui dure une année toute entiere. 

Si quelque Sauvage vient à mourir durant Hiver, en quelque lieu éloigné 
du Cimetiere commun de ses ancê- [525] tres, ceux de sa cabanne l’envelopent 
avec beaucoup de soin, dans des écorces matachiées de rouge & de noir, le 
mettent dessus les branches de quelque arbre sur le bord de la riviere, & luy 
font avec des bûches une espece de petit fort, de crainte qu’il ne soit endom- 


DE LA GASPESIE 481 


magé par les bêtes-fauves, ou par les oiseaux de rapine : le Chef députe au Prin- 
tems la jeunesse, pour aller querir le cadavre, qui est reçû avec les mêmes cere- 
monies que nous venons de dire. 

Nos Gaspesiens n’ont jamais brûlé les corps de leurs défunts, comme nos 
anciens Gaulois, qui brûloient avec leurs morts, tout ce qu’ils avoient aimé, 
jusqu’à leurs papiers & leurs obligations ; peut-être dans le [526] dessein de 
proceder, de païer, ou demander leurs dettes en l’autre monde. Jai appris 
seulement de nos Sauvages, que les Chefs de leur Nation confioient autrefois 
les corps des défunts à certains vieillards, qui les emportoient religieusement 
dans une cabanne faite exprés au milieu des bois, dans laquelle ils demeuroient 
un mois ou six semaines. Ils ouvroient la téte & le ventre du défunt, & en 
ôtoient la cervelle & les entrailles, enlevoient la peau de dessus le corps, coupoient 
la chair par morceaux ; & l’aïant fait secher à la fumée, ou au Soleil, ils la met- 
toient au pied du mort, auquel ils rendoient sa peau, qu’ils accommodoient à 
peu prés comme si la chair n’en avoit pas été dtée. 

[527] Il y a fort peu de tems, que dans l’Isle de Tisniguet, lieu fameux & 
ancien Cimetiere des Gaspesiens de Ristigouche, nous trouvâmes dans les bois 
une fosse faite en forme de coffre, & quantité de peaux de castors & d’orignaux, 
des fléches, des arcs, de la pourcelaine, de la rassade, & d’autres bagatelles que 
les Sauvages avoient enterrées avec le défunt, dans la pensée qu’ils avoient, que 
les esprits de toutes ces choses luy feroient compagnie & service dans le Pais 
des Ames. 


[528] CHAPITRE XXI. 


Premier retour de PAuteur en France, © la harangue que le Chef des 
Gaspesiens luy a faite a son départ. 


L y avoit déja six années consecutives que je cultivois la Mission Gas- 
pesienne, que l’obeïssance avoit commise à mes soins, lorsque le Reverend 

Pere Valentin le Roux nôtre Commissaire Provincial & Superieur, qui 
donnoit toutes ses applications, & emploioit avec succez les ardeurs de son 

zele pour la gloire de Dieu, le service de la Colonie, & le progrez de nos Missions ; 
aiant parfaitement bien reconnu la necessité ab- [529] soluë où nous étions, 
d’avoir un Hospice à Quebec, pour le soulagement de nos Missionnaires ; 
sollicité puissamment par les principaux Habitans de Mont-Roïal, d'établir dans 
cette belle Isle, sous le bon plaisir & avec l’agrément de Messieurs du Seminaire 
de Saint Sulpice, qui en sont les Seigneurs proprietaires, une Maison de Re- 
collets ; & d’ailleurs voulant rechercher les moiïens possibles de rendre fixes 
& sedentaires les Missions que nous avions chez les François & les Sauvages, afin 
d’humaniser ces Peuples, les habituer avec nous, les appliquer à la culture des 
terres, les soûmettre à nos Loix & nos Coûtumes, & d’en faire de veritables 
Chrêtiens, aprés les avoir rendu hommes civils, [530] policez & sociables ; jugea 
4 propos de nous envoier en France le R. P. Exuper de Thunes, & moi, avec des 
lettres au Reverendissime Pere Germain Allart, depuis Evéque de Vences, 


432 NOUVELLE RELATION 


afin d’obtenir du Roi & de Messieurs de Saint Sulpice, le contenu de lexposé, 
& des instructions qu’il nous remit entre les mains. 

Nous nous embarquames 4 cet effet, dans le vaisseau nommé la Sainte-Anne, 
& nous arrivames heureusement a l’Isle Percée, aprés sept semaines d’une 
ficheuse & penible navigation, causée par trois horribles tempêtes, dont la 
derniere pensa nous abimer au milieu de sept Isles. 

Comme j’étois entierement convaincu de l’affection sin- [531] cere que les 
Gaspesiens avoient pour moi, & qu’ils se persuadoient que je devois encore 
hiverner avec eux dans les bois, je crûs que j’étois obligé de faire la confidence 
& l'ouverture du dessein que j’avois de repasser en France, à celuy des Sauvages 
qui se disoit mon pere, & dont je me disois le fils, depuis le moment qu’il m’eût 
enfanté au milieu des festins ordinaires à la Nation Gaspesienne en semblable 
ceremonie. Il me seroit bien difficile de vous exprimer la consternation que 
cette nouvelle causa dans l’ame de ce Barbare, lequel, par le changement de 
couleur, le chagrin & la tristesse qui parut tout à coup sur son visage, me fit 
bien-tôt connoitre qu’il étoit sensiblement touché de [532] la resolution où je 
luy paroissois, de m’embarquer dans les premiers navires de nos Pécheurs. Il 
me quitta brusquement, contre sa coûtume ; il entra dans les bois, peut-être 
pour essuier les larmes qui commençoient à couler de ses yeux : il en sortit 
quelque-tems aprés, & trouva bon d’envoïer un de ses enfans avec deux ou trois 
jeunes Sauvages, porter la nouvelle de mon départ aux Gaspesiens qui étoient 
à la pêche de saumons, & les convier de se rendre tous incessament auprés de 
luy, afin de me dire adieu. Il ordonna à ces Députez de ne pas approcher de 
leurs cabannes, qu’avec les mêmes ceremonies qu’ils observoient inviolablement 
lorsqu'ils vont annoncer la mort [533] de quelqu’un de leurs considerables ; 
parce qu’ils estimoient que j’allois mourir à leur égard, & qu’ils ne me verroient 
plus jamais davantage. 

La promtitude avec laquelle tous ces Sauvages, baptisez & non baptisez, 
se rendirent à l’Isle Percée, jointe à la tendresse que ces Barbares me témoig- 
nerent, en me conjurant tous ensemble de ne les pas abandonner, me fit balancer 
quelque-tems sur la resolution que j’avois prise de partir; & je vous avouë 
ingenûment, qu’en aïant moi-même le cœur sensiblement touché de compassion, 
il n’y eut precisément que le merite de l’obeïssance, qui m’ordonnoit de m’em- 
barquer dans les premiers navires Pêcheurs, pour le bien de nos Missions, qui 
[534] acheva de me déterminer à repasser en France. 

Le petit nombre de nos Gaspesiens que j’avois baptisez, vint de grand matin 
à la Chapelle, quelques-uns pour se confesser, les autres pour se faire instruire, 
plusieurs pour me demander des Owkateguennes Kignamatinoër, des Papiers 
instructifs à prier Dieu, & tous pour entendre la sainte Messe & la harangue ; 
c’est ainsi qu’ils appellerent l’exhortation que je leur fis, afin de les encourager 
à pratiquer fidelement ce que je leur avois enseigné. Les paroles dont Samüel 
se servit autrefois, quand il se déchargea de la conduite du Peuple d'Israël, en 
luy donnant un Roi; & celles de l’Apôtre, lorsqu’à son départ pour Jerusalem, 
il [535] appella le Ciel & la Terre à témoin du zele qu’il avoit pris, d’annoncer 
aux Ephesiens l'Evangile du Seigneur, furent à peu prés les mêmes dont je me 
servis heureusement en prenant congé de mes Sauvages, qui proposerent tous 
d’être fideles à Dieu. Je les embrassai tendrement aprés mes actions de graces, 
pendant lesquelles les hommes & les femmes entonnerent & chanterent à l’alter- 
native, des Cantiques spirituels que je leur avois enseignez, avec une harmonie 


DE LA GASPESIE 433 


de voix si douce & si agreable, que nos François en furent sensiblement 
édifiez. 

Comme l’on m’avoit donné quelques brasses de tabac de bresil, & qu’il me 
restoit uncore une douzaine [536] de petits miroirs, coûteaux, éguilles, & d’autres 
bagatelles, qu’ils estiment autant que nous faisons l’or & argent ; je les leur 
distribuai tres-volontiers, les conjurant affectueusement de les recevoir, comme 
les gages fideles & sinceres de mes amitiez. Trois Matelots qui vinrent à nôtre 
Chapelle de la part de leur Capitaine, pour emporter dans leur navire nôtre 
petit équipage, alloient finir nos entretiens, lorsque le Chef de nos Gaspesiens 
me supplia avec beaucoup d’instance, de ne pas permettre que ces hommes me 
rendissent ce service; parce que les Sauvages en vouloient avoir l’honneur & 
la gloire, afin, me disoit-il, de faire paroître à tous les François, combien ils 
avoient [537] d’estime & d’affection pour moi. Il nomma sur le champ six 
jeunes Chasseurs, qu’ils appellent Zarbasou ; & quoique tout ce qui étoit à mon 
usage ne consistât seulement qu’en un petit matelas, une couverture, & une 
cassette qui renfermoit les ornemens de nôtre Chapelle portative, ils le par- 
tagerent cependant, par ostentation, en trois canots differens, dans lesquels ils 
s’embarquerent promtement, pour le porter au vaisseau qui étoit prêt de mettre 
à la voile. 

Nous sortimes de la Chapelle avec differens sentimens de douleur, parce 
qu’enfin je n’avois pas moins de peine à les quitter, qu’ils en témoignerent de 
me perdre : il falut cependant nous separer, [538] pour joindre nos François 
qui m'attendoient pour aller à bord; & je fus extrémement surpris, lorsque 
prenant congé de Messieurs les Capitaines qui restoient à l’Isle Percée, le Chef 
de nos Gaspesiens fendit la presse, s’approcha de moi, parut au milieu de l’assem- 
blée avec un visage tout consterné de douleur & de tristesse, haussa vers le Ciel, 
& baissa plusieurs fois les yeux dessus la terre, & prononga en soûpirant ces 
paroles, Akaia, akaia, qui marquent ordinairement l’amertume & le déplaisir 
qu’ils ont dans le cœur ; il me prit la main, & me regardant fixement avec des 
yeux prêts à verser des larmes, il me dit en ces propres termes. 

Hé bien donc, mon fils, la [539] resolution en est prise, tu veux nous aban- 
donner & repasser en France ; car voila le grand canot de bois (en me montrant 
le navire dans lequel je devois m’embarquer) qu va te dérober aux Gaspesiens, 
pour te rendre à ton Païs, a tes parens, & a tes amis. Ah! mon fils, si tu voiois 
mon cceur a present, tu verrois qu’il pleure des larmes de sang, dans le tems 
méme que mes yeux pleurent des larmes d’eau, tant il est sensible a cette cruelle 
separation. II] s’arréta tout court, & ne dit plus mot, selon la coûtume & la 
maniere des Sauvages, qui en agissent de-même ; soit pour reflechir à ce qu’ils 
ont à dire, ou pour donner le loisir & le tems à ceux qui les écoutent, d’éxaminer, 
d’approuver ou de [540] rejetter ce qu’ils ont avancé. Hé quoy donc, mon fils, 
ajoûta-t’il, seroit-il bien possible que tu aïes perdu si-tôt le souvenir du festin 
que tu nous fis autrefois à Gaspé, la premiere fois que tu vins demeurer dans nos 
cabannes, où aïant formé avec de la farine pêtrie dans la graisse & la moëlle 
d’orignac, autant de cœurs de pâte,que nous étions de Gaspesiens, tu les arrangeas 
dans un même plat d’écorce, voulant nous persuader que le plus grand de tous 
ces cœurs, qui cachoit & couvroit tous les autres, étoit la figure du tien, dont 
le zele & la charité renfermoit au-dedans de soi-même tous les cœurs des Sauvages, 
ni plus, ni moins que les meres renferment les enfans dans leur sein? Tu étois 
[541] faché, disois-tu, que la Nature ne t’en avoit donné qu’un seul en partage, 

2E 


434 NOUVELLE RELATION 


lequel tu souhaitois de multiplier autant qu’il étoit en ton pouvoir, par la dis- 
tribution que tu nous faisois de ces cœurs de pâte, en disant à chacun de nous 
en particulier ces aimables paroles : Tahoé nkamera mon ignemoulo : Mon frere, 
je te donne mon cœur; #kameramon achkou oüiguidepcheup ; vous cabannerez, 
vous logerez & demeurererez doresnavant dans mon cœur, qui veut devenir 
comme les vôtres, par l’union d’une amitié mutuelle & reciproque, tout Sauvage 
& tout Gaspesien. A peine eûs-tu fini ta harangue, qui acheva de te gagner les 
cœurs de la Gaspesie, qu’on ne parla plus que de danses & de fes- [542] tins, 
pour te marquer la joie sensible que nous avions du present que tu nous avois 
fait; & parmi les acclamations universelles de toutes nos cabannes, un chacun 
s’efforçoit d’exprimer par les chansons que l’on chanta à ta loüange, le bonheur 
qu’il avoit de posseder le cœur du Patriarche: Dis-moi donc à present, ce 
cœur n’est il plus aujourd’hui le même qu’il étoit autrefois ? est-il donc tout-à- 
fait devenu François, & n’a-t’il plus rien de Gaspesien ? ou bien, veut-il vomir 
pour jamais les Sauvages, aprés les avoir reçûs & aimez tendrement ? Il s’arrêta 
pour la seconde fois: Si quelqu’un de nous, me dit-il ensuite, d’un ton de voix 
plus élevé & plus imperieux, t'a causé quelque [543] déplaisir, qui peut-être 
t’oblige de nous abandonner, ne sçais-tu pas, mon fils, que je suis ton pere, & 
le Chef de la Nation Gaspesienne ? comme ton pere, tu ne peux ignorer jusqu’à 
present, la sincerité de mon amitié ; je t’assûre même que je t’aimerai toûjours 
aussi tendrement que l’un de mes propres enfans : comme Ches des Sauvages, 
tu sçais bien que j’ai la puissance & le pouvoir en main, pour faire punir le coup- 
able, si tu veux me le dénoncer ; ou si tu es dans le dessein de le cacher, suivant 
les maximes & les regles de la charité que tu nous as enseignées, tiens, mon fils, 
voila des robes de castor, de loutre & de marte que nous t’offrons volontiers, 
pour essuier & effacer le chagrin que l’on [544] t’a donné, & l’indignation que 
tu peux avoir congié contre nous. 

Il fit jetter en effet 4 mes pieds, par deux jeunes Sauvages, quelques-unes de 
ces pelleteries ; mais voiant que je refusois ces presens : Il est vrai, dit-il, que tu 
les as toûjours méprisez ; le peu d’état que tu en as fait, pendant que les François 
les recherchent avec tant d’empressement, nous a bien fait connoitre il y a long- 
tems, que tu ne desirois rien au monde, que le salut de nos ames, & que nous 
étions trop pauvres & jamais assez riches, pour récompenser dignement les peines 
& les travaux que tu prenois, afin de nous faire vivre en bons Chrétiens: mais 
si le peu que nous possedons n’a pas assez d’attrait pour t’enga- [545] ger 4 
rester avec nous, il faut, mon fils, que je t?ouvre mon cceur, & que je te demande 
aujourd’hui, en presence du Soleil qui nous éclaire, s’il faut croire ce que tu nous 
as enseigné, ou s’il ne le faut pas croire?  Répons, & parles à present. 

Vous remarquerez, s’il vous plaît, que les Sauvages n’interrompent jamais 
celuy qui harangue ; & ils blament avec raison, ces entretiens, ces conversations 
indiscretes & peu reglées, où chacun de la compagnie veut dire son sentiment, 
sans se donner la patience d’écouter celuy des autres: c’est aussi pour ce sujet, 
qu’ils nous comparent à des cannes & aux oyes, qui crient, disent-ils, & qui 
parlent tous ensemble, comme les François. Il faut [546] attendre qu’ils aïent 
achevé tout ce qu’ils ont à dire, & qu’ils vous obligent à répondre, comme 
celuy-ci, qui m’engagea de luy témoigner en peu de mots, que je ne leur avois 
enseigné que ce que le Fils de Dieu avoit enseigné à tous les Chrêtiens ; & que 
par consequent ce n’étoit pas seulement assez de la croire, par la sotimission 
respectueuse qu’il devoit avoir A ses Commandemens; mais encore, qu’il les 


DE LA GASPESIE 435 


faloit observer religieusement, & mourir même, s’il en étoit necessaire, pour la 
verité & la défense de son saint Evangile. 

S’il est ainsi, repliqua le Sauvage, de deux choses l’une ; ou tu es un men- 
teur, ou tu n’es pas un bon Chrétien: Ouce choiien taboé: ‘Tu es un men- 
[547] teur, mon frere, si tout ce que tu nous as enseigné n’est pas veritable ; 
ou tu n’es pas bon Chrétien, puisque tu n’observes pas comme il faut les Com- 
mandemens de Jesus. Car enfin, je veux bien que tout le monde m’entende : 
tu as dit à nos enfans, qu’ils étoient obligez, sous peine d’être brûlez dans les 
Enfers, d’honorer leurs pere & mere ; que c’étoit un crime énorme de les aban- 
donner, & de leur refuser le secours qu’ils en pouvoient esperer dans leurs 
besoins : Tes Instructions, & le Commandement de Dieu, qui dit; Koutche, 
kitche chibar, chakiou, baguisto skiginouidex ; Honore & crains ton pere & ta 
mere, tu vivras longuement, ont retenu mon fils aîné dans ma cabanne, qui 
cependant [548] vouloit m’abandonner au milieu de l’Hiver, dans nos plus 
grands besoins : il a tué un grand nombre d’orignaux, il t’a fait bonne chere, 
& donné abondamment de la graisse à manger & de l’huile d’ours à boire dans 
nos festins, autant que tu en as pû souhaiter. François, encore un coup, mon 
fils aîné a demeuré avec son pere & sa mere, pour le respect qu’il portoit au Com- 
mandement de Jesus, & l’amitié qu’il avoit pour le Patriarche: Fais donc à 
present, 4 son éxemple, pour moi, pour ma femme & pour luy, ce qu’il a fait 
si genereusement pour toi. Tu m’appellois ton pere; ma femme, disois-tu à 
tous les Sauvages, étoit ta mere, depuis que nous t’avions tous les deux enfanté 
dans nos [549] cabannes ; mes enfans étoient tes freres & tes enfans : Hé bien, 
maintenant, est-ce donc bien fait à un enfant, de quitter son pere, sa mere, ses 
freres & ses sœurs? Est-ce ainsi que tu méprises le Commandement de Dieu, 
qui dit, Koutche, kitche chibar, chaktou, baguisto skinouidex ? Sil est vrai que 
les enfans qui honorent leurs parens vivent long-tems, n’apprehendes-tu pas de 
perir dans le grand lac, & de faire naufrage dans ces eaux salées, aprés nous avoir 
abandonné dans le besoin que nous avons de ton secours? Helas, mon fils! 
ajoûta ce Sauvage, aïant les larmes aux yeux, si quelqu’un de nous vient à mourir 
dans les bois, qui est ce qui aura le soin de nous montrer le chemin du Ciel, & 
de nous [550] assister à bien mourir? Faloit-il donc prendre tant de peine 
pour nous instruire, comme tu as fait jusqu’à present, pour nous laisser dans un 
peril évident de mourir sans les Sacremens, que tu as a ministrez à mon frere, 
à mon oncle, & à plusieurs de nos vieillards moribons? Si ton cœur demeure 
encore insensible à tout ce que je viens de dire, sçaches, mon fils, que le mien 
verse & pleure des larmes de sang en si grande abondance, qu’il m’étouffe la 
parole. Cest ainsi qu’il finit sa harangue, & me donna le tems de luy déclarer 
mes sentimens. 

Comme toute la compagnie, autant surprise que je l’étois moi-même d’un 
semblable discours, auquel je ne m’attendois pas, étoit en peine de ce C51] 
que je répondrois à ce pauvre Sauvage, qui se disoit mon pere ; je luy fis connoître 
& luy dis, que mon cœur versoit plus de larmes de sang que le sien, 4 cause qu il 
étoit luy seul plus sensible à nôtre commune separation, que tous les cœurs des 
Sauvages ensemble : Que je n’avois reçû aucun déplaisir de la Nation Gaspe- 
sienne, qui m’avoit toûjours puissamment engagé, par les amitiez & le bien qu elle 
m’avoit fait, de rester avec elle, & d’en preferer la Mission, comme Je la pre- 
fererois toûjours, si l’occasion se presentoit, à toutes celles qu’on voudroit 
me donner dans la Nouvelle France: Que je le reconnoissois encore pour mon 


436 NOUVELLE RELATION 


pere, autant & plus que jamais; & que je le priois aussi de tout [552] mon 
cœur, de me considerer toûjours comme son fils: Qu’il faloit observer religieuse- 
ment tout ce que je leur avois enseigné du devoir des enfans envers leurs pere 
& mere, exprimez dans le quatriéme Commandement de Dieu; Koutche, 
kitche chibar, chaktou, Sc. Que bien loin de pratiquer le contraire à leur 
égard, je ne repassois en France que pour le mettre plus efficacement en 
pratique, puisque c’étoit pour obeir 4 Dieu dans la personne de mon Superieur, 
qui me tenoit lieu de Pere, & dans le dessein de persuader 4 quelques-uns de 
mes Freres, de les venir instruire. Que je ne les abandonnois pas dans leur 
besoin sans secours, d’autant que je leur laissois un autre moi-méme, dans la 
per- [553] sonne du R. P. Claude Moreau, extrémement zelé pour leur salut. 
Que j’avois écofité paisiblement tout ce qu’il m’avoit dit, plitét comme l’effet 
de son amitié, que d’un reproche outrageant qu’il efit voulu me faire, aprés 
les avoir aimé si tendrement: Mais qu’enfin, je ne pouvois m’empécher de luy 
témoigner que mon cœur avoit été touché jusqu’au vif, en me demandant s’il 
n’étoit plus Gaspesien, & s’il vouloit vomir les Sauvages pour jamais. Tu te 
trompes, mon pere, luy dis-je d’un ton de voix assez severe, mon cœur est plus 
Gaspesien que jamais ; & dans le tems même que tu te persuades qu’il se retressit, 
il devient plus grand de jour en jour en jour, pour y loger & [554] recevoir tous 
ceux de ta Nation : Il voudroit, ce cœur, se multiplier, afin de se trouver dans 
tous les endroits où sont les Gaspesiens, pour les instruire ; & je t’assûre que je 
ne repasse en France, que dans le dessein où je suis, de faire à mon retour, par 
le ministere de nos Missionnaires, ce qu’il m’étoit impossible de faire moi seul. 
Ce sera pour lors, que tu confesseras que mon cœur est bien plus grand que 
tu ne penses ; & que bien loin de vomir & de rejetter les Sauvages, il cesseroit 
de vivre, s’il étoit un moment sans inclination pour les Gaspesiens. 

S'il est ainsi, répondit au même instant un certain Memidoüades, il faut que 
je passe en France avec le Patriarche ; il a raison, il a de l'esprit, & [555] nous 
n’en avons pas autant que luy ; il ne recherche que nôtre nôtre salut: mais 
je veux que nous nous embarquions dans des navires differens ; afin que si l’un 
de nous vient à perir, l’autre se puisse sauver, pour en apporter la nouvelle, ce 
qui seroit impossible, si nous faisions tous deux naufrage dans un même vaisseau. 
Il alloit nous dire quelqu’autre chose, lorsque le Capitaine nous avertit qu’il 
étoit tems de partir. 

Nos Sauvages demeurerent au bord de la mer, durant nôtre embarque- 
ment; & je vous avoué que j’eus un déplaisir sensible, considerant avec une 
lunette d’approche nos pauvres Gaspesiens, qui resterent toûjours dans la même 
place où je les avois laissé, jusqu’à [556] ce que nôtre navire aïant doublé la 
Pointe au Loup-marin, l’Isle de Bonaventure, que nous laissimes entre nous 
& la terre-ferme, me priva de la satisfaction de les voir, & d’en étre viis. 

La navigation fut également promte, & heureuse ; en sorte que nous arri- 
vâmes à Honfleur trente jours aprés nôtre départ de l’Isle Percée. Nous primes 
ensuite la route de Paris, où le Reverendissime Pere Germain Allart, & le tres- 
Reverend Pere Potentien Ozon Provincial actuel des Recollets d’Artois, ména- 
gerent avec tant de succez les interêts de nos Missions, que le premier obtint 
du Roi, l'établissement de Hospice que nous avons presentement à Quebec ; 
& le second, des Lettres de fa- [557] veur de Monsieur Tronçon Superieur 
des Messieurs du Seminaire de Saint Sulpice, à Monsieur d’Ollier Superieur des 
Messieurs du Seminaire de Mont-Roïal en Canada, en vertu desquelles mondit 


DE LA GASPESIE 437 


Sieur d’Ollier eut la bonté de nous accorder genereusement une espace de 
terrein sur le bord du fleuve, avec pouvoir d’y bâtir une Maison de Mission, 
avec l’agrément de Monseigneur l’Évêque, pour la consolation spirituelle des 
Habitans de Mont-Roial. 

Pendant que ces Reverends Peres agissoient de concert pour obtenir ces 
nouveaux établissemens, l’obeïssance me permit de retourner dans nôtre chere 
Province d'Artois, où tout le monde, pour ainsi dire, parens, amis, Reli- [558] 
ligieux & Seculiers, firent leurs efforts afin d'empêcher & de me faire perdre le 
dessein que j’avois formé de retourner en Canada. Peut-être aurois je succombé 
aux instances de ces personnes, qui ne cherchoient dans mon sejour en France, 
que leur propre & seule satisfaction, si le tres-R. P. Potentien Ozon, qui avoit 
passé deux fois en ce nouveau Monde, en qualité de Commissaire & Superieur 
de nos Missions Canadiennes, n’eût dissipé tous ces obstacles par une de ses 
Lettres, en me faisant connoître que toutes les difficultez que je luy proposois 
r’étoient plus de saison, & qu’il ne s’agissoit pas de penetrer la volonté de Dieu 
sur une affaire, où elle paroissoit trop évidemment dans celle des Superieurs 
des [559] deux Provinces de Saint Denis & de Saint Antoine; mais bien de 
Péxecuter au plûtôt: attendu même que Monseigneur l’Evêque de Quebec 
& le R. P. Valentin le Roux Superieur de nos Missions, demandoient avec 
instance mon retour en Canada. 

Il n’en falut pas davantage pour me déterminer à faire un sacrifice de toutes 
les repugnances que je pouvois avoir, de quitter une seconde fois nôtre chere 
Province: convaincu parfaitement que l'esprit du Seigneur residoit dans ce 
grand Serviteur de Dieu, je reçûs sa Lettre & ses avis comme la décision de mon 
sort; & pour ne plus être exposé davantage aux attaques que l’amitié naturelle 
des parens & des amis me livroit tous les [560] jours, afin de m’engager à rester 
au Pais, je sortis de Bapaume pour aller à Arras, y faire ma retraite annuelle, & 
me disposer au second voiage que je devois faire dans la Nouvelle France. Ils 
semble que Dieu agrea mon sacrifice, puisque celuy de nos Religieux qui s’étoit 
opposé le plus jusqu’alors 4 mon retour, se trouva luy-méme tellement changé, 
huit jours aprés mon départ, qu’il demanda avec tant d’empressement de venir 
avec moi en Canada, que les Superieurs se rendirent à ses instantes prieres : 
cette nouvelle me fut d’autant plus agreable, que j’étois persuadé de la capacité, 
& de la vertu de ce Religieux, & du grand bien qu’il feroit, comme il a fait dans 
les Missions Françoi- [561] ses & Iroquoises, qu’il a cultivées durant six années, 
avec une singuliere édification. 

J'en écrivis aussi-tot à nos Superieurs, pour les informer de la resolution du 
R. P. François Wasson, qui vouloit passer avec moi en Canada: en effet, nous 
partimes incessamment de Bapaume pour Paris, où j’eus l'honneur de recevoir 
la visite de Monsieur Macé tres-digne Ecclesiastique de Saint Sulpice, homme 
d’une vertu consommée, & d’un zele veritablement Apostolique pour la Mission 
de la Nouvelle France, qui me pria instament de m’embarquer avec deux 
Religieuses Hospitalieres de Beaufort en Vallée, que Monseigneur d'Angers 
vouloit bien confier à mes soins jusques à Quebec. Quelque indi- [562] gne 
que je me crûs de la conduite & de la direction de ces saintes Filles, il m’obligea 
cependant de condescendre 4 sa demande, & ne sortit pas de chez nous, qu il 
n’eût tiré parole que nous irions au Convent de ces bonnes Religieuses, & leur 
donnerions avis du tems auquel elles devoient se rendre à la Rochelle, pour 
s’embarquer dans les premiers navires: en sorte que toutes choses étant dis- 


438 NOUVELLE RELATION 


posées, nous partimes de Paris, & nous arrivâmes heureusement, vers les Fêtes 
de la Pentecôte, aux Hospitalieres de Beaufort en Vallée. La Reverende Mere 
des Roseaux, que Mademoiselle de Melun, si celebre par la pratique des vertus 
les plus éminentes du Christianisme, avoit mise en ce saint Monas- [563] tere, 
en étoit devenué la Superieure : animée par les éxemples de pieté de sa sainte 
Maîtresse, & brûlant de ce même feu de la charité du prochain qui consuma le 
cœur de cette grande Princesse, elle fit un sacrifice aux pauvres malades de 
Mont-Roial, de ses deux cheres & bien-aimées Filles, les Sœurs Gallard & Mon- 
musseau ; la premiere, fille d’un Conseiller d’Angers ; la seconde, d’un fameux 
Marchand. Comme ces deux bonnes Religieuses étoient d’une vertu solide, 
& fortifiées de l'Esprit de Dieu qui les conduisoit en Canada, il semble aussi 
qu’elles ne sortirent du Cloître, que pour en donner des marques éclatantes ; 
soit durant le sejour qu’elles firent à la Rochelle, où Monseigneur PE- [564] 
vêque les reçut comme des veritables épouses de Jesus-Curist ; soit durant la 
navigation, que Nôtre-Seigneur rendit tres-heureuse, par les prieres & la 
sainteté de ces ames Religieuses, qui faisoient leurs Oraisons mentales, Lectures 
spirituelles, recitoient leur Office en commun, comme si le navire fit devenu 
pour elles un autre Convent de Beaufort en Vallée. Elles parurent insensibles 
à toutes les incommoditez qui sont ordinaires sur la mer; mais elles ne pirent 
s’empécher de fremir & de trembler comme des ames chastes, apprenant que 
nous étions en danger d’être bien-tôt attaquez par un navire Turc, qui venoit 
à toutes voiles dessus nous, ou pour s'emparer de nôtre vaisseau, [565] ou pour le 
couler à fond. Le canon que l’on disposoit, les mousquets, les piques, la poudre 
& le plomb que l’on distribuoit à tous les Passagers avec assez de precipitation, 
ne les effraïoit pas: incertaines de ce qu’elles deviendroient, si les Turcs, qui 
s’approchoient à vûë d’œil de nous, se rendoient les maîtres du navire, elles 
apprehendoient tout pour leur pureté; & preferant genereusement la mort à 
la perte de ce precieux tresor, qui couroit risque d’être exposé aux insultes & 
aux violences de ces ennemis du nom Chrêtien, elles se jetterent à genoux, pour 
implorer le secours du Ciel, & me prierent, avec une une ferveur d'esprit extra- 
ordinaire, d’approuver la resolution qu’elles [566] avoient formée, de se jetter 
à la mer aussitôt que les Turcs monteroient dans le vaisseau ; aimant mieux, 
disoient-elles, s’abandonner aux soins amoureux de la Providence, & mourir 
mille fois, que de tomber entre les mains & d’être soüillées par la brutalité de 
ces Infideles. Le Ciel cependant se contenta de leur bonne volonté: on se 
mit en état de resister au navire Turc, qui approchoit à la portée du canon de 
nôtre vaisseau ; & comme il étoit beaucoup meilleur voilier que nous, on se 
resolut de l’attendre, & de se mettre en état d’attaquer & de se défendre. Cette 
fermeté & la resolution que nous fimes paroître, de vouloir combattre l'ennemi, 
jetta la terreur parmi ces Barbares, [567] lesquels se persuadant que nous étions 
beaucoup plus de monde que nous ne paroissions sur le tillac, apprehenderent 
eux-mêmes le succez d’un combat où ils commengoient à perdre l’esperance 
de vaincre & de triompher ; ils jugerent à propos de ne rien risquer, changerent 
de bord, passerent en arriere de nôtre navire, & se contenterent de nous faire 
des menaces, ausquelles on répondit avec une fierté qui ne cedoit rien du tout 
à leurs insultes : en sorte que ces Infideles s’étant éloignez de nous, jusqu’à nous 
faire perdre leur vaisseau de vûüë, on chanta le Te Deum, en action de graces ; 
& l’on attribua cet heureux succez aux merites & aux prieres ferventes de ces 
bonnes Reli- [568] gieuses, que le Ciel consola dans la continuation du voiage, 


DE LA GASPESIE 439 


par une navigation autant heureuse qu’elles le pouvoient souhaiter, & qui nous 
fit voir ’embouchire du fleuve de Saint Laurent, trente jours aprés nôtre 
départ de la Rochelle. 

Le vent s’étant rendu de jour en jour plus favorable, on moiiilla bien-tét 
l’anchre devant Quebec, où je m’étois rendu en canot, pour informer Mon- 
seigneur de Laval premier Evèque de Quebec, & Messieurs ses Grands Vicaires, 
de l’heureuse arrivée de nos deux Religieuses Hospitalieres, qui avoient gens- 
reusement exposé leur vie aux perils de la mer, pour se consacrer entierement 
au service des malades de Mont-Roial, [569] dans le Convent & l’H6pital fondez 
par la charité & les liberalitez de Madame de Bullion. On les recut avec tout 
le bon accueil & le respect possible ; elles furent conduites aux Ursulines de 
Quebec, & quelques jours aprés à Mont-Roïal, par Monsieur Soüart leur Direc- 
teur, grand serviteur de Dieu, dont la memoire sera toûjours en benediction 
dans la Nouvelle France, par l'odeur de ses vertus, qu’il y a répanduë durant 
quarante années de Mission, jusqu’à une heureuse vieillesse. 

Le Reverend Pere Valentin le Roux, qui ne perdoit aucune occasion de pro- 
curer les établissement de nos Missions, destina le Pere François [570] Wasson 
pour continuer celle que nous avions aux Iroquois, où ce bon Religieux a 
demeuré l’espace de six ans, soit durant la paix, soit durant la guerre que nous 
eûmes avec ces Barbares, aux insultes desquels ce zelé Missionnaire étoit con- 
tinuellement exposé. Le Reverend Pere Superieur m’ordonna aussi de monter 
avec luy, & de servir d’Aumônier à Monseigneur le Comte de Frontenac 
Gouverneur General de la Nouvelle France, jusqu’au Mont-Roïal; afin de 
ménager auprés de Monsieur d’Ollier Superieur du Seminaire, & Seigneur de 
PIsle du Mont-Roial, un espace de terrein quil nous accorda genereusement, 
aprés avoir [571] fait lecture de la Lettre que je luy presentai de la part de 
Monsieur Troncon, nous donnant en sa consideration quatre arpens de terre 
situez sur le bord du fleuve, proche la Chapelle de la Sainte Vierge, vis à vis 
d’une petite élevation sur laquelle on a bâti un moulin, commodes & tres-propres 
pour l’abord des canots & des chaloupes, & dont il envoia le Contract de con- 
cession au Reverend Pere Valentin le Roux, aussi-tôt que je fus de retour à 
Quebec. Deux jours avant mon départ pour ma Mission, de nos Gaspesiens, 
ou celuy qui se disoit mon pere, & sa famille, me reçûrent avec tout le bon 
accueil qu’il leur fut possible. J’obmets ici les circon- [572] stances de cette 
seconde Mission, que je reserve pour le Premier établissement de la Foi dans 
la Nouvelle France. : 


Fin. 





De l’Imprimerie de Laurent Ronper. 





Gi] ABLE 
DES CHAPITRES 


contenus en ce Livre 


PAGE 
OF 


CHAP. JF lol E la Gaspeste en ge- mms 
| D i neral. oat 
7 ? ? 331 
DUT 


Cuap. II. De l'origine des Gaspesiens, 34 337 


Cuar. III. De /a naissance des Gas- 


pestens, 42700 
Car. IV. Des habillemens & parures 
des Gaspesiens, 52 4 


Cuap. V. Des cabanes & lo- [ii] gemens 

des Gaspesiens, 67 344 
Car. VI. De la maniere de vivre des 

Gaspesiens © de leurs 

nourritures, 89 348 
Cuap. VII. De Pignorance des Gas- 


pesiens, 1270630 
Cuar. VIII. De /a langue des Gas- 


pesiens, 1000301 
44T 


442 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP, 


[iii] Cuar. 


CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


CHAP. 
CHAP. 
CHAP. 


CHAP. 


TABLE 
IX. De la Religion des Gas- 


pesiens, 

X. De l'origine du culte de la 
Croix chez les Gaspesiens 
dits Porte-Croix, 

XI. Relation du penible voiage de 
Auteur allant annoncer 
la fot aux Gaspesiens 
porte-Crotx, 

XII. De /a croïance des Gas- 
pesiens touchant l'immor- 
talité de l'ame, 

XIII. Des superstitions des Gas- 
pesiens, 

XIV. Des Souverains & des Lots 
des Gaspesiens, 

XV, Des mœurs des Gaspesiens, 

XVI. Du Mariage des Gas- 
pesiens, 

XVII. De /a maniere dont les 
Gaspesiens font la guerre, 

XVIII. De /a chasse des Gas- 
pesiens, 

XIX. Les festins, les danses & 
les diver- [iv] tissemens 
des Gaspesiens, 


199 


308 


329 


377 
577 


+34 


450 


470 


496 


PAGE 


362 


303 


369 


389 
393 


402 
405 


414 


416 


420 


425 


DES CHAPITRES 443 


Cuap. XX. Des remedes, maladies & i 
morts des Gaspesiens, £10) 428 
Cuap. XXI. Premier retour de? Auteur 
en France, & la harangue 
que le Chef des Gas- 
pesiens luy a faite à son 


depart. CeO Aad 





INDEX 


ABENNAQUI, or Abnakis, 22, 140 
Acadia, 1, 2, 12, 28 

Acadians, 282 

Akahie, or Akaia, 133, 308 
Algonquins, 22, 24, 80, 81, 140, 208 
Allan, John, 241 

Allart, Father, 305, 315 

Alphonse, Jean, 63, 64 

Altestakun, 294 

American Geographical Society, 44 
Amusements of the Gaspesians, 288 
Anselme, Pére, 49 
Anticostie, Isle, 76 

Archives Department, xi, 7, 69 
Arras, 3, 153, 317 

Artois, 2, 10, 55, 316 

Aubert, Charles, 77 

Autmoins, 144 

Ayer, Edward E., 44 


BAIE, or Bay, des Chaleurs, 9, 132 

Bailloquet, Father, 62 

Balsam of the fir, 298 

Bapaume, 2, 317 

Barachois, 5, 71, 74, 78, 248 

Barbaucannes, Sieur de. See Henaut 

Barbué, 285 

Baring-Gould, 39 

Barnaby River, 152 

Bartibog, 176 

Basque murderer, 17 

Basques, 90 

Bass, 110, 285 

Bathurst, 160, 161 

Baxter, 39 

Baye des Espagnols, 266 

Baye des Morues, 78 

Bazire, Charles, 77, 204 

Bears, great and little, 135; super- 
stitions, 226, 227, 280, 285 

Beaubears Island, 156, 178 

Beaufort in Vallée, 317, 318 

Beaver, 109, 274; dams, 279; de- 
scription, 277; hunting, 276, 280; 
superstitions, 226, 228 ; works, 278 





Benjamin, S. G. W., 65 

Bernardin, Father, 162 

Beurre d’Orignac, 118 

Biard, Father, 23, 102, 144, 224, 241, 
250, 261, 268 

Bibliographical description of the 
Nouvelle Relation, 42 

Bibliothèque Nationale, 29, 44 

Biggar, H. P., xi, 20, 77 

Bigot, Father, 8, 206 

Birth of the Gaspesians, 88 

Bizance, 147 

Black alder, 296 

Blackcock, 282 

Boisel, Jacque, 69, 79 

Boissel, Nouel, 69 

Bollen, Captn., 68 

Bonaventure, Isle, 67, 70, 75, 76, 315 

Bonnaventure, Denys de, 79 

Bonodemeguiche, 138 

Boston Athenzeum, 44 

Boston Public Library, 43 

Boucannée, 41, 110 

Bouhinne, 217, 219, 299 

Branchus, 281 

Bréard, Charles, 62 

Brémes, 285 

Bressani, Father, 23 

Brinton, 39 

British Museum, 29, 43 

Brown, Mrs. Wallace, 294 

Browne, G. W., 65 

Buch, das gut, title, 31 

Buisset, Father, 4, 128, 204 

Bullion, Madame de, 320 

Burnt Church, 176 


CACAMOS, 118 

Cæsar, 138, 142 

Camping in the woods, 165 
Canada goose, 282 
Cannibalism, 115, 220 

Canso, 77 

Cape Breton, 1, 5, 32, 192, 205 
Capitaines, 61 


446 | 


Capuchin Fathers, 162, 163 

Caribou, 285 

Carpes, 285 

Cartier, vii, 1, 17, 49, 63, 64, 150, 191 

Casgrain, Abbe, 153, 314 

Castor glands, 279 

Census of 1681, 3, 7 

Cerfs, 285 

Chabot, Philippe, 49 

Chagat, 294 

Chamberlain, A. F., 108, 122, 123, 208 

Chamberlain, M., 142, 250 

Champlain, vii, 63, 65, 89, IOI, 240, 
274, 302 

Characters, 6, 21, 28, 114, 129, 130, 
132; burnt by Indian girl, 133; 
description, 126 ; origin, 131. See 
also Hieroglyphics 

Charlevoix, Father, 16, 20, 37, 67, 68 

Chateigne, Vincent, 69, 79 

Chefs, 61 

Chiefs, 15, 61, 234 

Chigoüidah, 291 

Church, E. Dwight, 44 

Church of Sainte Claire, 73, 75 

Church of Saint Peter, 9, 73 

Cimbrians, 88 

Civezza, Father, 30 

Clairambault Collection, 69, 73, 76, 77, 


79 
Clapin, 89, 281, 291 
Clarke, J. M., xi, 11, 62, 65, 72, 73 
Clarke, J. S., 89 
Clothes and finery of the Gaspesians, 


93 

Cod, 109, 285 

Cod fishery, 61, 81, 105 

Constellations, 135 

Cooney, 179, 237 

Coptis, 96 

Cormorants, 282 

Gorm 217 212 

Coste de St. Ange, 7, 129 

Couleurs, 96 

Couturier, Captain, 76 

Cradle, 89 

Creation, 84 

Creighton, J. G. H., 65 

Cross used among the Indians of 
Miramichi, 22, 32, 33, 109, 144, 147, 
251, 253-258; in assemblies, 148, 
152, 234; im canoes, 157; on 
clothes, 149; at fishing and hunt- 
ing-places, 151; given deputies, 
148 ; restoration of worship, 156; 
origin of worship, 146, 189; on 


INDEX 


tombs, 151; symbol of Miramichi 
tribe, 176; in wigwams, 149, 179 ; 
worship, 86 

Cross-bearer Indians, 146, 149, 154, 
155, 158, 159, 163, 164, 179, 182, 
186, 187, 232, 301 

Culin, S., 294 

Customs of the Gaspesians, 240 


DANCES of the Gaspesians, 288 

D’Angers, Monsieur, 317 

Davis, Sylvanus, 67 

Dawson, 63, 64, 266 

Death of the Gaspesians, 296 

Dedication of this book, 13, 32 

Dedication of church, 72 

Deer, 280, 285 

Degré, Sieur, 179 

De l'Isle, 12 

Deluge, 85 

De Meulles’ map, 155 

Denis, Madame, I11, 112 

Denys, Joseph, 8, 76, 77 

= Nicolas; "viis* vill, 1,12, 22 ymto, 
19, 62, 65, 77, 79, 94, 96, III, 112, 
118, 120, 122, 150;) 265, 167," 100, 
224, 235, 241, 250, 257, 260, 261, 
274,, 275, 276, 280, 281,290, 1202, 
297; 302 

FAR Pierre, 53 773 78; 79, 248, 289 

—— Richard, Sieur de Fronsac, 14, 
69, 79, 111, 152, 153; 155, 156, 158, 
159, 160, 161, 163, 166,"177, 276, 
179, 184, 190, 203, 205, 248 

—— Simon, 77 

De Roo, 37, 38 

Des Roseaux, Mother, 318 

Dethunes, Father, 5, 75, 77, 202, 305 

Devil, 255,210, 217,218 22108220) 
221, 222, 223, 224, 227, 254, 209 

Dictionary of Gaspesian, 81, 154 

Didace, Brother, 73 

Diéreville, vii, 98, 224, 226, 244, 250, 
281, 293, 297 

Dionne, 108, 282 

Dippers, 282 

Diseases of the Gaspesians, 296 

Dogs, 226 

D’Ollier, 316, 320 

Doughty, A., xi 

Druillettes, 22 

Du Chesneau, 77 

Ducks, 281, 282 

Dulion, Pierre, 69 

Du Tartre, 79 


INDEX 


EAGLES, 282 

Eames, Wilberforce, xi, 42, 44, 45, 46 

Eels, 285 

Egron, Pierre, 69 

Ejougouloumoiiet, 174, 175, 176, 184 

Elk, 274 

Emerillion, 283 

Emkadoui, 218 

Enault, Philippe, 14, 160, 183 

Epicurus, 207 

Epilepsy, 275 

ea or Esquimaux, 15, 61, 266, 
207 

Estat present de l'Eglise, title, 8, 


132 
Ethiopians, 143 


al a and leanness of animals, 

II 

Faucher de Saint Maurice, 65 

Feasts of the Gaspesians, 288 

Ferguson’s point, 163 

Field, 20 

Filion, Father, 204 

Filliastre, Father, 204 

Filon, 62 

Filtoupier, P., 69, 79 

Fires in the woods, 166, 167 

Fire of Miramichi, 167 

First Establishment of the Faith, 
title, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 12, 20, 74, 75, 
222, 120, 130 

Flounders, 285 

Flushing, 66 

Food of Gaspesians, 109 

Forillon, 63 

Forks of Miramichi, map, 179 

Forsyth de Fronsac, 77 

Fort de Fronsac, 175, 176, 
location, 178 ; map, 179 ; 180 

Foxes, 285 

Franciscans, x, 3 

Fronsac, Richard de. 
Richard 

Frontenac, Comte de, 4, 5, 20, 21, 72, 
75, 127, 203, 320 

= =fOrt, 12051129, 203 

Frost fish, 138 


177 ; 


See Denys, 


GAGNON, Philéas, ix, 7, 27, 28, 43, 46, 
81, 96, 202 

Galium, 96 

Gallen, Father, 184 

Gannet, 282 

Gaspé, 1, 2, 11; origin of name, 63, 
77, 288 





447 


Gaspé Bay, 64, map, 65 

Gaspesia, 2, 61 

Gaspesie, bounds, 12 ; origin of name, 
12 

Gaspesiens, or Gaspesians, origin of 
name, 12; identical with Micmacs, 
6. See Indians 

Gaudet, Placide, xi, 7 

Gay, F. L., xi, 43, 45 

George, Master, 204 

Gerard, W. R., 96 

Germ, 90, 216, 217, 299 

Goderis, Captain, 68 

Gordon Brook, 156, 166, 279 

Gordon, Governor, 241 

Goulet, 78 

Grand Grève, 62 

Grand Patriarch, 115 

Green, S. A., 272 

Grouse, species, 280 

Guards of the North Star, 135, 136 

Guesnin, Fathers, 5, 75 

Gull, 282 

Gyles, J., 260, 274 


HAGAR, S., 135, 294 

Hainaut de Barbaucannes, 160. 
Henaut 

Hale, H., 150 

Hamel, Joseph, 63, 64 

Harbour seal, 284 

Hares, 284 

Harrisse, Henry, 2, 9, 20, 65 

Harvard College Library, xi, 43, 44 

Hay’s Readings, 164, 176 

Henaut de Barbaucannes, 14, 163, 
165, 166, 168, 169, 170, 171, 177, 
182, 183, 185 

Hennepin, Father, 4, 10, 128, 204 

Henshaw, W. H., 122, 123 

Heron Island, 302 

Herring, 285 

Hieroglyphics, 6, 10, 21, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 126, 132; origin of, 22, 
24, 25; books of, 31. See also 
Characters 

Histoire Chronologique de la Nou- 
velle France, title, 8 

Histoire Chronologique de la Pro- 
vince des Recollets, title, 3 

Histoire des Colonies Francoises, 
title, 20 

Hoo, 148 

Hospitaliere nuns, 161, 317, 318, 320 

Hugolin, Father, 73,77. See also the 
following 


See 


448 


Hugolin and Odoric, Fathers, x, 3, 4, 7, 
8, 10, 129, 153, 204, 304, 305, 314, 
321 

Humming-bird, 281 

Hunting of the Gaspesians, 274 

Hurons, 140, 141 

Huron-Iroquois, 150 

Hutchinsen’s History, 71 


IARBASOU, 308 

Iconoclasts, 133 

Ideograms, 29 

Ignorance of the Gaspesians, 125 

Illustrations to Father le Clercq’s 
book, 27 

Immortality, Indian belief, 207 

Indians, acting as priests, 229; ad- 
miration for books, 135 ; ‘adoption, 
290, 305; affronts, 247; adultery, 
237; ages of, 230, 247; ambitions, 
107; appearance, 240; attack on 
Esquimaux, 269; belief in dreams, 
146, 227; belief as to immortality, 
207; belief in spirits, 209, 212, 213; 


birth of children, 89 ; blood letting, ' 


297; buildings, 99, 103; burial 
customs, 301; burning at stake, 
271, 272; camping methods, 103; 
cannibalism, 113; care of the sick, 
299; ceremony, 246; chiefs, 234; 
Christians, 193, 253; cleverness, 
241 ; clothes, 93 ; cooking, 119, 120, 
121; counting, 137; dances, 292; 
death, 300; dignity, 240; direction 
signs, I 36; dirty habits, 253; 
divorce, 239, 243, 262; drinks, 122; 
drunkenness, 255 ; eating to excess, 
116; emetics, 296; endurance of 
hunger, 116; error about, 82; 

executions, 236, 23743 famines, 110; 
favourite dishes, 118, 120; feasts 
described, 228-292; feast of the 
dead, 186; fickleness, 252; games, 
294; generous to one another, 245 ; 
gluttonous habits, 120, 121 ; graves, 
300 ; grief at deaths, 263 ; grief for 
children, 189: hair dressing, 08 ; 

hairlessness, 82; health, 241, 296 ; 

herbs, 296, 208 + home life, 106; 
hospitality, 245; hunters, 119; 
hunting, 80; hunting customs, 171, 
172; ignorance, 125; improvidence, 
110; ingratitude, 246; instructive 
papers, 126; kettles, 120; language, 
140 ; laziness, 110 manners, 252; 
maps, 136; marks in use, 22; 





INDEX 


marriage customs, 237, 238, 259- 
263 ; memory, 22; moccasins, 93 ; 
modesty of women, 2 250, 251 ; mor- 
tuary customs, 187; nursing of 
children, 91; occupations, 92; ora- 
tions, 301; orators, 240, 241 5 
ornaments, 95; orphans, 2 238; paint- 
ing, 95; patience in sickness, 244, 
299 ; picture-writing, 24; prayer, 
185; reading and writing, 125; re- 
covery of repose, 243; religion, 143; 
remedies, 296; repose esteemed, 
242; scalping, 270; seasons, 1373 
songs, 292; speeches, 103; stingi- 
ness condemned, 246; suicide, 247, 
248, 249; Swearing, 252; sweat- 
houses, 297 ; temper, 250; tender- 
ness to children, 83;ime reckoning, 
137; tortures, 271, 272; {totem 
signs, 192; vindictive, 2443; voices, 
293, 307; war methods, 265, 268 ; 
wigwams, 100 ; widows and orphans, 
117, 245 ; women, 239; worship of 
cross, 145, 146; worship of the sun, 
143, 146 

Indian woman burned to death, 180 

—— women, modesty, 94 ; patriarch, 
229 

Cove, 62 

Instructive characters, 135 

Introduction, 1 

Iroquois, 140, 150, 151, 271 

Isle Percée, 5, 7; 8, 9,923, 0) 055100, 
69, 72, 73, 75, 76, 78, 79, 81, 103, 
153, 161, 179, 180, 205, 304, 305, 
306, 307 ; description, 64 

Isles aux Maingan, 269 





JACK, Edward, 164, 179 
Jays, 282 
Jesuit Fathers, vii, 5, 20, 22, 75, 165, 


193 ’ 

Jesuit Relations, Thwaites’ 
8, 193 

John Carter Brown Library, 44 

Joli, Mount, 73 

Journal du Corsaire, 62 

Joutel, 122 

Jugglers, 15, 90, 
299 

Jugglers’ bag, 220, 221 

Jumeau, Emmanuel, 3, 9, 11, 13, 61, 
65, 67, 79, 145, 151, 155, 156, 178, 
235, 302; his map, 11, 152; bio- 
graphy, 152 


edition, 


144, 216, 224, 


INDEX 


KALM, 96 

Kauder, Father, 30 

Kenebec, 229 

Kenibeki, 229 

Kephart, H., 136 

Kidder, 241 

Kiernan, T. J., xi 

Kignamotinoer, 126 

Killer-whale, 286 

Kir, 141 

Koucdedaoüi, 142, 160, 180, 187, 283 
Koutche, kitche chibar, 312, 313, 314 
Kraemer, H., 296 


LA BASSÉE, 32, 55 

Lafitau, Father, 36 

Lamote, 69 

Land of Souls, 208, 209, 239, 301 

Language of the Gaspesians, 140 

Laval, Monseigneur de, 4, 5, 75, 202, 
317; 320, 

Laval University, 44 

Laverdiére, Abbé, 63, 89, 240, 274 

Lavoie, Father, 73 

Laws of the Gaspesians, 234 <— 

Lead mine, 61 

Leatherwood, 296 

Le Caron, Father, 18, 224, 226, 292 

Le Clercq, Father, adopted by the 
Indians, 290; age, 3, 191; arrival 
in Canada, 3,76; autograph, 7, 10; 
biography, 1; birth, 2; book, vii, 
11; death,9; departure from Mira- 
michi, 155; discouraged, 6, 194; 
nearly drowned, 74; gives feast to 
the Indians, 280 ; his hieroglyphics, 
21-32; honoured, 10; invents the 
hieroglyphics, 131 ; licence, 5, 202; 
map, II; mission, 5 ; second mission, 
8,321; at Montreal, 10, 320; name, 
3; asanaturalist,275 ; plagiarisms, 
18, 19; possible portrait, 10, 27; 
receives letter from Father le Roux, 
194; return to Canada, 317 ; return 
to France, 9 ; synopsis of book, 13- 
16; visit to Quebec, 127 ; voyage to 
France, 7, 304; voyage to Mirami- 
chi, 6, 159; first winter in Canada, 78 

Le Clercq, Maxime, 3 

Leclercqia, 11 

Leclercqi, 11 

Ledelstaganne, 210 

Lefebvre, Father, 3, 80 

Le Garçon, 69 

Leisler, Governor, 68 

Le Jeune, Father, 18, 115, 123, 213, 


449 


215, 217, 226, 227, 235, 240, 250, 
263, 277 

Leldestaganne, 212, 294 

Le Loutre, l'Abbé, 25, 26, 28 

Lens, 9, 55 | 

Leonard, Friar, 204 

Lepine, 69 

Le Roux, Father, 6, 14, 21, 127, 120, 
194, 204, 205, 304, 305, 317, 320, 
321; his letter, 194 

Lescarbot, vii, 12, 89, 94, 120, 224, 250, 
260, 261, 274, 281, 285 

Les costes de la Grande Baye, 2 

Le Tac, Father, 8,9, 73, 75, 76, 79, 
153, 162, 203, 268, 321 

Librarian of Congress, 30 

Libraries of Congress, 30, 44 ; of the 
Legislature of Quebec, 44 ; of Par- 
liament, 44 

Licence, 5, 56 

Lindsay, Abbe Lionel, 7, 202 

Liquor traffic, 254 

L’Isle au Massacre, 150 

Little Gaspé, 62 

Little River, 78 

Louisiana Historical Collections, 20 

Loup marin, 283 

Loup servier, 283 

Lynx, 283 

Lyonnes, Father, 192 


MACDONALD, Father, 32 

Macé, Monsieur, 317 

Mackerel, 285 

MacPherson, Father, 32 

Maillard, l’Abbé, 25, 26, 28, 29, 140, 
141, 224, 250, 293 

Mal Bay, 71 

Maliseets, 142 

Mallery, G., 22, 31, 39 

Manach, Abbé, 140 

Manne, 180 

Manner of life of Gaspesians, 109 

Map of Gaspesia, 11 

Maple sap, 122 

Maple sugar, 122; antiquity of making, 
123 

Marchin, 240 

Margry, 3, 20, 122 

Marie, 184 

Marie Joseph, 150 

Marks used by Indians, 26, 27 

Marionette, 283 

Marriage of the Gaspesians, 259 

Martens, 285 ; superstitions, 226 

Mason, Captn., 68 


2F 


450 


Matachias, 89 

Maurault, l'Abbé, 63 

Medousaoüek, 246 

Melun, Mademoiselle de, 52, 318 

Melun, Prince de, 49 

Membré, Zénobe, 3, 4, 128, 204 

Mémoires pour servir, title, 9 

Mesic, 138 

Metauh, 284 

Mexicans, 143 

Michtan, 122 

Micmacs, 6, 19, 23, 25, 29, 30, 31, 89, 
150 ; the same as the Gaspesians, 6 

Micmac expressions, list on page 249 

Milkweed, 296 

Miramichi, origin of name, 180 ; 2, 8, 
13, 17, 82, III, 145, 154, 158, 160, 
175, 205. .See also Mizamichis 

Mirmenaganne, 155, 180 

Miscou, 162, 192 

Mission, R. de, 158 

Mizamichis, 86, 145, 159, 160, 164, 166, 
167. See also Miramichi 

Moccasins, 93 

Meceurs des Sauvages, title, 36 

Mohawk incursions, 150 

Monastery of Notre-Dame des Anges, 
127, 128 

Monseignat, de, 67, 68 

Montagnais, or Montagniez, 22, 29, 
140, 227 

Montpetit, 285 

Mont-Roial, 203, 304, 320 

Moose, 109; calling of, 276; descrip- 
tion, 274 ; hunting, 274 ; meat, 118 ; 
superstitions, 226 

Moreau, Father, 132, 150, 314 

Mouhinne, 135 

Murdoch’s History, 68, 69, 140 

Muses de la Nouvelle-France, 12 

Muskrats, 285 


NANIBOZHU, 208 

Ndegouche, 249 

Nemidoiiades, 315 

Nepisiguit, 5, 10, 150, 153, 156, 165, 
166. See also Nipisiquit 

New France, 130; description and 
map, 161 

Newberry Library, 44 

New York, 13; Historical Society, 
43; Public Library, 43, 44; State 
Library, 44 

Nibk, 138 

Nigaiou, 120, 285 

Nightingale, 282 


INDEX 


Nipisiquit, 158, 160, 162, 164, 165, 167, 
168, 193, 205, 230. See also Nepisi- 
guit 

Nirido, 281 

North Shore, 2 

Northwest Miramichi, 155, 156, 166, 
175, 279 

Notes pour servir, title, 2 

Notre Dame des Anges, 81 

Nouvelle Relation, authority of, 17; 
irregularities, 19; misprints, 19; 
proof reading, 19; style, 18, 19, 21; 
title of, 12; trustworthiness On 
value of, 17 


OAGANDO, 275 

Odoric, Father. 
Odoric 

Ohi, 90 

Origin of the Gaspesians, 84 

Orignac, 274 

Otis-Slafter, 96 

Otters, 280 

Oiiahich, 90, 216, 218, 221, 222, 223 

Oüaspous, 284 

Ouce choüen tahoé, 311 

Oué, 300 

Oukate guenne, 134, 135, 306 

Ouragan, 291 

Oysters, 285 

Ozon, Father, 4, 76, 304, 316 


See Hugolin and 


PABINEAU Falls, 166, 175 

Pacifique, Father, xi, 30, 32, 63, 80, 80, 
IAI 

Pactagane, 276 

Paints, 89 

Paltsits, V. H., x, 42 

Paniah, 138 

Papkootparout, 15, 208, 209, 211, 212, 
213, 214, 298 

Paquot, 9 

Parabego, 111 

Parkman, 20 

Partridge, 109, 280 

Passage Jumeau, 153 

Patriarch, 229 

Pelletier, D., 204 

Peopling of new world, 85 

Percé Rock, 11, 64 

Perrault, Father, 37 

Petite Rivière, 5, 71, 74, 77, 78, 79 

Phips, William, expedition, 13, 67, 71 

Pickerel, 285 

Picture-writing, title, 22 

Pikes, 285 


INDEX 


Pilling, 27, 29, 30, 31, 141 

Pirate ships, 68 

Pointe au Père, 163 

Ponamon, 139, 285 

Pond-fish, 285 

Poonamoo, 138 

Porcupine, 109, 175, 285 ; habits, 174 ; 
superstitions, 225 

Portage River, 156, 166, 279 

Porte-Croix, 32, 145 

Porter, Peter A., 44 

Port Royal, 67 

Potherie, de la, 67 

Premier Etablissement de la Foy, 3, 
9, 20, 21, 30, 80 ; title, 19 

Prince Edward Island, 32 

Princesse d’Epinoy, 13, 49 

Ptarmigan, 280 

Pye, Thos., 65 


QUINQUAJOU, 41, 285 
Quioudo, 191 


RABBITS, 284 

Rale, 140 

Rand, S. T., 30, 32, 40, 63, 89, 90, 96, 
101, 120, 126, 138, 139, I41, 142, 150, 
217, 218, 219, 246, 249, 275, 276, 281, 
284, 289, 291, 294, 298, 308, 311, 312 

Rassade, 95 

Ravens, 282 

Raymond, W. T., 202, 252 

— W. O., 314 

Reade, J., 90 

Recollects, x, 3, 4, 7, 8, 75, 161 

Reformed Franciscans, 3 

Religion of the Gaspesians, 143 

Religious, 66 

Remedies of the Gaspesians, 296 

Renou, Lemey, 39 

Requiem, 286 

Restigouche, 5, 6, 9, 32, 74, 89, 128, 
150, 205, 235 See also Ristigouche 

Return of the Author to France, 304 

Réveillaud, 4, 8, 9, 73, 75, 76, 79, 203, 

21 

Robe du Tiers-Ordre, title, 4, 77 

Ribourd, Father, 128, 204 

Richard, Father, 75, 266 

Richibucto, 235, 237 

Ristigouche, 129, 160, 192, 286, 303. 
See also Restigouche 

Riviere de Saint-Croix, 180 

Riviére Ouelle, 153 

Robertson, J. A. D., 303 

Robins, 282 





451 

Rochemonteix, 20 

Ronde, Sieur de la, 5, 77, 248. 
Denys, Pierre 

Rosiers, Cap des, 66 

Rossignol, 282 

Rouillard, 63, 64 

Roy, 64 

Rulers of the Gaspesians, 234 


See 


SAGAMITE, 41, 108 

Sagard, 70, 122, 164 

Sainte Anne de Beaupré, 7, 129 
Anne-de-la-Grande-Anse, 153 
Saint Aubin, 241 

Sainte Claire, 75 

Sainte-Croix, River, 86, 111, 145, 168, 





171 
Saint Joseph River, 235, 286 
—— Peters, 159 
—— Sulpice, 305 
— Valier, Monsigneur de, 8, 9, 35, 
36, 73,192, 32).05 29 453, 256, 168, 
180, 189, 250, 256, 293 
Salle, Monsieur de la, 128, 129, 130, 
204 
Salmon, I10, 285 
Sand pipers, 282 
Saouyanne, 96 
Sardanapalus, 207 
Saut aux Loups Marins, 165 
Sea-cows, 284 
Seal, 109, 283 
Seal Falls, 166 
Seasons, 138 
Sebastian, Father, 162 
Seigneurie of Isle Percée, 77 ; of Mi- 
ramichi, 160 ; of Nepisiguit, 160 
Seminary of Quebec, 152, 205; of 
Saint Sulpice, 304 
Shad, 285 
Shark, 286 
Sept Isles, 305 
Shea, John Gilmary, 2, 3, 4, 9, 20, 29, 
.39; 40, 94, 203 
Sicotte, M. L. W., 44 
Siffleur, 283 
Sillery, 206 
Sirois, Father, 78 
Sister Gallard, 318 
Sister Monmusseau, 318 
Skate, 285 
Smagnis, 142 
Smelt, 285 
Smethurst, C., 293 
Smith, A. C., 282, 300 
Snipe, 109, 282 


452 


Snow buntings, 282 

Snow goose, 282 

Soirées Canadiennes, 26 
Song sparrows, 282 
Soquoqui, 140 

Soüart, Monsieur, 320 
Souls, Indian idea of, 213 
Sparrows, 282 

Speech of Indian chief, 308 
Squid, 285 

Squirrels, 285 

Sturgeon, 285 

Suckers, 285 

Sulte’s Histoire, 3 

Sun worship, 84 
Superstitions of the Gaspesians, 215 
Swans, 282 

Swordfish, 286 


TABAGANNES, IOI 

Table à Rolland, 70 

Table générale des Recollets, title, 
10 

Table of Chapters, 57 

Tahoé messet, 277 

Tahoé nkamera mon ignemoulo, 289, 
309 

Talon, 77 

Tamahoé, 298 

Tanguay, 28, 77, 111, 152, 153, 204 

Taoüak, 138 

Tchougis, 219, 220 

Teal, 109, 283 

Thrushes, 282 

Thury, Father, 8, 152, 153, 158 

Thwaites, 193 

Tickle, 78 

Tisniguet, 302 

Tissaouhianne, 96 

Titiais, 282 

Tkours, 138 

Tobacco, 211, 212, 288, 298 








INDEX 


Tomcod, 138, 139, 285 
Totem signs, 38, 40 
Tracadie, 31 

Trappist monastery, 31 
Tronçon, Monsieur, 316, 321 
Trout, 110, 285 

Turkish ship, 318 


URSULINES, 125, 320 


VALLEAU, Pierre, 69 
Vetromile, Father, 63, 64, 65 
Vienna, 31 

Voyage to Miramichi, 159 


WALKER, B.E, xi 

Walley, Major, 71 

Walrus, 284 

Wampum, 95 

Wars of the Gaspesians, 265 

Wasson, Father, 317, 320 

Water of Canada, 123 

West, J., 237 . 

Whales, 286 

Whitefish, 285 

White-throated sparrow, 282, 283 

Widows and orphans, 117 

Wigwams and dwellings of the Gaspe- 
sians, 100 

Wild goose, 109 

Winds, 136 

Wisconsin Historical Society, 43 

Witchcraft, 219 

Wolf, 284 

Wolverene, 220, 222, 285 

Wolves, 283 

Woodpeckers, 281 

Wooden kettles, 120 

Worship of the Cross, 13, 17, 32 

Wrong, G. M., xi 


YARMOUTH, 63 


THE PUBLICATIONS OF THE 
CHAMPLAIN SOCIETY 


. THE HISTORY OF NEW FRANCE. By Marc 
LescarBoT. With an English Translation, Notes and Appendices 
by Professor W. L. Grant of Queen’s University, and an Intro- 
duction by H. P. Biccar. Vol. I., pp. xxi-331. (To be completed 
in Three Volumes.) 


. THE DESCRIPTION AND NATURAL HISTORY 
OF NORTH AMERICA (ACADIA). By Nicoras DENYs. 
Translated and Edited, with a Memoir of the Author, Collateral 
Documents, and a Reprint of the Original, by Professor WILLIAM 
F. GANONG. Pp. xvi-625. 


. DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE SEIGNIORIAL 
TENURE IN CANADA, 1598-1854. Edited, with a Historical 
Introduction and Explanatory Notes, by Professor WILLIAM BENNETT 
Munro of Harvard University. Pp. cxxiii-380. 


THE LOGS OF THE CONQUEST OF CANADA. 
Edited, with a Historical Introduction, by Colonel Witt1aM Woop, 
Author of “The Fight for Canada.” Pp. XXVI-335- 


. NOUVELLE RELATION DE LA GASPÉSIE. Par 
CHRESTIEN LE CLERCQ. An English Translation with the French 
Text, edited, with Notes, by Professor W. F. Ganonc. Pp. xvi-452. 


. JOURNEY FROM PRINCE OF WALES FORT IN 
HUDSON BAY TO THE NORTHERN OCEAN, 1769-1772: 
By SAMUEL HEARNE. A New Edition, edited, with Notes, by 
J. B. TYRRELL. [Zn the Press. 


_ THE HISTORY OF NEW FRANCE. By Marc 


LescarBoT. Edited by W. L. GRANT and H. P. Biccar. Vol. Il. 
[Jn the Press. 

















| 


0033236 2 
T UNIVERSITY 


ii 


ij 


li 


= 
2 


| Lil 


| 


69940. 








