Presented  to  the 
LIBRARY  of  the 
UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
from 

the  estate  of 

J.  Stuart  Fleming 


i 


'^■>  ’ 


i«-Â- 


"1. 

2 1/-  j\Xiit(^ 


"?.î, 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2015 


https://archive.org/details/newvoyagestonort01laho_2 


I ' NEW 

VOYAGES 


' In  Two  VOLUME  S. 

V A great  part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original 

LONDON:  Printed  for  H.  Bonwicke  in  St.  PauVs  Church-yard  ; 
T,  Goodwin^  M.Wotton^  B,  Tooke^  in  Fleet  fir  set  ^ and  5.  Manjhip 
in  Cornhil^  1703*  1 

1 

NE  W 

VOYAGES 

T O 

North-America. 

CONTAINING 

An  Account  of  the  feveral  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con- 
tinent ; their  Cuftoms,  Commerce,  and  Way  of 
Navigation  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers  ; the  feve- 
ral Attempts  of  the  EngUfh  and  French  to  dilpolTefs 
one  another  ; with  the  Reafcns  of  the  K4ifcarriage 
of  the  former  ; and  the  various  Adventures  be- 
tween the  French,  and  the  Iroquefe  Confederates  of 
England,  from  1683  to  1694. 

A Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada^  and  a Natu- 
ral Hiftory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon 
their  Government,  and  the  Intereft  of  the  Englijh 
and  French  in  their  Commerce. 

AJfb  a Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a General  of  the 
Savages,  giving  a full  View  of  the  Religion  and  ftrange 
Opinions  of  thofe  People  : With  an  Account  of  the  Au- 
thors Retreat  to  Portugal  and  Dcnmark^^  and  his  Remarks 
on  thofe  Courts. 

To  which  is  added, 

A DidHonary  of  the  Algonk^ine  Language,  which  is  generally 
fpoke  in  North-America. 

Illuftrated  with  Twenty  Three  Mapps  and  Cutts. 

Written  in  French 

By  the  Baron  L A H o N T a n,-  Lord  Lievtenant 
of  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  in  Flew- 
foundland,  now  in  England. 

Done  into  EngUfh. 

In  Two  VOLUMES, 

V A great  part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original. 

LO  N DON  : Printed  for  H.  Bonwicke  in  St.  PauVs  Church-yard  ; 

T.Gooàwin^  M.Wotton^  B.  Tooke^  in  Fleet  firs  et  and  S.  Manjhi^ 

in  Cornhif  1703. 


DOMUS  CMTHÜS:  xofp; 
EX  DO.¥0 

Î)A¥I£IIS  ¥MIAEM'. 


To  His  Grace 

WILLIAM 

Duke  of  Devonfhire^ 

Lord  Steward  of  Her  Majefties  Houf- 
hold^  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  County 
of  Derby  , Chief  Juft  ice  in  Eyre  of 
all  Her  Majefties  Forrefts,  Chafes  y 
Parks  , 6cc.  Trent-North  ; One 
of  the  Lords  of  Her  Majefties  Moft 
Honourable  Privy  Council^  and  Knight 
of  the  Moft  Honourable  Order  of  the 
Garter. 


My  Lordy 

Since  I had  the  Honour  to  prefent 
the  King  of  Denmark^  with  the 
firfi:  part  of  this  Book,  I pre- 
fume to  make  a Prefent  of  the  Latter 
to  your  Grace.  In  making  the  hrft 
Dedication,  I had  no  other  induce- 
ment, than  a due  regard  to  the  bene- 
fits I receiv’d  from  His  Majefties  fa- 
vour 5 and  the  fame  Motive  with  re- 
ference to  your  Grace,  has  prompted 
me  to  make  this  acknowledgment  of 
, A 2 the 


The  Dedication. 

the  undeferved  Favours  you  kindly 
vouchfaf ’d  me. 

I did  not  dare  to  launch  out  into 
the  praife  of  His  Vanijh  Majefty,  who 
has  a juft  Title  to  all  forts  of  Enco- 
miums 3 by  reafon  that  the  little  French 
I had,  has  been  forgot  among  a fort 
of  People,  that  take  Panegy ricks  to 
be  Affronts.  Tis  with  the  fame  view. 
My  Lord,  that  I decline  the  pleafure 
of  publifliing  thofediftinguifhing  Qua- 
lities, that  place  Your  Lordfhip  at  the 
Head  of  the  Moft  Accomplifh’d  Gran^ 
dees  of  the  World,  and  the  Moft  Zea- 
lous Patriots  of  their  Country. 

/ am  ivith  all  Gratitude  and  Feneration^ 

My  Lord^ 

Tour  Grace  Sf 
Moji  Humlle^  and  Mofi 
Obedient  Servant. 

Lahontan. 


THE 


THE 


PREFACE. 

HAvifig  flatter  d my  felf  with  the  vain 
hopes  of  retrieving  the  King  of  Fran- 
ce’s favour  y before  the  Declaration  of 
this  War  ; I was  Jo  far  from  thinking 
to  put  thefe  Letters^  and  Memoirs^  to  the  Prefs  ; 
that  I defignd  to  have  committed  'em  to  the  flames  ^ 
if  that  Monarch  had  done  me  the  honour  of 
reinflating  me  in  my  former  Places^  with  the  good 
leave  of  Mefieurs  de  Pont- 
cbartrain , * the  Father  and  * chemceiiw  cf 

'^1  ^ • France,  and  the  other 

the  Son.  Twos  with  that  view  Secretary  ot  St^te  : B,th 

that  / negleSled  to  put  'em  in  of 'm  vafiiy  rich, 

fuch  a dre/s  as  miqlot  now  he 

wifh'd  for^  for  the  fatisfaSlion.  of  the  Reader 

that  gives  himfelf  the  trouble  to  peruje  'em. 

Between  the  fifteenth  and  fixteenth  year  of  my 

Age  I went  to  Canada,  and  there  took  care  to  kpep 

up  a confiant  Correfpondence  by  Letters  with  an  old 

Relation,^  who  had  required  of  me  a Narrative  of  the 

Occurrences  of  that  Country  upon  the  account  of  the 

yearly  afjtfflance  he  gave  me.  Tis  thefe  very  Let-^ 

ters  that  make  the  greateft  part  of  the  firfl  V ?- 

lum.  They  contain  an  account  of  all  that  pafs'd 

between  the  Englift,  the  French,  the  IroqucTc, 

A and 


The  Preface. 

and  the  other  Savage  Nations,  from  the  year  1683, 
to  1694.  Together  with  a great  many  curious 
Remarks,  that  may  he  of  ufe  to  thofe  who  have  a- 
ny  knowledge  of  the  Englifli  or  French  Colonies. 

The  whole  is  writ  with  a great  deal  of  Fidelity  ; 

for  I reprefent  things  juft  as  they  are.  I neither 

flatter  nor  fpare  any  Perfon  what~  ! 

foever  ; I attribute  to  the  * Iro- 
Iilh  in  New-York,  ^ , , , 

Mahak,  quele,  the  glory  they  have  pur-  | 

chafed  on  fever al  occafions,  thd 
at  the  fame  time  I hate  that  Rafcally  People,  as 
much  as  Horns  and  Law-Suits.  Notwithftanding  \ 
the  V ineration  I have  for  the  Clergy,  / impute  ! 
to  them  all  the  mifchief  the  Iroquefe  have  done 
to  the  French  Colonies,  in  the  courfe  of  a War  j 
that  had  never  been  undertaken,  if  it  had  not  | 
been  for  the  Counfels  of  thefe  pious  Church-  j 
Men. 

The  Reader  is  dejifd  to  take  notice  that  the  j 
Towns  of  New-York,  are  known  to  the  French 
by  their  old  Names  only,  and  for  that  reafon  I 
was  obligd  to  make  ufe  oj  the  fame  in  my  Lei-  | 
ters,  as  well  as  my  Mapps.  They  give  the  name  | 
of  New-York  to  all  that  Country,  that  reaches  | 

from  the  Source  of  its  River  to  the  Mouth,  that  | 

is,  to  the  Ifland,  upon  which  there  ftands  a City 
calTd  in  the  time  of  the  Dutch  Manathe,  and 
now  by  the  Englifli,  New-York.  In  like  man-  | 
ner  the  Plantation  of  Albany,  that  lies  towards  { 
the  head  of  the  River,  is  call’d  by  the  French, 
Orange.  I 

Farther  ; / would  not  have  the  Reader  to  take  j 
it  amifs,  that  the  thoughts  of  the  Savages  are 
fet  forth  in  an  European  Drefs.  The  occafion  of 

that 


The  Preface. 

that  choice  proceeded  from  the  Re  I a'  Su  Letter 

tion  I Correfponded  with  ; for  that  ‘ 
honed  Gentleman  ridiculed  the  Metaphorical  Ha» 
rangue  of  the  * Graogula  ; and  intreated  me  not 
to  make  a literal  Tranjlation  of  a Language  that 
was  fo  fluff  d with  Ficlions  and  Savage  Hyper- 
boles. 'Tis  for  this  reafon  that  all  the  Difcour- 
fes  and  Arguments  of  thofe  Mations^  are  here 
accommodated  to  the  European  Style  and  ivay  of 
Speaking  ; for  having  comply  d with  my  Friend's 
Requefl.^  I contented  my  felf  in  keeping  only  a 
Copy  of  the  Letters  I writ  to  him^  during  my 
Tilgrimage  in  the  Country  of  theje  naked  Philo^ 
fophers. 

'Twill  not  be  improper  to  acquflnt  the  Reader 
by  the  bye^  that  thofe  who  know  my  faults^  do  as 
little  juflice  to  thefe  People.,  as  they  do  to  me., 
in  alledging  1 am  a Savage  my  felf  and  that  that 
makes  me  (peak  fo  favourably  of  my  Fe How- Sa- 
vages. Thefe  Obfervators  do  me  a great  deal  of 
Flonour,  as  long  as  they  do  not  explain  themjelves^ 
fo  as  to  make  me  direllly  of  the  fame  Char  aller 
with  that  which  is  tack'd  to  the  word  Ravage  by 
the  Europeans  in  their  way  of  thinking  : For  in 
faying  only  that  I am  of  the  fame  temper  with  the 
Savages,  they  give  me  without  dedgn,  the  Cha- 
r aller  of  the  boneflefl  Man  in  the  World.  ’Tis  an 
uncontefled  truth,  that  the  Nations  which  are  not 
debauch'd  by  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Europeans* 
are  fir  angers  to  the  Meafures  Meum  and  Tuum, 

and  to  all  Laws,  fudges,  and  Priefts.  This  cant 
be  call'd  in  quefiion,  fence  all  Travellers  that 
have  vifited  thofe  Countries,  vouch  for  its  truth  | 
and  a great  many  of  different  Profeffions,  have 

A 4 


The  Preface. 

given  the-lVorld repeated  ajfurahces  that  ^tis  fe. 
tTow  this  being  granted^  we  Ought  not  to  fcruple 
to  believe^  that  theje  are  fuch  ivije  and  reajona- 
hle  People.  I tak^e  it^  a Man  mujl  he  quite  blind., 
who  do  snot  fee  that  the  property  of  Goods  (Ido 
not  fpeak  of  the  ingr offing  of  Women  ) is  the  only 
Source  of  all  the  Dif orders  that  perplex  the  Eu- 
ropean Societies.  Upon  that  Confideration  ’twill 
he  eafie  to  perceive,  that  I have  not  [poke  wide 
in  defc riling  that  Wifdom  and  Acutenefs  which 
jhines  through  the  Words  and  Allions  of  thefe 
poor  Americans.  If  all  the  World  had  accefs  to 
the  Books  of  Uoyages,  that  are  found  in  feme  well 
flock’d  Libraries,  they  would  find  in  above  a hun- 
dred Deferiptions  of  an  infinity  of  Dif- 

courfes  and  Arguments  offer’d  by  the  Savages, 
which  are  incomparably  Jhonger,  and  more  ner- 
vous than  thofe  I’ve  inferted  in  my  Memoirs. 

As  for  fuch  as  doubt  of  the  InfiinEl  and  wonder- 
ful capacity  of  Beavers,  they  need  only  to  cafi  their 
Eyes  upon  the  Great  Map  of  America,  drawn  by 
the  Sieur  de  Fer,  and  grav'd  at-  Paris  in  the 
year  1698.  Where  they  will  meet  with  fever al 
furprifing  things,  relating  to  thefe  Animals. 

While  my  Book  was  a Printing  in  Holland,  I 
was  in  England  ; and  as  foon  as  it  appear’d, 
fever  al  Englifh  Gentlemen  of  a difinguiffing  Me- 
rit, who  underftand  the  Frencli  as  well  as  their 
Mother  Tongue,  gave  me  to  know,  that  they  would 
be  glad  to  fee  a more  ample  Relation  of  the  Man- 
ners and  Cufioms  of  thç  People  of  that  Continent, 
whom  we  call  by  the  n.ime  of  Savages,  This  oh- 
ligd  me  to  communicate  to  thefe  Gentlemen,  the 
ftb/lance  of  the  feveral  Conferences  I bad  in  that 

Country 


The  Preface. 

Country  with  a certain  Huron,  whom  French 
call  Rat.  While  I flay  d at  that  AmericanV 
Village^  - 1 imploy  d my  time  very  agreeably  in  ma- 
king a carefulColleÜion  of  all  his  Arguments  and 
Opinions  ; and  as  foon  as  I return  d from  my  V oy- 
age  upon  the  Lakes  of  Canada,  / Jhewd  my  Ma- 
nufcript  to  Count  Frontenac,  who  was  fo  pleas'd 
with  it^  that  he  took  the  pains  to  ajftfl  me  in 
digefling  the  D'lalogues^  and  bringing  them  into 
fhe  order  they  now  appear  in  : For  before  that, 
they  wer^  abrupt  Conferences  without  Connexion. 
Upon  the  Solicitation  of  Englifli  Gentlemen^ 
I 've  put  thefe  Dialogues  into  the  hands  of  the 
P erf  on  who  tranflated  my  Letters  and  Memoirs  : 
And  if  it  had  not  been  for  their  pr effing  Infl an- 
tes, they  had  never  feen  the  light  ; for  there  are 
but  few  in  the  World  that  ivill  judge  imparti- 
ally, and  without  prepoffefjlon,  of  feme  things  con- 
tain’d in  ’em. 

I have  likewife  intrufled  the  fame  Tranflator 
with  feme  Remarks  that  I made  in  Portugal, 
and  Denmark,  when  I fled  thither  from  New- 
found-Land. There  the  Reader  will  meet  with  a 
defeription  of  Lisbon  and  Copenhagen,  and  of 
the  capital  City  of  Arragon. 

To  the  Tranflation  cf  my  firfl  Volume,  I have 
added  an  exabi  Map  of  Newfound-Land,  which 
was  not  in  the  Original.  I have  likewife  cor- 
rected almofl  all  the  Cuts  of  the  Holland  Im- 
preffion,  for  the  Dutch  Gravers  had  murdePd 
'em,  by  not  underflanding  their  Explications,  which 
were  all  in  French.  They  have  grav’d  Women 
for  Men,  and  Men  for  Women  ; naked  Perfons 
for  thofe  that  are  cloath’d,  and  è Contra.  As 

for 


The  Preface. 

for  the  Maps  , the  Reader  will  find  'em  very 
exacl  ; And  I ha  ve  taken  care  to  have  the  Trahis  of 
my  V oyages  more  nicely  delineated^  than  in  the  0- 
riginal. 

I underfland  hy  Letters  from  Paris,  that  the 
two  Mejfieurs  de  Pontchartrain  indeavour  hy 
all  means  to  be  reveng'd  upon  me  for  the  af- 
front they  fay  I have  given  'em  in  puhlifhing 
fame  trifling  Stories  in  my  Book,  that  ought  to 
have  been  conceatd.  I am  likewife  inform'd,  that 
I have  rea/on  to  be  apprehenfive  of  the  Refent- 
ment  of  fever  al  Ecclefiaficks,  who  pretend  [have 
in  fuit  ed  God  in  cenj tiring  their  Conduhi.  But 
fince  I expehled  nothin<i^  lefs  than  the  furious  Re~ 
fentment  both  of  the  one  and  the  other^  when  I 
put  this  Book  to  the  Pref  ; / had  time  enough  to 
arm  my  felf  from  top  to  toe,  in  order  to  make  head 
againjl  'em.  '[is  my  comfort,  that  1 have  writ 
nothing  but  what  I make  good  by  Authentick 
proofs  ; befides,  that  1 could  not  have  faid  lefs 
of  'em  than  I have  done  ; fir  if  I had  not  tied 
my  felf  up  to  the  direPl  thread  of  my  Difcourje, 
I could  have  made  Digrefftons,  in  which  the  Con- 
duPt  both  of  the  one  and  the  other,  would  have 
appear'd  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  repofe  of  the  So- 
ciety, and  the  publick  Good.  I had  provocation 
enough  to  have  treated  'em  in  that  manner  ; but 
my  Letters  being  addrefs'd  to  an  old  Bigotted  Re- 
lation of  mine,  who  fed  upon  Devotion,  and  dread- 
ed the  influence  of  the  Court-  he  ftill  befeech'd 
me  to  write  nothing  to  him  that  might  difoblige  the 
Clergy  or  the  Courtiers,  for  fear  of  the  intercept- 
ing of  my  Letters.  However,  I have,  advice  from 
Pans,  that  fame  Pedants  are  fit  at  work  to  lafb 

me 


The  Preface. 

me  in  writing  ; and  fo  I muft  prepare  to  fiand  the 
hunt  of  a jhower  of  affronts,  that  will  he  pourd 
upon  me  in  a jew  days.  But  "tis  no  matter  ; lam 
fo  good  a Conjurer,  that  I can  ward  off  any  form 
from  the  fide  of  Paris.  I laugh  at  their  Threats  ; 
and  fence  I cant  make  ufe  of  my  Sword,  ITl  wage 
War  with  my  Pen. 

This  I only  mention  hy  the  lye,  in  this  my  Pre- 
face to  the  Reader,  whom  I pray  the  Heavens 
to  Crown  with  Profperity , in  preferving  him 
from  having  any  lujmefs  to  adjufl  with  mojl 
of  the  Miniflers  of  State,  and  Priefls  ; for  let 
them  he  never  fo  faulty,  they'll  feill  he  Jald  to 
he  in  the  right,  till  fuch  time  as  Anarchy  he 
introduc'd  amongfe  us,  as  well  as  the  Americans, 
among  whom  the  forryefl  fellow  thinks  himfelf 
a better  Man , than  a Chancellour  of  France. 
Thefe  People  are  happy  in  being  fcreend  from  the 
tricks  and  fhifts  of  Miniflers,  who  are  always 
Majlers  where- ever  they  come.  I envy  the  ft  ate  of 
a poor  Savage,  who  tramples  upon  Laws,  and 
pays  Homage  to  no  Scepter.  / wife  I could  fpend 
the  reft  of  my  Life  in  bis  Hut  t,  and  fo  he  no  lon- 
ger expos'd  to  the  chagrin  of  bending  the  knee  to 
a feet  of  Men,  that  jacrifece  the  puhlick  good  to 
their  private  intereft,  and  are  horn  to  plague 
honefl  Men.  The  two  Miniflers  of  State  I have 
to  do  with,  have  been  follicited  in  vain,  by  the 
Dutchefs  <^Lude,  Cardinal  Bouillon,  Count  Gui- 
Icar  , Mr.  de  Quiros,  and  Count  d’  Avaux  ••  No- 
thing could  prevail,  tho'  all  that  is  laid  to  my 
charge,  confifls  only  in  not  hearing  the  affronts  of 
a Governour,  whom  they  proteSl  ; at  a time  when 
a hundred  other  Officers,  who  live  under  the  impu- 
tation 


The  Preface. 

tatîon  of  Crimes^  infinitely  greater  than  mine^ 
are  excused  for  three  Months  alfence  from  Cour}. 
Now  the  Reafon  is^  that  they  give  lefs  quarter  to 
thofe  who  have  the  misfortune  to  difpleafe  the  two 
Mefiieurs  de  Ponchartrain,  than  to  fuch  as  aB 
contrary  to  the  Kings  Orders. 

..But  after  all  my  Misfortunes^  I have  this  to 
folace  me^  that  I injoy  in  England  a fort  of  Li- 
berty^ that  is  not  met  with  elfewhere  : For  one 
may  juflly  fay^  that  of  all  the  Countries  inhabited 
by  civilis’d  Feople^  this  alone  affords  the  greateji 
perfedion  of  Liberty.  Nay,  I do  not  except  the 
liberty  of  the  Mind,  for  I am  convinc’d,  that  the 
Englifli  maintain  il  with  a great  deal  of  tender- 
nefs  : So  true  it  is,  that  all  decrees  of  Slavery 
are  abhor r’d  by  this  People,  who  Jhew  their  iVif 
dom  in  the  precautions  they  tike  to  prevent  their 
finking  into  a fatal  Servitude. 


THE 


TH  E 


.LETTER  I. 

Dated  at  £^ehec  Nov.  8.1683, 

Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Pajfage  from 
France  to  Canada  ; with  feme  Remarks 
upon  the  Coa^s^  Channels.^  &c.  and  the 
variation  of  the  Needle.  p.  i. 

L E T T E R II. 

Dated  at  the  Canton  of  Beaupre  May  z,  1684. 

Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Plantations  of 
Canada,  and  the  manner  in  whichi  they  were 
jirji  forrrid  : As  alfo  an  Account  of  the  Tranf- 
port  at  ion  of  Whores  fromïïmcQ  to  thatCoun- 
try  ; together  with  a view  of  its  Climate  and 
Soil.  '■  p.  7. 


LET- 


The  Contents. 


LETTER,  m. 

Dated  at  ^elec  May  15'.  1684. 

Containing  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  City  of 
Quebec,  and  of  the  Ijland  of  5/.  Laurence. 

p.  II. 

LETTER.  IV. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  14.  1684. 

Containing  a Irief  Defcription  of  the  Habitati- 
ons of  the  Savages  in  the  Heighhourhood  of 
Quebec;  of  the  River  of  St.ljimQncQy  as  far 
up  as  Monreal;  of  a curious  way  of  fifhing 
Eels;  and  of  the  Cities  of  Trois  Rivieres,  and 
Monreal.*  Together  with  an  account  of  the 
Conduct  of  the  Forrefl-Rangers  or  Pedlers. 

p.  16. 

LETTER.  V. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  i8. 1684. 

In  which  is  contain  d a fhort  account  of  the  Iro- 
quefe,  with  a view  of  the  War  and  Peace  they 
made  with  the  French,  and  of  the  means  ly 
which  it  was  brought  about.  p.  zi. 

L E T T E R.  VI. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  zo.  1684. 

Being  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  Canows  made 
of  Birch  Bark , in  which  the  Canadans 

per- 


The  Contents. 

perform  all  their  Voyages  \ with  an  Account  of 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  made  and  ma~ 
nagd.  p. 

LETTER.  VIL 

Dated  at  Monreal  Idovemh.  z.  1684. 

Deferring  the  River  of  St.  Laurence , from 
Monreal  to  the  firfi  great  Lake  of  Canada, 
with  the  Water-palls.,  Qataratls-.,  and  Naviga- 
tion of  that  River:  As  alfo  Fort  Frontenac, 
and  the  advantages  that  accrue  from  it.  To- 
gether with  a Qircumflantial  account  of  the 
Expedition  of  Mr.àt  la  Barre,  the  Governour 
General.,  againjl  the  Iroquefe  ; the  Speeches  he 
made,  the  Replies  he  receiv’d,  and  the  final 
Accommodation  of  the  difference.  p.  zy. 

LETTER.  VIÎI. 

Dated  Monreal  fune  28.  1685'. 

Reprejenting  the  Fortifications  of  Monreal,  and 
the  indifereet  zeal  of  the  Friefis,  who  are  Lords 
of  that  Town  .\  With  a Defeription  of  Chara- 
bli,  and  of  the  Commerce  of  the  Savages  upon 
the  great  Lakes.  p.  45-. 

LETTER.  IX. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  OTl.  z.  16S5'. 

Being  an  Account  of  the  Commerce  and  Trade  of 
Monreal  .*  Of  the  Arrival  of  the  Marquis  of 

Denonville 


The  Contents. 

Denon ville  with  fome  Troops’,  and  of  the  re- 
calling  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre.  With  a curious  Def- 
er iption  of  certain  Licenfes  for  trading  in  Bea- 
ver-Skins in  the  remote  Countries.  p*  Ji* 

L E T T E R.  X. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  July  8.  16^6. 

Relating  the  Arrival  of  Mr.  de  Champigni,  in 
the  room  of  Mr.  de  Meules,  who  is  recall'd  to 
Fran  ce  j*  the  arrival  of  the  Troops  that  came 
along  with  him^  the  curiofity  of  the  Rackets, 
and  the  way  of  hunting  Elks  ; with  a Deferip- 
tionof  that  Animal.  V-  5 S’ 

LETTER.  XI.  ^ 

Dated  at  Boucherville  May  z8. 1687. 

Being  a curious  Defer  iption  of  the  Hunting  of  di- 
vers Animals.  p.  do, 

LETTER.  Xil. 

Dated  at  St.  Helens  over  againfl;  Monreal 
June  8.  1687. 

The  Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil  arrives  in  Canada 
with  fome  Troops.  Both  the  Regular  Troops 
and  the  Militia  are  pojied  at  St.  Helens,  in 
a . readinefs  to  march  againfl  the  Troquefe. 

p.68. 


I 


LET- 


The  Contents. 

LETTER.  Xin. 

Dated  at  Niagara  Aug.  z.  1687. 

Reprefenting  the  unfavour  allé  Ijf'ue  of  the  Cam^ 
paign^  made  in  the  lro(\\\e.(Q  Country;  the  dif- 
covery  of  an  Ambufcade^  and  the  iffuing  of  Or- 
ders for  the  Author  to  inarch  with  a Detachment 
to  the  great  Lakes.  p.  70. 

LETTER.  XIV. 

■ Dated  at  MifUimakinac  May  x6.  1688. 

Jhe  Author  leaves  Nagara,  and  has  an  Incounter 
with  the  iroquQle  at  the  end  of  the  Land-Car- 
riage. The  after- part  of  his  Voyage.  A Def- 
cription  of  the  Country.  He  arrives  at  Fort  St. 
Jofepli  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  Hurons.  A 
Detachment  of  the  iAmons  arrive  at  the  famé 
place.  After  an  Ingagement^  they  fet  out  for 
MiflTilimakinac.  A flrange  Adventure  of  Mr.: 
de  la  Salle’^  Brother.  Miffilimakinac  dèf- 
cril’d.  p.  80.' 

LETTER.  XV. 

Dated  at  Mifftlimakindc  Sept.  18.  ï688. 

Defer  thing  the  FaB  call'd  Saut  St.  Marie,  where 
the  Author  perfwades  the  Inhabitants  to  joyn 
the  Outaouas,  and  march  again f the  Iroquele. 
And  containing  an  account  of  the  Occurrences  of 
the  Voyage  between  that  F lace  and  MifliliniakV 


The  Contents^ 

LETTER.  XVI. 

'DzX&à  2X  Miffilimakinac  May  i8.  1*689. 

Containing^  an  Account  of  the  Author  s Departure 
fronty  and  Return  to^  Miflilimakinac.  A Def- 
cription.  of  the  Bay  of  Puants,  and  its  Villages. 
An  ample  Defcription  of  the  Beavers^  follow  d 
hy  the  fournal  of  a remarkable  V oyage  upon  the 
Long  River^  and  a Map  of  the  adjacent  Coun- 
try. p.  104. 

LETTER.  XVII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Sep.  z8.  1689. 

fhe  Author  fets  out  from  Miffilimakinac  to  the 
Colony and  defcrtbes  the  Country ^ Rivers^  and 
Paffes  that  he  faw  by  the  way.  The  Iroquélê 
make  a fatal  incurfton  into  the  Ifland  of  Mon- 
real  .*  Fort  Frontenac  is  ahandmdi  Count 
Frontenac  is  fent  to  Canada,  and  the  Marquis 
of  Denonville  is  recall’d.  p.  14  z. 

LETTER.  XVIII. 

Dated  at  fjuelec  Nov.  15.  1689. 

Giving  an  Account  of  Mr.  de  Frontenacs  Arrival^ 
his  Reception.,  his  Voyage  to  Monrcal,  and  the 
r repairing  of  Fort  Icï0ütcn2.c.  P*  ^5^' 

LETTER.  XIX. 

Dated  at  Monreal  OHober  1 690. 

Relating  the  Aitemits  upon  New-England,  and 

New- 


The  Contents. 

New-York  ; a fatal  Emhaffy  fent  hy  the  French 
to  the  Iroquefe,  and  an  ill-concerted  Enter prife 
of  the  Englifli  and  the  Iroquete,  in  marching 
hy  Land  to  attack  the  French  Colony,  p.  1 5"5 . 

LETTER.  XX, 

Dated  at  Rochel  January  1691. 

Being  a Relation  of  a fécond  and  very  important 
Expedition  of  r^^EngUfn^  Seay  in  which  is 
contain’d  a Letter  written  ly  the  Englifli  Admi- 
ral to  Count  Frontenac,  with  the  Cover nour  s 
V erhal  Anfwer.  As  alfo  an  account  of  the  Au-^ 
thors  departure  for  Francs.  p.  159. 

LETTER.  XXf, 

Dated  at  Rochel  July  i6.  1691. 

Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Courts  or  Offices  of 
the  Minifiers  of  State^  and  a view  of  fome 
Services  that  are  ill  rewarded  at  Courts  p.  i66. 

LETTER.  XXI!, 

Dated  at  ffiuelec  N'ov.  10.  i<59t. 

Which  contains  an  account  of  the  Author  s depar-. 

Rochel /o  Quebec,  'of  his  Voyagé  to- 
the  mouth  of  the  River  St.  Laurence,  <?/  a Ren- 
counter with  an  Englifli  Ship  which  he  fought  j 
of  the  firanding  of  his  Ship  ; of  his  failing  thrV 
the  River  St,  Laurence  ; of  the  news  he  receiv’d, 
that  a party  of  the  Englifli  and  Iroquefe,  had  de- 
feated a.  Body  of  the  French  Troops.^  p.  1 71 , 

‘ ’ LE  T^. 


[ The  Contents. 

LETTER.  XXIII. 

Dated  at  Nants  OBoh.  i6gz,  ,,, 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  taking  of  feme  Eng- 
\[{hf^efels,  of  defeating  a Party  of  Iroquefe, 

of  an  Iroquefe  hurnt  alive  at  Quebec  ; of  ano~ 
ther  Party  of  thefe  Barbarians^  who  having  fur- 
prisd fome  Coureurs  de  Bois,  were  afterwards 
ftirpris'd  themfelves.  Of  the  ProjeB  of  an  Enter~ 
prize  proposed  hy  Mr.  Frontenac  to  the  Author. 
Of  the  Author  s departure  in  a Frigat  /ôr  France, 
and  his  flopping  at  Placentia,  which  was  then  at- 
tack'd ly  the  Englirti  Fleet  that  came  to  take  that 
Poflfrcm  us.  How  the  Englilh  fail'd  in  their 
Deflgn,  and  the  Author  purfu  d his  Voyage. 

P*  175- 

LETTER.  XXIV. 

Dated  at  FI  ants  May  lo.  K393. 

Containing  an  Account  of  Mr.  FrontenaeV  ProjeB^' 
which  was  rejekled  at  Courts  and  the  reafon  why 
it  was  rejeBed.  The  King  gives  the  Author  the 
ÇieutenancyofFit'CNÏoKsnA  L^.nà.,  &ç.  together 
with  the  Independent  Company.  p.  187. 

LETTER.  XXy. 

Dated  at  Viana  [^Portugal  fan.  31.  1694. 

The  Author  s departure  from  France  to.  Placentia. 
A Fleet  of  30  Englilli  Ships  cams  to  feize  upon, 
that  place  5 hut  is  difappointed,  arid  fl:eers  off. 
The  reafon.  why  the  Englifli  have  had  fyecefs  in 

all 


The  Contents. 

all  their  Enterprifes  heyond  Sea.  Tlje  Au- 
thor s Adventure  with  the  Governour  of  Placen- 
tia. Hh  departure  for  Portugal.  An  Ingage- 
ment  with  a Flufliing  Privateer.  p.  195. 


Memoirs  of  ISLorth- America. 

Containing  a Geographical  Vefcription  of  that  vafi 
Continent  ; the  Qufioms  and  Commerce  of  the 
Inhabitants-)  p.  20^. 

A fhort  Defcription  of  Canada.  p.  205'. 

A Lift  of  the  Savage  Nations  of  Canada,  p.  230. 

A Li  (I  of  the  Animals  of  Canada.  p.  232. 

A Defcription  of  Juch  Animals  or  Be  aft  s as  are  not 
mention  d in  the  Letters.  P-2-33. 

A Lift  of  the  Fowl  or  Birds  of  Canada.  P-2-37* 

A Defcription  of  fuch  Birds  as  are  not  accounted  for 
in  the  Letters,  P-2-39. 

A Defcription  of  the  Infers  of  Canada.  p.  2-|2. 

The  Names  of  the  Fifh  of  Canada.  P 2,43. 

A Defcription  of  the  Fijh  that  are  not  mention  d in 
the  Letters.  p.  244. 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  Canada.  p.  247, 

A Defcription  of  the  above-mention  dTrees»  p.248. 

A General  view  of  the  Commerce  of  Canada,  p.254. 

The  Commodities  truck’d  to  and  again  betaoeen  the 
French  and  the  Savages.  p.  257. 

An  Account  of  the  Government  of  Canada  in  Gene- 
ral. p.  260. 

A Difcourfe  of  the  Inter  eft  of  the  French  and  Eog- 
li(h  in  North* America.  p.26o. 

A Table  Explftningfome  uncommon  Terms,  p.276. 

The 


The  Contents  of  the  Second  Volume. 

A Difcourfe  of  the  Halit ^ Houfes^  Complexi- 
on  and  Temperament  of  the  Savages  of 
North» America.  P.  i.  Vol.  2. 

A jhort  view  of  the  Humours  and  Qufioms  of  the 
Savages.  , p.  7, 

The  Belief  of  the  Savages , and  the  Olfiacles  of 
their  CoHverfion.  p.  19, 

The  way  of  IVorjhip  us'd  hy  the  Savages.  p.  29, 
An  Account  of  the  Amours  and  Marriages  of  the 
Savages.  P*  34» 

A Fiew  of  the  Difeajes  and  P\.emedies  of  the  Sava-^ 
ges.  p.  45, 

The  Diverfions  of  Hunting  and  Shooting  ufual  a~ 
mong  the  Savages.  P*  55'* 

The  Military  Art  of  the  Savages.  P*  7 1. 

A View  of  the  Heraldy  and  the  Coats  of  Arms  of 
the  Savages.  p.  84. 

An  Explication  of  the  Savage  Hieroglyphicks 

p.  8(5. 

A Conference  or  Dialogue  between  the 
Author  and  Adarip^  a noted  Man  a- 
mong  the  Savages. 

Containing  a Circumfiantial  view  of  the  Cuflems 
and  Humours  of  that  People.  p.  90. 


An 


The  ContéfttSi 

An  JTfEKDIXj  Containing  feme 
New  Voyages  to  Portugal  and  Denmar^i 
I after  the  Authors  Retirement  from  Cd- 
nada. 

LETTER.  I. 

Dated  at  Lislon  April  lo.  1694. 

Containing  a Defeription  <?/ Viana,  Porto  a Porto, 
Aveiro,  Coimbra,  Lisbon;  together  with  à 
View  of  the  Court  of  Portugal  ; and  an  Account 
of  the  Government^  Laws  ^Cufloms^  and  Humours 
of Portuguefe.  p.  iBf. 

L E T T E R.  II. 

Yi2Xtàz}LTravemunde  1694. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author  s V oy  age  from 
Lisbon  to  Garnfey  ; his  Adventure  with  an  Eng- 
lifli  Man  of  War^  and  an  Englifli  Privateer  : A 
Defeription  of  Koittïàzm  and  Amftcrdam;  the 
Author  s Voyage  to  Hamburgh  ; the  Dimenfions 
of  a Flemifti  Sloop  ; a Defeription  of  the  City  of 
Hamburg  ; the  Author’s  'Journey  from  thence  to 
Lubeck,  and  a Defeription  of  that  City.  p.  ii  i. 

LETTER.  III. 

Dated  at  Copenhagen  Sept.  rx.  1694. 

Containing  a Defeription  of  the  Port  and  City  of 
Copenhagen,  a view  of  the  Danilh  Courts  arJ 
of  the  Humours^  CufiomSyCommerce,  Forcesfuc. 

Danes.  p.  ztê» 


The  Contents. 

LETTER.  IV. 

Dated  at  Paris  Decemh,  zg.  1^94. 

Containing  a Journal  of  the  Author  s Travels  from 
Copenhagen  to  Pans.  p.  2,44. 

LETTER.  V. 

Dated  at  Erleich  July  4. 1 694. 

Giving  a view  of  the  Superjlition  and  Ignorance  of 
the  People  of  Bearn  ; their  additlednefs  to  the 
notions  of  Witchcraft^  Apparitions^àiC,  And  the 
Authors  Arguments  againji  that  Delufon.  p.x5  5'. 

LETTER.  VI. 

Dated  at  Huefia  July  ii.  1695^. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author  s efcape  and 
journey  to S^2i\n  i his  being  taken  up  for  a\A\i- 
guenot,  and  the  Ignorance  and  Bigotry  of  the 
Curates  and  People  <?/Bearn  /«France,  p.  z68. 

LETTER.  VII. 

Dated  atSaragoza  Olioh.  8. 

Containing  a Defcription  o/Saragoza;  a View  of 
the  Government  of  Arragon,  and  an  Account  of 
theCu/lomsof  the  People.  p.  174. 

A Jhort  Dillionary  of  the  Language  of  the  Savages, 

p.  xS/. 


ERRATA. 

^OL.  I.  p.  6.1.  II.  for  days  r.  Vtapits.  p.  7.I.  1 7.  for  tïco  or  three,  r.  trc§  or  /' 
three  hundred,  p 16.  1.  5.  for  Mtlelv.  Leagues',  p.  18.  fot  forty  r.  forty  fix»  p, 
227.1.  34.  for  P on tnte  T»  Pointe.  Vcl.II.  p.  14.  1.  S.fov  Stipernumcrans  r.  Supernu. 
werary.  p.  Î.  «ç.  for  twenty  ninth  r.  tivefity  fixih.  p.  21. 1.  18.  for  Happinefs  r.  Vn~ 
happinefs.  2 6,1.  38 . for  r.  p.  79.  I-  • 6,  for  Canada  v.  Acadia,  p.  1. 
3;-  for  Counted  of  FriezJand,  r.  Cônntefs  dé  Frlz,e.  p.  243.  1.  T.  for  Streets  r. 
Skirts,  p ^48. 1,  1 1.  for  IntelhgtrKc  v.  Pafsport. 

Sot^e’ 


I 


Some  New 

VO  Y AGES 

TO 

ll^oxth-America. 

. X o M fc,  I 


LETTER.  I. 

Dated  at  the  Port  of  Quebec,  Nov.  8,  1683. 

’Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Taffage  from 
France  to  Canada  ; with  fome  Remarks  Upon 
the  Coafls,  Channels,  &G.  and  the  Variation 
of  the  Needle. 

S I-R, 

I am  furpris’d  to  find  that  a Voyage  to  the  New 
World  is  fo  formidable  to  thofe  who  are  ob» 
lig’d  to  undertake  itj  fori  folemnly  proteft  that 
’tis  far  from  being  what  the  World  commonly 
takes  it  for.  ’Tis  true,  the  Paflage  is  in  fome  rriea- 
I fure  long  j but  then  the  hopes  of  viewing  an  un= 
! known  Country,  attones  for  the  tedioulhefs  of  the 
Voyage.  When  we  broke  ground  from  Rocbel,  I 
j acquainted  you  with  the  Reafons  that  mov’d  Mr* 
k Fevre  4e  la  Barren  Governor  General  of  Canada, 
to  fend  the  Sieur  Mahu  , a Canadefe,  to  Frame  | 
and  at  the  fame  time  gave  yon  to  kndw,  that  he 

B had 


I 


2 Some  TsLeip  Voyages 

had  refolv’d  upon  the  utter  deftruétion  of  the  /ro- 
^uefe,  who  are  a very  Warlike  and  Savage  People. 
Thefe  Barbarians  befriend  the  EngliJlj,  upon  the  ac- 
count of  the  Succours  they  receive  from  "’em  ; but 
they  are  enemies  to  us^  upon  the  apprehenfion  of 
being  deftroy’^  by  us  fome  time  or  other.  The 
General  I fpoke  of  but  now,  expedred  that  the  King 
would  fend  him  feven  or  eight  hundred  Men  ; but 
when  we  fct  out  from  Rocbel  the  feafon  was  îb  far 
advanc’d,  that  our  three  Companies  of  Marines 
were  reckon’d  a fufficient  Venture. 

I met  with  noîhi*^g  in  our  PaflTage  that  was  dif- 
agreeable,  abating  for  a Storm  that  alarm’d  us  for 
fome  days,  upon  the  precipice  of  the  bank  of  New- 
fomd-Landf  w/here  the  Waves  fwell  prodigioufly,  e* 
ven  when  the  V/inds  are  low.  In  that  Storm  our 
Frigat  receiv’d  fome  rude  /hocks  from  the  Sea  ; but 
in  regard  that  fuch  accidents  are  ufual  in  that  Voy- 
age, they  made  no  impreffion  upon  the  old  fea- 
fon’d  Sailors.  As  for  my  >part,  I could  not  pre- 
tend to  that  pitch  of  indifterence  j for  having  ne- 
ver made  fuch  a Voyage  before,  1 was  fo  alarm’d 
in  feeing  the  Waves  mount  up  to  the  Clouds,  that 
I made  more  vows  to  Neptune,  than  the  brave  Ido- 
menam  did  in  his  return  from  the  Wars  of  Troy. 
After  we  made  the  bank,  the  Waves  funk,  and  the 
Wind  dwindled,  and  the  Sea  became  fo  fmooth 
and  eafie,  that  we  could  not  work  our  Ship.  You 
can  fcarce  imagine  what  quantities  of  Cod-fifh 
were  catch’d  there  by  our  Seamen,  in  the  fpace  of  a 
quarter  of  an  hour;  for  though  we  had" thirty  two 
fathom  Water,  yet  the  Hook  was  no  fooner  at  the 
bottom,  than  the  Fi/h  was  catch’d  ; fo  that  they 
had  nothing  to  do  but  to  throw  in,  and  take  up 
without  interruption:  But  after  all,  fuch  is  the  mif- 
fortune  of  this  Fifhery,  that  it  do’s  not  fucceed  but 
upon  certain  banks,  which  are  commonly  paft  o- 
ver  without  flopping.  However,  as  we  were  plen- 
tifully 


to  North- America,.  ^ 

tifully  entertain’d  at  the  coft  of  thefe  Fifiies,  fo 
fuch  of  ’em  as  continued  in  the  Sea,  made  fuffici- 
ent  reprifals  upon  the  Corps  of  a Captain,  and  of 
feveral  Soldiers,  who  dy’d  of  the  Scurvy,  and  were 
thrown  over-board  three  or  four  days  after. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Wind  veering  to  the  Weft- 
North-Weft,  we  were  oblig’d  to  lye  bye  for  five  or 
fix  days  ; but  after  that  it  chop’d  to  the  North, 
and  fo  we  happily  made  Cape  Ra/e,  tho’  indeed  our 
Pilots  were  at  a lofs  to  know  where  we  were,  by 
reafon  that  they  could  not  take  the  Latitude  for  ten 
or  twelve  days  before.  You  may  eafily  imagine, 
that  ’was  with  great  joy  that  we  heard  one  of  our 
Sailors  call  from  the  Top-Maft,  LW,  juft 

as  St  Pau/  did  when  he  approach’d  to  Maltha^  Tnir 
Of yt!v  o§co  : For  you  muft  know  that  when  the  Pi- 
lots reckon  they  approach  to  Land,  they  ufe  the 
precaution  of  fending  up  Sailors  to  the  Top-Maft, 
in  order  to  fbme  difeovery  ; and  thefe  Sailors  are 
reliev’d  every  two  hours  till  Night  comes,  at  which 
time  they  furl  their  Sails  if  the  Land  is  not  yet 
defery’d  : So  that  in  the  Night-time  they  fcarce 
make  any  way.  From  this  it  appears  how  impor- 
tant it  is  to  know  the  Coaft,  before  you  approach 
to  it  ; nay,  the  Palfengers  put  fuch  a value  upon 
the  difeovery,  that  they  prefent  the  firft  difeoverer 
with  fome  Piftoles.  In  the  mean  time,  you’ll  be 
pleas’d  to  obferve,  that  the  Needle  of  theCompafs, 
which  naturally  points  to  the  North,  turns  upon 
the  bank  of  New  found.  Land,  twenty  three  Degrees 
towards  the  North- Weft;  that  is,  it  points  there 
a degree  nearer  to  the  Weft,  than  North-North-Weft. 
This  remark  we  made  by  our  Compafs  of  Vari- 
ation. 

We  defery’d  the  Cape  about  Noon  ; and  in  order 
to  confirm  the  Difeovery,  flood  in  upon  it  with  all 
fails  aloft.  At  laft,  being  allur’d  that  ’twas  the 
Promontory  we  look’d  for,  an  univerfal  joy  was 

B a Ipread 


4 Some  “Mew  Voyages 

fpread  throughout  the  Ship,  and  the  fate  of  the 
wretches  that  we  had  thrown  over- board,  was  quite 
forgot.  Then  the  Sailors  fet  about  the  Chriftening 
of  thofe  who  had  never  made  the  Voyage  before, 
and  indeed  they  had  done  it  fooner,  if  it  had  not 
been  for  the  death  of  our  above-mention’d  Compa- 
nions. The  Chriftening  I fpeak  of,  is  an  imperti- 
nent Ceremony,  pradis’d  by  Sea-faring  Men,  whofe 
humours  are  as  ftrange  and  extravagant,  as  the 
Element  it  felf,  upon  which  they  foolifbly  truft 
themfelves.  By  vertue  of  a Cuftom  of  old  Band- 
ing, they  profane  the  Sacrament  of  Baptifm  in  an 
unaccountable  manner.  Upon  that  occafion,  the  old 
Sailors  being  blacken’d  all  over,  and  dilguis’d  with 
Rags  and  Ropes,  force  the  greener  fort  that  have 
never  pafs’d  fome  certain  degrees  of  Latitude  be- 
fore, to  fall  down  on  their  Knees,  and  to  fwear 
upon  a Book  of  Sea  Charts,  that  upon  all  occafi- 
ons  they  will  pradiife  upon  others,  the  fame  Cere- 
mony that  is  then  made  ufe  of  towards  them.  Af- 
ter the  adminiflring  of  this  ridiculous  Oath  , they 
throw  fifty  Buckets  full  of  Water  upon  their  Head, 
Belly,  and  Thighs,  and  indeed  all  over  their  Body, 
without  any  regard  to  rimes  or  feafons.  This  piece 
of  folly  is  chiefly  pradis’d  under  the  Æquator,  un- 
der rheTropicks,  under  the  Polar  Circles,  upon  the 
bank  of  Newfound- Land ^ and  in  die  Streights  of 
Gibraltar,  the  Sund,  and  the  Dardanelloes.  As  for 
Perfons  of  Note  or  Charader,  they  are  exempted 
from  the  Ceremony,  at  the  expence  of  five  or  fix 
bottles  of  Brandy  for  the  Ships  Crew. 

Three  or  four  days  after  the  performance  of  this 
Solemnity,  we  difeover’d  Cape  Raye,  and  fo  made 
up  to  St.  Laurence  Bay,  in  the  Mouth  of  which  we 
were  becalm’d  for  a little  while  ; and  during  that 
Calm,  we  had  a clearer  and  pleafanter  day,  than 
any  we  had  feen  in  the  Paflage.  It  look’d  as  if 
that  day  had  been  vouchfaf  'd  us  by  way  of  recom- 

pence 


Efpadon,  aFijhhe’- 
tween  i o and  1 5 Foot 
kng^  being  four  Foot 
in  circumference^  and 
having  in  its  Snout  a 
fort  of  Saw  which  is 
four  Foot  long^  four  In-» 
ches  broad  ^ and  fix 
Lines  thick. 


to  Florth  hmencsL,  5 

pence  for  the  Rains,  Foggs,  and  high  Winds,  that 
we  incounter’d  by  the  way.  There  we  law  an 
Engagement  between  a Whale 
and  a * Sword- Filh,  at  the  di- 
ftance  of  a Gun-lhot  from  our 
Frigat.  We  were  perfeâly  charm’d 
when  we  faw  the  Sword-Fifh  jump 
out  ofthe  water  in  order  to  dart  its 
Spear  into  the  Body  of  the  Whale, 
when  oblig’d  to  take  breath.  This 
entertaining  fliow  lafted  at  leaft 
two  hours,  fometimes  to  the  Starboard,  and  fome- 
times  to  the  Larboard  of  the  Ship  The  Sailors, 
among  whom  Superftition  prevails  as  much  as 
among  the  Egyptians,  took  this  for  a prefage  of  fome 
mighty  Storm  ; but  the  Prophecy  ended  in  two  or 
three  days  of  contrary  Winds,  during  which  time 
we  travers’d  between  the  Iflandof  Newfound- Land ^ 
and  that  of  Cape  Breton.  Two  days  after  we  came 
in  fight  of  the  Ifland  of  Fowls,  by  the  help  of  a 
Nortli-Eaft  Wind  ; which  drove  us  from  the  Mouth 
of  St.  Laurence  Bay,  to  the  Ifle  of  Anticofi,  upon  the 
Bank  of  w'hich,  we  thought  to  have  been  call  a- 
w'ay,  by  nearing  it  too  much.  In  the  Mouth  of 
that  River  we  fell  into  a fécond  calm,  which  was 
follow’d  by  a contrary  Wind,  that  oblig’d  us  to 
lye  bye  for  fome  days.  At  laft  we  made  Tadoujfac, 
by  gradual  approaches,  and  there  came  to  an  An- 
chor. 

This  River  is  four  Leagues  broad  where  we  then 
rode,  and  twenty  two  at  its  Mouth  ; but  it  contrats  it 
felf  gradually,  as  it  approaches  to  its  fource.  Two 
days  after,  the  Wind  handing  Eah,  we  weigh’d  An- 
chor ; and  being  favour’d  by  the  Tyde,  got  fafe 
through  the  Channel  of  the  Red  Ifland,  in  which 
the  Currents  are  apt  to  turn  a Veflfei  on  one  fide, 
as  well  as  at  the  Ifland  of  Coudres,  which  lies  fome 
Leagues  higher.  But  upon  the  Coaft  of  the  laft 

B I Ifland, 


6 Some  'Hew  Voyages 

Ifland,  we  had  certainly  ftruck  upon  the  Rocks,  if 
we  had 'not  drop’d  an  Anchor.  Had  the  Ship  been 
caft  away  at  that  place,  we  might  eafily  have  fav’d 
our  felves  : But  it  prov'd  fo,  that  we  were  more  af- 
fraid  than  hurt.  Next  Morning  we  weighed  with 
a frefti  gale  from  the  Eaft,  and  the  next  day  after 
came  to  an  Anchor  over  againft  Cape  TourmentCy 
where  we  had  not  above  two  Leagues  over,  tho’ 
at  the  fame  time  ’tis  a dangerous  place  to  thofe  who 
are  unacquainted  with  the  Channel.  From  thence 
we  had  butfeven  days  failing  to  the  Port  of  Que- 
bec, where  we  now  ride  at  Anchor.  In  our  PalTage 
from  the  red  Ifland  to  this  place,  we  faw  fuch  floats 
of  Ice,  and  fo  much  Snow  upon  the  Land,  fhat  we 
were  upon  the  point  of  turning  back  for  France, 
tho’  we  were  not  then  above  thirty  Leagues  off  our 
defired  Port.  We  were  affraid  of  being  ftop’d  by 
the  Ice,  and  fo  loft  ; but  thank  God  we  ’fcap’d. 

We  have  receiv’d  advice,  that  the  Governor  has 
mark’d  out  Quarters  for  our  Troops  in  fome  Villa- 
ges or  Cantons  adjacent  to  this  City  ; fo  that  I am 
oblig’d  to  prepare  to  go  alhoar,  and  therefore  muft 
make  an  end  of  this  Letter.  I cannot  as  yet  give 
you  any  account  of  the  Country,  excepting  that 
’tis  already  mortally  cold.  As  to  the  River,  I mean 
to  give  you  a more  ample  defcription  of  it,  when 
I come  to  know  it  better.  We  are  informed  that 
Mr.  Je  la  Salle  is  juft  return’d  from  his  Travels, 
which  he  undertook  upon  the  difcovery  of  a great 
River  that  falls  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  j and  that 
he  imbarques  to  morrow  for  France.  He  is  perfedly 
well  acquainted  with  Canada,  and  for  that  reafon 
you  ought  to  vifit  him,  if  you  go  to  Paris  this  Win- 
ter. I am,  • ' . 

SIR, 

Tours, 

LET- 


to  North-Amcnca.. 


? 


LETTER  II. 

Dated  at  the  Canton  of  Beaupré,  May  2.  1684. 

Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Tlàntations  of 
Canada,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were  frfl 
form’d:  As  alfo  an  account  of  the  Tranfporta- 
tion  of  Whores  from  France  to  that  Country  • 
together  with  a view  of  its  Climate  and  Soil. 


SIR, 

AS  foon  as  we  landed  laft  year,  Mr.  deJa  Barre 
lodg’d  our  three  Companies  in  fome  Cantons 
or  Quarters  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Quebec.  The 
Planters  call  thefe  places  Cotes,  which  in  France  ligni- 
fies no  more  than  the  Sea-Coaft  j tho’ in  this  Coun- 
try where  the  names  of  Town  and  Village  are  un- 
known, that  word  is  made  ufe  of  to  exprefs  a Seig- 
nory  or  Manour,  the  Houfes  of  which  lie  at  the 
diftance  of  two  or  three  Paces  one  from  another, 
and  are  fsated  on  the  brink  of  the  River  of  St.  Lau^ 
rertce.  In  earncft,  Sir,  the  Boors  of  thofe  Manors 
live  with  more  eafe  and  conveniency,  than  an  in- 
finity of  the  Gentlemen  in  France.  I am  out  indeed 
in  calling  ’em  Boors,  for  chat  name  is  as  little  known 
here  as  in  Spain  ; whether  it  be  that  they  pay  no 
Taxes,  and  in  joy  the  liberty  of  Hunting  and  F:fh- 
ing  j or  that  the  eafinefs  of  their  Life,  puts  ’em  up- 
on a level  with  the  Nobility.  The 
pooreft  of  them  have  four  f Ar- 
pents of  Ground  in  front,  and 
thirty  or  forty  in  depth:  The 
whole  Country  being  a continued 
Forreft  of  lofty  Trees,  the  ftumps 

B 4 of 


t An  ArpQnt  if  a fpot 
of  ground  containing 
ICO  Peaches  fquare^ 
each  of  which  is  eigh^^ 
tern  Foit  long, 


8 Some  New  Voyages 

of  which  muft  be  grub'd  up,  before  they  can  make 
ufe  of  a Plough.  ’Tis  true,  this  is  a troublefom 
and  chargeable  task  at  firft  ; but  in  a Ihort  time 
after  they  make  up  their  Lofles  ; for  when  the  Vir- 
gin ground  is  capable  of  receiving  Seed,  it  yields  at^ 
increafe  to  the  rate  of  an  hundred  fold.  Corn  is 
there  fown  in  May,  and  reap’d  about  the  middle  of 
September.  Inftead  of  threlhing  the  Sheafs  in  the  Field, 
they  convey  ’em  to  Barns,  where  they  lie  till  the 
coldeft  feafon  of  the  Winter,  at  which  time  the 
Grain  is  more  eafily  difengag’d  from  the  Ear.  In  this 
Country  they  likewife  fow  Peafe,  which  are  much 
efteem’d  in  France.  All  forts  of  Grain  are  very 
cheap  here,  as  well  as  Butchers  Meat  and  Fowl. 
The  price  of  Wood  isalmoft  nothing,  in  compari- 
fon  with  the  charge  of  its  carriage,  which  after  all 
is  very  inconfiderable. 

Moft  of  the  Inhabitants  are  a free  fort  of  People 
that  remov’d  hither  from  France,  and  brought  with 
’efn  but  little  Money  to  fet  up  withal  : The  reft 
are  thofe  who  were  Soldiers  about  thirty  or  forty 
years  ago,  at  which  time  the  Regiment  of  Carignan 
was  broke,  and  they  exchang’d  a Military  Poft, 
for  the  Trade  of  Agriculture.  Neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  pay’d  any  thing  for  the  grounds  they  pof- 
fefs,  no  more  than  the  Officers  of  thefe  Troops, 
who  mark’d  out  to  themfelves,  certain  portions  ©f 
unmanur’d  and  woody  Lands;  for  this  vaft  Conti- 
nent is  nothing  elfe  than  one  continued  Forrelf. 
The  Governours  General  allow’d  the  Officers  three 
or  four  Leagues  of  ground  in  front,  with  as  much 
depth  as  they  pleas’d  ; and  at  the  fame  time  the  Of- 
ficers gave  the  Soldiers  as  much  ground  as  they 
pleas’d,  upon  tlie  condition  of  the  payment  of  a 
Crown  per  Arpent,  by  way  of  Fief. 

After  the  reform  of  thefe  Troops,  feveral  Ships 
were  feat  hither  from  France,  with  a Cargoe  of 
Women  of  an  ordinary  Reputation,  under  the  di- 

redion 


to  North- Amcïïca.  9 

reilion  of  fome  old  ftale  Nuns,  who  rang’d  ’em  in 
three  Claffes.  The  Veftal  Virgins  were  heap’d  up, 
( if  I may  fo  fpeak  ) one  above  another,  in  three 
different  Apartments,  where  the  Bridegrooms  Ang- 
led out  their  Brides,  juft  as  a Butcher  do’s  an  Ewe 
firom  amongft  a Flock  of  Sheep.  In  thefe  three  Se- 
raglio’s, there  was  fuch  variety  and  change  of  Diet, 
as  could  fatisfie  the  moft  whimfical  Appetites  ; for 
here  was  fome  big  fome  little , fome  fair  fome 
brown,  fome  fat  and  fome  meagre.  In  fine,  there 
was  fuch  Accommodation,  that  every  one  might 
be  fitted  to  his  Mind  : And  indeed  the  Market  had 
fuch  a run,  that  in  fifteen  days  time,  they  were  all 
difpos’d  of.  I am  told,  that  the  fatteft  went  off 
beft,  upon  the  apprehenfion  that  thefe  being  left 
! adive,  would  keep  truer  to  their  Ingagements,  and 
I hold  out  better  againft  the  nipping  cold  of  the  Win- 
ter : But  after  all,  a great  many  of  the  He-Adven- 
I turers  found  themfelves  miftaken  in  their  mealures. 

I However,let  that  be  as  it  will,  it  affords  a very  curious 
! Remark  j namely.  That  in  fome  parts  of  the  World, 
i to  which  the  vicious  European  Women  are  tranfport- 
! ed,  the  Mob  of  thofe  Countries  do’s  ferioufly  be- 
I lieve,  that  their  Sins  are  fo  defac’d  by  the  ridiculous 
I Chriftening,  I took  notice  of  before,  that  they  are 
! look’d  upon  ever  after  as  Ladies  of  Vertue,  of  Ho- 
nour, and  of  an  untarnilh’d  conduél  of  Life.  The 
Sparks  that  wanted  to  be  married,  made  their  Ad- 
. dreffes  to  the  above- mention’d  Governeffes,  to  whom 
they  were  oblig’d  to  give  an  account  of  their 
Goods  and  Eftates , before  they  were  allow’d  to 
make  their  choice  in  the  three  Seraglio's.  After  the 
choice  was  determin’d,  the  Marriage  was  concluded 
upon  the  fpot,  in  the  prefence  of  a Prieft,  and  a 
publick  Notary  ; and  the  next  day  the  Governor- 
General  beftow’d  upon  the  married  Couple,  a Bull,  a 
Cow,  a Hog,  a Sow,  a Cock,  a Hen,  two  Barrels 
pf  fait  Meat,  and  eleven  Crowns  ; together  with 


to  Some  l!Ïew  Voyages 

a certain  Coat  of  Arms  call’d  by  the 
I E$rnt  Greeks  ||  The  Officers  having  a 

nicer  tafte  than  the  Soldiers,  made  their 
Application  to  the  Daughters  of  the  ancient  Gen- 
tlemen of  the  Country,  or  thofe  of  the  richer  fort 
of  Inhabitants;  for  you  know  that  has  been 
poffefs’d  by  the  Frewck  above  an  hundred  years. 

In  this  Country  every  one  lives  in  a good  and  a 
well  furnifh’d  Houfe  ; and  moft  of  the  Houfes  are  of 
Wood,  and  two  Stories  high.  Their  Chimniesare 
very  large,  by  reafon  of  the  prodigious  Fires  they 
make  to  guard  themfelves  fiom  the  Cold,  which  is 
there  beyond  all  meafure,  from  the  Month  of  De~ 
eeffsher,  to  that  of  April.  During  that  fpace  of 
time,  the  River  is  always  frozen  over,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  flowing  and  ebbing  of  the  Sea;  and 
the  Snow  upon  the  giQu..d,  Ts  three  or  four  foot 
deep  ; which  is  very  flrange  in  a Country  that  lies 
in  th  ' Latit  de  of  forty  feven  Degrees,  and  fome 
odd  Minute'.  Molt  People  impute  the  extraordinary 
Snow  to  the  number  of  Mountains,  with  which 
this  vafl:  Continent  is  repleniOi’d.  Whatever  is  in 
that  matter,  I muft  take  notice  of  pne  thing,  that 
feems  very  ftrange,  namely,  that  the  Summer  days 
are  longer  here  than  at  P^rn.  The  Weather  is  then 
fo  clear  and  ferene,  that  in  three  Weeks  time  you 
fliall  not  fee  a Cloud  in  the  Horizon,  I hope  to  go 
to  Quebec  with  the  firft  opportunity  ; for  I have  or- 
ders to  be  in  a readinefs  to  imbarque  within  fifteen 
days  for  Monreal^  which  is  the  City  of  this  Coun- 
try, that  lies  fartheft  up  towards  the  Head  of  the 
River. 

I am, 

SIR, 

Xoutt)  &c. 


LET 


to  Nort/?- America. 


1 1 


LETTER  III. 

Dated  at  Quebec  May  if.  1684. 

Containing  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  City  of 
Quebec,  and  of  the  JJland  of  Orleans. 

i s'  Z R, 

BEfore  I fet  out  for  Monreal,  I had  the  curiofity 
to  view  the  Ifland  of  Orleans^  which  is  feven 
Leagues  in  length,  and  three  in  breadth  : It  ex- 
tends from  over  againft  Cape  Tourmente^  to  within 
a League  and  a half  of  Quebec,  at  which  place  the 
River  divides  it  felf  into  two  branches.  The  Ships 
fail  through  the  South  Channel  ; for  the  North 
Channel  is  fo  foul  with  Shelves  and  Rocks,  that 
the  fmall  Boats  can  only  pafs  that  way.  The  Ifland 
belongs  to  a General  Farmer  of  France,  who  would 
' make  out  of  it  a thoufand  Crowns  of  yearly  Rent, 
if  himfelf  had  the  management  of  it,  ’Tis  fur- 
rounded  with  Plantations,  that  produce  all  forts  of 
Grain. 

Quebec  is  the  Metropolitan  of  N^w-France,  being 
j almoft  a League  in  ôrcumference  j It  lies  in  the 
j Latitude  of  47  Degrees,  and  12  Minutes.  The 
j Longitude  of  \this  place  is  uncertain,  as  well  as  that 
; of  feveral  other  Countries,  with  the  leave  of  the 
i Geographers,  that  reckon  you  up  1200  Leagues 
from  Rachel  to  Quebec,  without  taking  the  pains  to 
meafure  the  Courfs  : However,  I am  fure  that  it 
I liés  but  at  too  great  a diftance  from  France,  for  the 
j Ships  that  are  bound  hither;  For  their  paflage  com- 
I monly  lafts  for  two  iMonths  and  a half,  whereas 

I the  homeward  bound  Ships  may  in  50  or  40  days 

I failing,  eafily  make  the  Belle  Ifls,  which  is  the  fu- 

reft 


1 % Some  î^ew  Poyages 

reft  and  moft  ufual  Land,  that  a Ship  makes  upon 
a long  Voyage.  The  reafon  of  this  difference,  is, 
that  the  Winds  are  Eafterly  for  loo  days  of  the 
year,  and  Wefterly  for  260. 

Quebec  is  divided  into  the  upper  and  the  lower  Ci- 
ty* ^ The  Merchants  live  in  the  latter,  for  the  con- 
veniency  of  the  Harbor  j upon  which  they  have 
built  very  fine  Houfes,  three  Story  high,  of  a fort 
of  Stone  that’s  as  hard  as  Marble.  The  upper 
or  high  City  is  full  as  populous,  and  as  well  adorn’d 
as  the  lower.  Both  Cities  are  commanded  by  a 
Caftle , that  ftands  upon  the  higheft  Ground. 
This  Caftie  is  the  Refidence  of  the  Governours, 
and  affords  them  not  only  convenient  Apart- 
ments , but  tiie  nobleft  and  moft  extenfive  Prof- 
peét  in  the  World.  Quebec  wants  two  eflenti- 
al  things , namely  , a Key  and  Fortifications  ; 
though  both  the  one  and  the  other  might  be  eafily 
made,  confidering  the  conveniency  of  Stones  ly- 
ing upon  the  fpot.  ’Tis  incompai&’d  with  feveral 
Springs,  of  the  beft  frefh  Water  in  the  World, 
which  the  Inhabitants  draw  out  of  Wells  j for  they 
are  fo  ignorant  of  the  Hydroftaticks,  that  not  one 
of  ’em  knows  how  to  convey  the  Water  to  certain 
Ballns , in  order  to  raife  either  flat  or  fpouting 
Fountains.  Thofe  who  live  on  the  River  fide,  in 
the  lower  City,  are  not  half  fo  much  pinch’d  with 
the  Cold,  as  the  Inhabitants  of  the  upper  ; befides 
that  the  former  have  a peculiar  conveniency  of 
tranfporting  in  Boats,  Corn,  Wood,  and  other  Ne- 
ceffaries,  to  the  very  Doors  of  their  Houfes  : But 
as  the  latter  are  more  expofs’d  to  the  injuries  of 
the  Cold,  fo  they  injoy  the  benefit  and  pleafure  of 
a cooler  Summer.  The  way  which  leads  from  the 
one  City  to  the  other  is  pretty  broad,  and  adorn’d 
with  Houfes  on  each  fide  ; only,  ’tis  a little  fteep. 
Quebec  ftands  upon  a very  uneven  Ground  ; and  its 
Houfes  are  not  uniform.  The  Intendant  lives  in  a 

bottom. 


to  Nor/:/?- America.  1 1 

bottom,  at  fome  fmall  diftance  from  the  fide  of  a 
little  River,  which  by  joyning  the  River  of  St. 
Laurence,  coops  up  the  City  in  a right  Angle.  His 
Houfe  is  the  Palace  in  which  the  Soveraign  Coun- 
cil aflembles  four  times  a Week;  and  on  one  fide 
of  which,  we  fee  great  Magazines  of  Ammuniti- 
on and  Provifions.  There  are  fix  Churches  in  the 
the  High  City  : The  Cathedral  confifls  of  a Bilhop, 
and  twelve  Prebendaries,  who  live  in  common  in 
the  Chapter- Houfe,  the  Magnificence  and  Archi- 
tecîture  of  which  is  truly  wonderful.  Thele  poor 
Priefts  are  a very  good  fort  of  People  ; they  con- 
tent themfelves  with  bare  Neceflaries,  and  meddle 
with  nothing  but  the  Affairs  of  the  Church,  where 
the  Service  is  perform’d  after  the  Roman  way.  The 
fécond  Church  is  that  of  the  Jefuits,  which  ftands 
in  the  Center  of  the  City  ; and  is  a fair,  ftate!y,and 
well  lighted  Edifice.  1 he  great  Altar  of  the  Je- 
fuits Church,  is  adorn’d  with  four  great  Cylindrical 
Columns  of  one  Stone  ; The  Stone  being  a fort  of 
Canada  Porphyry,  and  black  as  Jet,  without  either 
Spots  or  Veins.  Thefe  Fathers  have  very  conveni- 
ent and  large  Apartments,  beautify’d  with  plea- 
fant  Gardens,  and  feveral  rows  of  Trees,  which  are 
lb  thick  and  bufhy,  that  in  Summer  one  might 
take  their  Walks  for  an  Ice-Houfe  : And  indeed 
we  may  fay  without  ftretching,  that  there  is  Ice 
not  far  from ’em,  for  the  good  Fathers  are  never 
without  a referve  in  two  or  three  places,  for  the 
cooling  of  their  Drink.  Their  College  is  fo  fmall, 
that  at  the  beft  they  have  fcarce  fifty  Scholars  at  a 
time.  The  third  Church  is  that  of  the  Recolleds, 
who,  through  the  interceffion  of  Count  Frontenac, 
obtain’d  leave  of  the  King  to  build  a little  Chap- 
pel  ( which  I call  a Church  ; ) notwithftanding  the 
Remonftrances  of  Mr.  de  Laval  our  Bilhop,  who,  in 
concert  with  the  Jefuits,  us’d  his  utmofi  Efforts  for 
ten  years  together  to  hinder  it.  Before  the  build- 

ing 


14  Some  "Mew  Voyages 

ing  of  this  Chappel,  they  liv’d  in  a little  Hofpital 
that  the  Bi/hop  had  order’d  to  be  built  for  ’em  ; 
and  fome  of  ’em  continue  there  Bill.  The  fourth 
Church  is  that  of  the  Urfelines,  which  has  been 
burn’d  down  two  or  three  times,  and  Bill  rebuilt  to 
the  Advantage.  The  fifth  is  that  of  the  Hofpital- 
Order,  who  take  a particular  Care  of  the  Sick, 
tho’  therafelves  are  poor,  and  but  ill  lodg’d. 

The  Soveraign  Council  is  held  at  Que- 
fiicatio7i^~  confifts  of  twelve  Counfellors  of 

Table.  * Capa  y de  fpada,  who  are  the  fupream 
Judicature,  and  decide  all  Caufes  with- 
out Appeal.  The  Intendant  claims  a Right  of  be- 
ing Prefident  to  the  Council  j but  in  the  Juftice- 
Hall  the  Governour- General  places  himfelf  fo  as  to 
face  him,  the  Judges  being  fet  on  both  fides  of  them  ; 
fo  that  one  would  think  they  are  both  Prefidents. 
While  Monfieur  de  Frontenac  was  in  Canada,  he  laugh’d 
at  the  pretended  Precedency  of  the  Intendants  ; 
nay  he  ufed  the  Members  of  that  Aflembly  as 
roughly  as  Cromivell  did  the  Parliament  of  Eng- 
land. At  this  Court  every  one  pleads  his  own  Caufe, 
for  Sollicitors  or  Barrifters  never  appear  there  j by 
which  means  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  Law-Suits  are 
quickly  brought  to  a Period,  without  demanding 
Court  Fees  or  any  other  Charges  from  the  contend- 
ing Parties.  The  Judges,  who  have  but  four  hun- 
dred Livers  a Year  from  the  King,  have  a Difpen- 
fation  of  not  wearing  the  Robe  and  the  Cap.  Be- 
fides  this  Tribunal,  we  have  in  this  Country  a Lieu- 
tenant-General, both  Civil  and  Military,  an  Attor- 
ney-General, the  Great  Provoft,  and  a Chicfjuftice 
in  Eyre. 

The  way  of  travelling  in  the  Winter,  whether 
in  Town  or  Country,  is  that  of  Sledges  drawn  by 
Horfes  ; who  are  fo  infenfible  of  the  Cold,  that 
I have  feen  fifty  or  fixty  of  ’em  in  January  and  Fe- 
bruary (land  in  the  Snow  up  to  their  Breaft,  in  the 

midfl 


to  Norï/?  America.  1 5 

midft  of  a Wood,  without  ever  offering  to  go  near 
their  Owner’s  Houfe.  In  the  Winter-time  they 
travel  from  Quebec  to  Monreal  upon  the  Ice,  the 
River  being  then  frozen  over  ; and  upon  that  oc- 
cafion  thefe  Sledges  will  run  you  fifteen  Leagues  a 
day.  Others  have  their  Sledges  drawn  by  two  Ma- 
ftiff  Dogs,  but  then  they  are  longer  by  the  way. 
As  for  their  way  of  travelling  in  Summer,  I fhali 
tranfmit  you  an  Account  of  it,  when  I come  to 
be  better  inform’d.  I am  told  that  the  People  of 
this  Country  will  go  a thoufand  Leagues  in  Ca- 
nows  of  Bark  j a Defcription  of  which  you  may 
exped,  as  foon  as  I have  made  ufe  of  ’em.  The 
Eafterly  Winds  prevail  here  commonly  in  the  Spring 
and  Autumn  ; and  the  Wefterly  have  the  Afcen- 
dant  in  Winter  and  Summer.  Adieu  Sir  : I muft 
now  make  an  end  of  my  Letter,  for  my  Matter  be- 
gins to  run  fhort.  All  I can  fay,  is,  tharas  foon 
as  I am  better  inftruded  in  what  relates  to  the  Com- 
merce , and  the  Civil  and  Ecclefiaftical  Govern- 
ment of  the  Country,  I’ll  tranfmit  you  fuch  ex- 
ad  Memoirs  of  the  fame,  as  fiiall  give  you  full 
fatisfadion.  Thefe  you  may  exped  with  the  firil 
Opportunity  ; for  in  all  Appearance  cur  Troops 
will  return  after  the  Conclufion  of  the  Campaign 
that  we  are  now  going  to  make  in  the  Country  of 
the  Iroejuefe,  under  the  Command  of  Monfteur  delà 
Barre.  In  feven  or  eight  Days  time  I mean  to  im- 
bark  for  Monreal  ; and  in  the  mean  time  am  going 
to  make  a Progrefs  to  the  Villages  of  Sdlltri,  of 
Saut  de  la  Cbaudiere^  and  oî  Lorete,  which  are  inhabi- 
ted by  the  Abenakis  t\\Q  Hurons.  Thefe  Places  are 
not  above  three  or  four  Leagues  off  ; fo  that  I may 
return  with  eafe  next  Week.  As  for  the  Manners 
of  the  People,  I cannot  pretend  to  deferibe  ’em  fo 
foon  ; for  a juft  Obfervation  and  Kno\Jt‘!edge  of 
thefe  things  cannot  be  compafs’d  without  time. 
I have  been  this  Winter  at  hunting  with  ti;irty  or 


1 6 Some  Kew  Voyages 

forty  young  Algovkins,  who  were  well  made  clever* 
Fellows.  My  Defign  in  accompanying  them,  was,  to 
learn  their  Language,  which  is  mightily  efteêm’d  in 
this  Country  j for  all  the  other  Nations  for  a thou- 
fand  Miles  round  ( excepting  the  Iroejuefe  and  the  Hu- 
rons)  undcrftand  it  perfedly  well  j nay,  all  their 
refpeâive  Tongues  come  as  near  to  this,  as  the  Por- 
tuguefe  does  to  the  Spanijh.  I have  already  made  my 
felf  Mafter  of  fome  Words  with  a great  deal  of  Fa- 
cility j and  they  being  mightily  pleafed  in  feeing  a 
Stranger  ftudy  their  Tongue,  take  all  imaginable 
pains  to  inftrudk  me.  I am, 

SIk, 

Tours,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

f 

Dated  at  Monreal,  June  14.  1684. 

Containing  a Irief  Dejtription  of  the  Hahitations 
of  the  Savages  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Que- 
bec; Of  the  River  of  St.  Lawfence,  as  far 
up  as  Monreal  j Of  a curious  way  of  fifhing  Eels  ; 
and  of  the  Cities  of  Trois  Rivieres  and  Mon- 
real : Together  with  an  Account 
oftheConiutloftU  * fcnejl 
flic  at  ion  Table.  Rangers  or  Fedlers. 


SIR, 


BEfora  my  Departure  irom  Quehec,  Ï vifited  the 
adjacent  Villages  inhabited  by  the  Savages.  The 
Village  of  Lorete  is  peopled  by  two  hundred  Fa- 
milies 


to  iSloHh- hmtïicà. 

mUîes  of  Hurovs,  who  were  converted  to  Chriftia- 
I nity  by  the  Jefuits,  though  with  a great  deal  of 
! kelucSancy.  The  Villages  of  SîEetiy  and  of  Saut  de 
\ la  Chaudière f are  compos’d  of  three  hundred  Fami- 
I lies  of  AbenakiSf  who  are  likewile  Chriftians,  and 
i among  whom  the  Jefuits  have  fetled  Miffionaries. 

: I return’d  to  Quebec  time  enough,  and  imbarqued 
! under  the  condud  of  a Mafter,  that  would  rather 
I have  had  a Lading  of  Goods,  than  of  Soldiers.  The 
! North-Eaft Winds  wafted  us  in  five  or  fix  days  toTrois 
i Rivieres j which  is  the  name  of  a fmall  City,  feated  at 
I the  diftance  of  thirty  Leagues  from  hence.  That  City 
derives  its  name  from  three  Rivers,  that  fpring  from 
one  Channel,  and  after  continuing  their  divifion  for 
; fome  fpace  re-unite  into  a joynt  Stream, that  falls  in- 
to the  River  of  Sr.  Laurence,  about  half  a quarter  of  a 
1 League  below  the  Town.  Had  we  fail’d  all  Night,  the 
Tides  would  have  carry’d  us  thither  in  two  days  time  j 
but  in  regard  that  the  River  is  full  of  Rocks  and 
Shelves,  we  durft  not  venture  upon  it  in  the  dark  ; fo, 

I we  came  to  an  Anchor  every  Night,  which  did  not  at 
I all  difpleafe  me  ; for  in  the  courfe  of  thirty  Leagues, 

I ( notwithftanding  the  darknefs  of  the  Night  j it 
gave  me  an  opportunity  of  viewing  an  infinite 
I number  of  Habitations  on  each  fide  of  the  River, 
i which  are  not  above  a Musket-Shot  diftant  one  from 
janother.i  The  Inhabitants  that  are  fetled  betweers 
iQuebedanâ  fifteen  Leagues  higher,  diverted  me  ve- 
ry agreeably  with  the  fiihing  of  Eels.  At  low  wa- 
ter they  ftretch  out  Hurdles  to  the  loweft  Wacer- 
Mark  j and  that  (pace  of  ground  being  then  dry 
‘ by  the  retreat  of  the  Water,  is  cover’d  over,  and 
[ ftut  up  by  the  Hurdles.  Between  the  Hurdles  they 
I place  at  certain  difiances  Inftruments  call’d  Ruches ^ 
from  the  refemblance  they  bear  to  a Bee-hive  5 be- 
jfides  Baskets  and  little  Nets  belag’d  upon  a Pole, 
which  they  call  Bouteux,  and  Boiits  de  Qukvres.  Then 
' .they  let  all  ftaed  in  this  fafcioh  fol  three  Months  ii8 

G 


i8  Some  Tüîew  Voyages 

«he  Spring,  and  two  in  the  Autumn.  Now  as  of- 
ten as  the  Tide  comes  in,  the  Eels  looking  out  foe 
ftallow  places  , and  making  towards  the  Shoar, 
croud  in  among  the  Hurdles,  which  hinder  ’em  af- 
terwards to  retire  with  the  Ebb-water  ; upon  that 
they  are  forc’d  to  bury  themfelvesin  the  abovemen- 
tioned  Ingines,  which  arefometimes  fo  over-cram’d,! 
that  they  break.  When  ’tis  low  water,  the  Inha-j 
bitants  take  out  thefe  Eels,  which  are  certainly  the 
biggeft,  and  the  longeft  in  the  World.  They  fait 
them  up  in  Barrels,  where  they’ll  keep  a whole  year! 
without  fpoiling  : And  indeed  they  give  an  admira-l 
ble  relilh  in  all  Sauces  ; nay,  there’s  nothing  that 
the  Council  of  l^ehec  defires  more,  than  that  this! 
Fiftiery  ftiould  be  equally  plentiful  in  all  years. 

Trois  Rivieres  is  a little  paltry  Town,  feated  ini 
the  Latitude  of  forty  Degrees  ; ’tis  not  fortified! 
neither  with  Stone,  nor  Pales.  The  River  to  whichjo 
it  owes  its  name,  takes  its  rife  an  hundred  Leagues! 
to  the  North-Weft,  from  the  greateft  ridge  ol 
Mountains  in  the  Univerfe.  The  Algonkins  who  are! 
at  prefent  an  Erratick  fort  of  Savages,  and,  like  the 
Arabs  y have  no  fetled  Abode  ; that  People,  I fayj 
feldom  ftraggle  far  from  the  banks  of  this  River! 
upon  which  they  have  excellent  Beaver-hunting.  Irl 
former  times  the  Irocjueje  cut  off  three  fourths  of  that 
Nation  j but  they  have  not  dat’d  to  renew  their  ln-| 
curfions,  fince  the  French  have  Peopled  the  Coua-j  Ï1 
tries  that  lie  higher  up  upon  the  River  of  St.  Lau 
fence.  I call’d  7rois  Rivieres  a little  Town,  with  refe|  t 
fence  to  the  paucity  of  the  Inhabitants  ; though  a 
the  fame  time  they  are  very  rich,  and  live  in  ftatelj 
IToufes.  The  King  has  made  it  the  Rcfidence  o 
a Governor,  who  would  die  for  Hunger,  if  hi  bj 
d,icl  not  trade  with  the  Natives  for  Beavers,  wher! 
his  fmall  allowance  is  out  : Befides,  a Man  tha 
would  live  there,  muft  be  of  the  like  temper  with 
.a  Dog,  or  at  Isaft  he  muft  take  pleafure  in  fcrarchl 

inf 


Û 


oil 


it 


be 


to  Nort^'Americâ^  lÿ 

îng  hîs  Skin,  for  the  Fleam’s  are  there  more  nume- 
rous than  the  grains  of  Sand.  I ani  inform’d,  that 
; the  Natives  of  this  Iplace  make  the  beft  Soldiers  in 
the  Country. 

Three  Leagues  higher  we  enter’d  St.  Peter’s  Lake, 
i which  is  fix  Leagues  long,  arid  had  difficulty  enough 
, in  croffing  it  j for  the  frequent  Calms  oblig’d  us  to 
;!eaft  Anchor  feveral  times.  It  receives  three  of 
four  Rivers  that  abound  with  Fiih;  upon  the 
; Mouth  of  which,  I defcry’d  with  my  Telefcope 
very  fine  Houfes.  Towards  the  Evening  we  fail’d 
;out  of  that  Lake  with  a frelh  Eafterly  Gale  ; and 
though  we  hoifted  up  all  our  Sails,  the  Current  run 
ifo  ftrong  againft  us,  that  ’twas  three  hours  before 
we  could  make  Sore/,  which  was  two  final  1 Leagues 
joff.  Sofe/ is  a Canton  of  four  Leagues  in  front, 
|in  the  neighbourhood  of  which,  a certain  River 
(conveys  the  Waters  of  Champlain  Lake,  to  the  Ri- 
ver of  St.  Laurence,  after  having  form’d  a Water-fall 
of  two  Leagues  at  Chambli.  Though  we  reckon  but 
pight  Leagues  from  Screl  to  Monreal,  yet  we  fpent 
three  days  in  failing  between  ’em  ; by  reafon  partly 
of  flack  Winds,  and  partly  of  the  ftrength  of  the 
Currents.  In  this  courfe  we  faw  nothing  but  I~ 
flands } and  both  fides  of  the  River  ail  along  from 
Quebec  to  this  place,  are  fo  replenifli’d  with  Inhabi- 
rants,  that  one  may  juftly  call  ’em  two  continued 
Villages  of  fixty  Leagues  in  length. 

This  place,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Villemarie; 
or  Monreal,  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  forty  five  De- 
grees, and  fome  Minutes  j being  feated  in  an  Ifland 
of  the  fame  name,  which  is  about  five  Leagues  broad, 
iind  fourteen  Leagues  long.  The  Diredors  of  the, 
ieminary  of  St.  Sulpitius  at  Par^,  are  the  Proprietors  of 
she  Iflandj  and  have  the  nomination  of  a Bailiff,  and 
several  other  Magiflrates  j nay,  in  former  times  they 
Oad  the  priviledge  of  nominating  a Governor.,  This 
little  Town  ills  all  operl^  Without  àtrf  Forfificatîoni 

S tltfïef 


20  Some  Kew  Voyages 

either  of  Stone  of  Wood  : But  its  fituation  is  fo  ad- 
vantageouSj  notwithftandihg  that  it  ftands  upon  an 
uneven  and  fandy  Ground,  that  it  might  eafily  be 
made  an  impregnable  Poft.  The  River  of  St.  Lau- 
rence which  runs  juft  by  the  Houles,  on  one  fide 
of  this  Town,  is  not  Navigable  further,  by  reafon 
of  its  rapidity  ; for  about  half  a quarter  of  a 
League  higher,  ’tis  full  of  rapid  falls,  Eddy’s,  &c. 
Mr.  Perot  the  Governor  of  the  Town,  who  has 
but  a thoufand  Crowns  a year  Sailary  ; has  made 
lliifc  to  get  fifty  thoufand  in  a few  years,  by  tra- 
ding with  the  Savages  in  Skins  and  Furs.  The 
Bailiff  of  the  Town  gets  but  little  by  his  place, 
no  more  than  his  Officers;  So  that  the  Mer- 
chants are  the  only  Perfons  that  make  Money  here  ; 
for  the  Savages  that  frequent  the  great  Lakes  of 
Canada,  come  down  hither  almoft  every  year  with 
a prodigious  quantity  of  Beavers-Skins,  to  be  giv- 
en in  exchange  for  Arms,  Kettles,  Axes,  Knives, 
and  a thoufand  fuch  things,  upon  which  the  Mer-  j 
chants  clear  two  hundred  per  Cent.  Commonly  the 
Governor  General  comes  hither  about  the  time  cf 
their  coming  down,  in  order  to  fiiare  the  profit, 
and  receive  Prefents  from  that  People.  The  Ped-  | 
lers  call’d  Coureurs  de  Bois,  export  from  hence  every  : 
year  feveral  Canows,  full  of  Merchandife,  which 
they  difpofe  of  among  all  the  Savage  Nations  of  : 
the  Continent,  by  way  of  exchange  for  Beaver- 
Skins.  Seven  or  eight  days  ago,  I faw  twenty  five 
or  thirty  of  thefe  Canows  return  with  heavy  Car- 
goes ; each  Canow  was  manag’d  by  two  or  three 
Men,  and  carry’d  twenty  hundred  weight,  i.  e.  for- 
ty packs  of  Beaver  Skins,  which  are  worth  an  hun- 
dred Crowns  a piece.  Thefe  Canows  had  been  a 
year  and  eighteen  Months  out.  \ou  would  be  a- 
maz’d  if  you  faw  how  lewd  thefe  Pedlers  are  when 
they  return  ; how  they  Feaft  and  Game,  and  how 
prodigal  they  are,  not  only  in  their  Cloaths,  buc 

upon  ' 


to  North  Ammcs.*  2 V 

upon  Women.  Such  of  ’em  as  are  married,  have 
the  wifdom  to  retire  to  their  own  Houfes|  but  the 
Batchelors  aéf  juft  as  our  Eafi-India-hiicni  and  Pi- 
rates are  wont  to  do  j for  they  Lavi/h,  Eat,  Drink, 
and  Play  all  away  as  long  as  the  Goods  hold  out  ; 
and  when  thefe  are  gone,  they  e’en  fell  their  Em- 
broidery, their  Lace,  and  their  Cloaths.  This  done, 
they  are  forc’d  to  go  upon  a new  Voyage  for  Sub- 
fiftance. 

The  Directors  of  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sidptius^ 
take  care  to  fend  Miffionaries  hither  from  time  to 
time,  who  live  under  the  direélion  of  a Superiour, 
that  is  very  muchrefpeded  in  the  Country.  They 
have  Apartments  allotted  for  ’em  in  a ftately^  great, 

: and  pleafant  Houfe,  built  of  Free-ftone.  This 
Houfe  is  built  after  the  Model  of  that  of  St.  SuU 
fice  at  Varü  ; and  the  Altar  (lands  by  it  feif,  juO: 
like  that  at  Varis.  Their  Seignories  or  Cantons  that 
lye  on  the  South-fide  of  the  ifland,  produce  a con- 
I fiderable  Revenue  j . for  the  Plantations  are  good, 
and  the  Inhabitants  are  rich  in  Corn,  Cattle,  Fowl, 
i and  a thoufand  other  Commodities,  for  which  they 
■ find  aMercat  in  the  City:  But  the  North  part  of 
! the  Ifland  lies  wafte.  Thefe  Diredors  would  ne- 
ver fuffer  the  Jefuits  or  Recolleds  to  difplay  their 
Banners  herej  though ’tis  conje<5lur’d,  that  at  the 
long  run  they’ll  be  forc’d  to  confent  to  it.  At  the 
diflance  of  a League  from  the  Town,  I favv  at  the 
foot  of  a Mountain,  a Plantation  of  Iroquefe  Ohn- 
ffians,  who  are  inftrudired  by  two  Priefts  of  the  Or^ 
der  of  Sulfitim  ; and  I’m  inform’d  of  a larger  and 
more  populous  Plantation  on  t’other  fide  of  the  Ri- 
ver, at  the  diftance  of  two  Leagues  from  hence, 
which  is  took  care  of  by  Father  Bruyas  the  jefuit, 
I hope  to  fet  out  from  hence,  as  foon  as  Mr.  de  la 
Barre  receives  advice  from  France  ; for  he  defigns  to 
leave  Quebee  upon  the  arrival  of  the  firft  Ship.  I 
refolve  to  go  to  fort  Frontenac,  upon  the  Lake  that 

C 2 goes 


1 1 Some  Neuf  Voyages 

goes  by  the  fame  name.  If  I may  credit  thofe  who 
have  been  formerly  in  Aâion  againft  the  Iro^uefe, 
I fhall  be  able  upon  my  return  from  this  Campaiign, 
to  inform  you  of  fome  things  that  will  feem  as 
ftrange  to  you,  as  they  will  ba  difagreeabje  to  my 
felf.  I am. 


1 


SIR,  , !! 

Tours,  &c.  1 

* II, 


LETTER  V. 

Dated  at  Mcnreal  June  i8.  1684. 


In  ivhkh  is  contain’d  a jhort  account  of  the  Iro-  |ji 
quefc,  with  a view  of  the  War  and  Peace  theji  ijl 
made  with  the  French,  and  of  the  means  hy  |;i 
which  it  was  hrou^t  about,  : J 


SIR,  'IJ 

I wrote  to  you  but  four  days  ago, and  did  not  think  || 
to  have  heard  from  youfo  foon  ; but  this  Morn-  jj, 
ing  I met  with  a very  agreeable  Surprifal,  in  receiv-  ijj 
ing  a Packet  addrefs’d  to  me  by  your  Brother.  You  jj 
may  be  fure  I was  infinitely  well  pleas’d,  in  being  i| 
given  to  underhand  what  has  pafs’d  in  Eurofe  fincel  ! 
left  it.  The  knowledge  of  the  Affairs  of  Europe  U 
comfortable  to  one  that’s  doom’d  to  another  World,  'i  ^ 
luch  as  this  is,  and  I cannot  but  acknowledge  my 
felf  infinitely  indebted  to  you,  for  the  exacSfnefs  of 
your  Intelligence.  In  as  much  as  you  require  of  J 
mean  account  of  the  Irocjueje,  and  would  have  ro®  L 
to  prefent  you  with  a juft  view  of  their  Temper , I 
and  Government  j I would  willingly  fatisfie  and  .,, 
oblige  you  in  tha^  ojr  any  other  poirit  ; But  in  ro-  ' ' 


to  Nonh-Amcncâ]  2j 

gArd  that  I am  oblig’d  to  fet  out  for  Fort  Frmenae 
the  day  after  to  morrow,  I have  not  time  to  in- 
form my  felf  of  things,  or  to  confult  thofe  who 
have  been  in  the  Country  before  : So  that  all  I can 
do  atprefent,  is  only  to  acquaint  you  with  what  I 
have  learn’d  this  Winter,  from  Perfons  that  have 
fojourn’d  twenty  years  among  ’em.  As  foon  as  I 
have  an  opportunity  of  inlarging  my  knowledge 
upon  that  Head,  by  a more  immediate  converfation 
with  themfelves,  you  may  affure  your  felf  that  ^’11 
impart  it  to  you.  In  the  mean  time,  be  pleas’d  to 
accept  of  what  follows. 

Thefe  Barbarians  are  drawn  up  in  five  Cantons, 
not  unlike  thofe  of  the  Swijjes.  Tho’  thefe  Can- 
tons are  all  of  one  Nation,  and  united  in  one  joynt 
intereft,  yet  they  go  by  different  names,  viz,,  the 
Tfmentouans^  the  Goyogoans,  the  Onnotagms,  the  Onoy- 
cuts,  and  the  Agnih.  Their  Language  is  almoft  the 
fame  j and  the  five  Villages  or  Plantations  in  which 
they  live,  lie  at  the  diftance  of  thirty  Leagues  one 
from  another,  being  all  ieated  near  the  South  fide 
of  the  Lake  of  Ontario^  ox  oî  Frontenac.  Every  year 
the  five  Cantons  fend  Deputies  to  afîîft  at  the  Uni' 
on  Feafi,  and  to  fmoak  in  the  great  Calumet , or  Pipe 
of  the  five  Nations,  Each  Village  or  Canton  con- 
tains about  fourteen  thoufand  Souls,  1.  e.  ipo  that 
bear  Arms,  2000  Superannuated  Men,  4000  Wo- 
men, 2000  Maids,  and  4000  Children  : Tho’  indeed 
ifome  will  tell  you,  that  each  Village  has  not  above 
^ looco  or  iiGoo  Souls.  There  has  been  an  Alliance 
'of  long  ftanding  between  thefe  Nations  and  the 
; Englijh,  and  by  trading  in  Furrs  to  New-Tor^,  they 
; are  fupply’d  by  the  EngUJI^  with  Arms,  Ammuniti- 
jOn,  and  all  other  Neceffaries,  at  a cheapen  fate  than 
' the  French  can  afford  ’em  at.  They  havè  no  other 
' eonfideration  fox  England  ox  France,  than  what  de? 

! pends  upon  the  occafion  they  have  for  the  Commo- 
dities of  thefe  two  Nations;  though  after  all  they 
! 4 4m 


î4 


Some  New  Voyages 


give  an  bver-purchafe;  for  they  pay  for  them  four 
times  more  than  they  are  worth.  They  laugh  ac 
the  Menaces  of  our  Kings  and  Governors,  for  they 
have  no  notion  of  dépendance,  nay,  the  very  word 
is  to  them  infupportable.  They  look  upon  them- 
felves  as  Soveraigns,  accountable  to  none  but  God 
alone,  whom  they  call  Hoe  Great  Spirit.  They  wa- 
ged War  with  us  almoft  always,  from  the  firft  fet- 
tlement  of  our  Colonies  in  C«wæJ(î,  to  the  fir  ft  years 
of  the  Count  of  Frontenacs  Government.  Meffieurs 
de  Courfdks,  and  de  Tract,  both  of  ’em  Governors- 
General,  made  Head  againft  the  Agnih  upon  the 
Champlain  Lake,  in  Winter  as  well  as  in  Sum- 
mer ; blit  they  could  not  boaft  of  any  great  Suc- 
cels.  They  only  burnt  their  Villages,  and  carry’d 
off  fome  hundred  of  their  Children,  of  whom  the 
above-mcntion’d  Ircqttefe  Chriftians  are  fprung.  ’Tis 
true,  they  cut  off  ninety  or  an  hundred  Warriours  ; 
but  in  compenfation  for  that,  feveral  Canadans,  and 
feveral  Soldiers  of  the  Regiment  of  Cartgnan,  being 
unprovided  againft  the  unfufFerable  cold  of  the  Cli- 
mate, loft  their  Limbs,  and  even  their  Life  it  felf. 
Count  Frontenac  who  fucceeded  Mr.  Coarfelle,  per- 
ceiving that  the  Barbarians  had  the  advantage  of  the 
''Europeans,  as  to  the  waging  of  War  in  that  Coun- 
try j upon  this  apprehenfion,  I fay,  he  declin’d  fuch 
fruitiefs  Expeditions,  which  were  very  chargeable  to 
the  King,  and  us’d  all  his  efforts  to  difppfe  the  Sa 
vages  to  a fincere  and  lafting  Peace.  This  judici- 
ous Governor  had  three  things  in  view  j The  firft 
was  to.  incourage  the  greateft  part  of  the  In- 
habitants, v;ho  would  have  abdicated  the  Colony, 
and  return’d  to  France,  if  the  War  had  continued. 
His  fécond  Topick  was,  that  the  conclufion  of  a 
Peace  would  difpofe  an  infinity  of  People  to  mar- 
ry, and  to  grub  up  the  Trees,  upon  vyhich  the  Co-  - 
iohy  would  be  better  Peopled  and  inlarg’d.  The 
third  /argument  that  diffuaded  him  from  carrying 

on 


•i 


I' 


-A  cartcJTZJ  û^^ii'c/2  ivM  âJcaùf 


, to  North  Amcîica.  25 

on  the  War,  wasadefign  of  purfuing  the  difcove- 
ry  of  the  Lakes,  and  of  the  Savages  that  live  upon 
their  banks,  in  order  to  fettle  a Commerce  with 
'em,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  ingage  them  in  our 
interefts,  by  good  Alliances,  in  cafe  of  a Rupture 
with  the  Iroquefe.  Upon  the  confideration  of  thefe 
Reafons,  he  fent  fome  Canadans  by  way  of  a for- 
mal EmbalTy  to  the  Iroquefe  Villages , in  order  to 
acquaint  them,  that  the  King  being  inform’d  that  a 
groundlefs  War  was  carried  on  againft  them,  had 
fent  him  from  France  to  make  peace  with  ’em.  At 
the  fame  time  the  Ambaffadors  had  orders  to  ftipu- 
late  all  the  advantages  they  could  obtain  with  refe- 
rence to  the  Commerce.  The  Iroquefe  heard  this 
Propolal  with  a great  deal  of  Satisfaélion  ; for 
Charles  II.  King  of  England,^  had  order’d  his  Gover- 
nor in  Nevs-York  to  reprefent  to  ’em,  that  if  they 
continu’d  to  wage  War  with  the  French,  they  were 
ruin’d,  and  that  they  would  find  themfelves  crufh’d 
by  the  numerous  Forces  tliat  were  ready  to  fail 
from  France.  In  effed,  they  promis’d  to  the  Am- 
baffadors that  four  hundred  of  their  number  fiiould 
meet  Count  Frontenac,  attended  by  an  equal  number 
of  his  Men,  at  the  place  where  Fort  Frontenac  now 
ftands.  Accordingly,  fome  Months  after,  both  the 
one  and  the  other  met  at  the  place  appointed,  and 
fo  a Peace  was  concluded.  Mr.  de  la  Salle  was  very 
ferviceable  to  this  Governor,  in  giving  him  good 
and  feaforiable  Advices,  which  I cannot  now  enter 
upon,  being  oblig’d  to  make  fome  preparations  for 
my  Voyage.  When  the  Campaign  is  over,  you 
may  exped  to  hear  from  me.  In  the  mean  time, 

I am. 


Tours,  &c. 

LET- 


SIR, 


Some  New  Voyages 


^6 


LETTER  VI. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  20,  1684, 

Being  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  Canows  made 
of  Birch-hark^  in  which  the  Canadans  per~ 
form  all  their  f^oyages^  with  an  account  of 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  made  and  ma* 
na^d. 

SIR, 

I thought  to  have  fet  out  as  this  day  ; but  in  regard 
that  our  Complement  of  great  Canows  is  not 
yet  brought  up,  our  Voyage  is  put  off  for  two 
days.  Having  lb  much  leifure  time  upon  my  Hands,  I 
have  a mind  to  imploy  it  in  prcfenting  you  with  a 
Ihort  view  of  thefe  flender  0>ntrivances  in  which 
the  Canadans  perform  all  their  Voyages  ; And  this 
will  furnilh  you  with  an  Idaa  of  the  toiture  of  this 
Country.  I faw  but  now  above  an  hundred  Ca- 
nows, fome  great  and  fome  little  ; but  confidering 
that  the  former  are  only  proper  for  Martial  Expedi- 
tions , and  long  Voyages,  I Ihall  confine  my  Def- 
cription to  that  fort.  Even  the  great  ones  are  of 
different  fizes  j for  they  run  from  ten  to  twenty 
eight  Foot  long.  Indeed  the  leaft  of  all  hold  but 
two  Perfons  fet  upon  their  Breech,  as  in  a Coffin  ; 
and  are  apt  to  over-fet,  if  the  Paffengers  move  to 
one  fide  or  t'other  : But  thofe  of  a larger  fize  will 
eafily  afford  flrowage  for  fourteen  Perfons  ; tho'  they 
are  commonly  mann'd  only  with  three  Men,  when 
they  are  imploy'd  in  tranfporting  Provifions  and 
Merchandize  ; and  even  then  they’ll  carry  twenty 
hundred  weight.  The  fargeft  fort  are  fafe  and 

fteddy. 


U North- htncncâl  17 

fteddy,  when  they  are  made  of  the  Bark  of  the 
Birch-tree,  which  comes  off  with  hot  Water  in  the 
Winter  time.  The  greateft  Trees  afford  the  beft 
Barks  for  Canows  ; but  oftentimes  the  Bark  of  one 
Tree  is  not  fufficient.-  The  bottom  of  the  Boat  is 
all  of  one  piece,  to  which  the  Tides  are  fo  artfully 
few’d  by  the  Savages,  that  the  whole  Boat  appears 
as  one  continu’d  Bark.  They  are  trimm’d  and 
ftrengthn’d  with  wicker  Wreaths,  and  ribs  of  Cedar- 
Wood,  which  are  alnaoft  as  light  as  Corkj  the 
Wreaths  are  as  thick  as  a Crown-piece  j but  the 
Bark  has  the  thicknefs  of  two  Crowns,  and  the 
Ribs  are  as  thick  as  three.  On  the  two  Tides  of  the 
Boat,  there  runs  from  one  end  to  the  other  two 
principal  Head -bars,  in  which  the  ends  of  the  Ribs 
are  inchas’d,  and  in  which  the  Spars  are  made  faft, 
that  run  a-crofsthe  Boat  and  keep  it  compad.  Thefe 
Boats  have  twenty  Inches  in  depth,  that  is,  from 
the  upper  edge  to  the  Platform  of  the  Ribs  ; their 
length  extends  to  twenty  eight  Foot,  and  the  width 
at  the  middle  Rib  is  computed  to  be  four  Foot  and 
a half.  They  are  very  convenient  upon  the  ac- 
count of  their  extream  lightnefs,  and  the  drawing 
of  very  little  Water  ; but  at  the  fame  time  their  brit- 
tle and  tender  Fabrick,  is  an  Argument  of  an  e- 
qui  valent  inconveniency  ; for  if  they  do  but  touch 
or  grate  upon  Stone  or  Sand,  the  cracks  of  the  Bark 
fly  open,  upon  which  the  Water  gets  in,  and  fpoils 
the  ProviTions  and  Merchandize  : Every  day  there 
is  fome  new  chink  orfeamto  begumm’d  over.  Ac 
Night  they  are  always  unloaded,  and  carried  on  (hoar 
where  they  are  made  faft  with  Pegs,  left  the  Wind 
fliould  blow  ’em  away  : For  they  are  fo  light,that  two 
Men  carry  ’em  upon  their  ihoulders  with  eafe.  This 
conveniency  of  lightnefs  and  eaTie  carriage,  renders 
’em  very  ferviceable  in  the  Rivers  of  Canada,  which 
are  full  of  Cataraiïts,  Water-falls,  and  Currents; 
for  in  thefe  lUyers  we^re  oblig’d  either  to  rranfporc 


I 


i8  Some  Voyages 

’em  over-land  where  fuch  obftru<aions  happen,  or 
elle  to  tow  ’em  along  where  the  Current  is  not  over- 
rapid,  and  the  Ihoar  is  a^cceffible.  Thefe  Boats  are 
of  no  ufe  for  the  Navigation  of  Lakes  ; for  the 
Waves  would  fwallow  ’em  up,  if  they  could  not 
reach  the  Ihoar  when  a wind  arifes.  ’Tis  true,  the 
Inhabitants  venture  in  ’em  for  four  or  five  Leagues, 
from  one  Ifland  to  another  ; but  then  ’tis  always  in 
calm  Weather,  and  nothing  is  made  ufe  of  but  Oars; 
for  befides  the  rifque  of  being  over-fet,  the  Goods 
are  in  danger  of  being  dammag’d  by  the  Water,  ef- 
pecially  the  Furs  which  are  the  moft  valuable  part  | 
of  the  Cargoe.  When  the  feafon  ferves,  they  carry  | 
little  Sails  ; but  if  the  Wind  be  but  a little  brisk,  j 
tho’  they  run  right  afore  it,  ’tis  impoffible  to  make  ! 
any  ufe  of  it  without  running  the  rifque  of  Ship- 
wrack.  if  their  courfe  lies  diredly  South,  they  j 
cannot  put  up  fail  without  the  wind  ftands  at  one  j 
of  the  eight  points,  between  North-Weft  and  North-  | 
Eaft  ; and  if  a wind  happens  to  fpring  any  where  | 
elfb,  ( unlefs  it  comes  from  the  Land  which  they  ! 
coaft  along  ) they  are  oblig’d  to  put  in  to  the  fhoar 
with  all  poffible  expedition,  and  unload  the  Boat  j 
out  of  hand , till  fuch  time  as  a calm  returns.  | 

As  for  the  working  of  thefe  Boats,  the  Canow-  j 
Men  ply  fometimes  on  their  Knees,  namely,  when 
they  run  down  the  fmall  Water-falls;  fometimes 
ftanding , when  they  fiem  a Current  by  fetting  | 
the  Boat  along  with  Poles  ; and  fometimes  fitting,  : 
viz,,  in  fmooth  and  ftagnating  water-  The  Oars  ! 
they  make  ufe  of  are  made  of  Maple-wood,  and  \ 
their  form  is  reprefented  in  the  annex’d  Cutt.  | 
The  Blade  of  the  Oar  is  twenty  Inches  long,  fix  | 
Inches  broad,  and  four  Lines  thick  : The  Handle  is  j 
about  three  Foot  long,  and  as  bigas  a Pigeons  Egg-  : 

When  they  have  occafion  to  run  up  againtt  rapid 
Currents,  they  make  ufe  of  Poles  made  of  Pine-  ' 

wood  ; and  the  fetting  of  the  Bo^t  along  with  thefe,  i 


to  Nor^^-America.  29 

is  what  they  call  fiquer  de  fond.  The  Canowshave 
neither  Stern  nor  Prow,  for  they  run  to  a point  at 
both  ends  : Neither  have  they  Keels,  Nails  or  Pegs, 
in  the  whole  Strufture.  The  Steerfman,  or  he  who 
Conns  the  Boat,  rows  without  interruption  as  well 
as  the  reft.  The  common  purchafe  of  fuch  a Boat 
is  eighty  Crowns;  but  it  do’s  not  laft  above  five 
or  fix  years. 

This  day  I have  receiv’d  advice,  that  Mr.  de  la 
Barre  has  rais’d  the  Militia  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Quebec^  and  that  the  Governor  of  this  Ifland  has  re- 
ceiv’d orders  to  have  that  of  the  adjacent  Cantms  in 
readinefs  to  march.  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &C. 


LETTER  VII. 

Dated  at  Monreal  Novemb.  2. 1684. 

Deferring  the  Courfe  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence, 
from  Monreal  to  the  firfi  great  Lake  of  Cana- 
da ; with  the  Water  falls,  Qatar aCls,  and  Navi- 
gation of  that  River  : As  alfo  Fort 
and  the  Advantages  that  accrue  from  it.  To- 
gether with  a Qircumflantial  account  of  the 
Expedition  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre,  the  Governor- 
General  again fl  the  Iroquefe  ; the  Speeches  he 
made,  the  Replies  he  receiv’d,  and  the  final 
Accommodation  of  the  difference. 

SIR, 

THank  God  I have  finilh’d  this  Campaign,  and 
am  now  return’d  in  fafety  to  this  place.  To 
prefent  you  with  the  Hiftory  of  our  Campaign,  be 

pleas’d 


Some  New  Voyages 

pleas’d  to  know  that  in  two  or  three  days  after  thS 
date  of  my  laft,  I imbarqu’d  on  board  of  a Ga-  I 
now  that  was  work’d  by  three  expert  Canow-Men.  ! 
Every  Canow  contain’d  two  Soldiers;  and  we  all  j 
row’d  up  againft  the  Current  of  the  River  till  we  | 
arriv’d  at  Saut  de  St.  Louü,  about  three  Leagues  a-  I 
bove  this  Town,  which  is  a little  Water-fall,  but  i 
fo  rapid,  that  our  Watermen  were  forc’d  to  ftand  j 
in  the  water  up  to  their  Middle,  in  order  to  drag  j 
the  Canows  againft  the  Stream  for  half  a quarter  | 
of  a League.  We  reimbarqu’d  above  this  Pais,  and  j 
row’d  about  twelve  Leagues  up  the  River^  and  thro’  ! 
the  Lake  of  St.  Louü,  till  we  arriv’d  at  a place  call’d  | 
the  Cafcades,  where  we  were  forc’d  to  turn  out  and  i 
carry  our  Boats  and  Baggage  over-land,  about  half  I 
a quarter  of  a League.  ’Tis  true,  we  might  have  I 
fow’d  oUr  Boats  againft  the  Stream  in  this  place 
with  fome  labour  ; but  there  was  a Catarad  a little  ! 
above  it,  which  they  call  le  CàtaraSlè  du  Trou.  I had  ' 
taken  up  a notion  that  the  only  difficulty  of  fail-  I 
ing  up  the  River,  confifted  in  the  trouble  of  Land-  | 
carriage  ; but  when  I came  to  be  a Spedator  of  j 
the  matter,  1 found  that  the  ftemming  of  the  Cur-  | 
rents  whether  in  towing  of  the  Canows,  or  in  fet-  | 
ting  them  along  with  Poles,  w'as  equally  laborious.  I 
About  five  or  fix  Leagues  higher  we  came  to  the  j 
Water-falls  call’d  Sauts  des  Cedres,  and  du  Buijjon, 
where  we  were  forc’d  to  tranfport  our  Boats  five  j 
hundred  paces  over  Land.  Some  Leagues  above  i 
that,  we  enter’d  the  Lake  of  St.  Francis,  which  is  j 
, faid  to  be  twenty  Leagues  in  Circumference;  and  ; 
having  croft’d  it,  met  with  as  ftrong  Currents  as 
before,  particularly  at  a fall  call’d  Saut,  where  I 
we  had  recoutfe  to  Lar.d.carriage  for  half  a League.  1 
Then  we  were  forc’d  to  drag  up  the  Boats  againft  the  ! 
rapid  Stream  ; and  after  a great  deal  of  fatigue  came  | 
at  laft  to  a Pafs  call’d  la  Galete,  from  whence  we  had  { 
but  twenty  Leagues  failing  to  Fort  Frontenac.  This  | 


to  Nort/>- America^  1 1 

Pafs  was  the  laft  difficulty  we  had  to  furmoûnt  j for 
above  it  the  water  was  as  ftill  as  that  of  a Pool,  and 
then  our  Watermen  ply’d  with  their  Oars  in  ftead 
of  Poles. 

The  Maringouins,  Which  we  call  Midges,  areun- 
fufferably  troublefom  in  all  the  Countries  of  Cana- 
da. We  were  haunted  with  fuch  clouds  of ’em,  that 
we  thought  to  be  eat  up  ; and  fmoaking  being  the 
only  Artifice  that  could  keep  ’em  off,  the  Remedy 
was  worfe  than  the  Difeafe  : In  the  Night-time  the 
People  Ihelter  themfelvcs  from  ’em  in  Bowers  or 
Arbours,  made  after  the  following  manner.  They 
drive  into  the  Ground  Stakes  or  Tittle  branches  of 
Trees,  at  a certain  diftance  one  from  another,  fo  as 
to  form  a femicircular  Figure  ; in  which  they  put  a 
Quilt  a nd  Bedcloaths,  covering  it  above  with  a large 
Sheet  that  falls  down  to  the  Ground  on  all  fides,  and 
fo  hinders  the  Infeds  to  enter. 

We  landed  at  Fort  Frontenac  after  twenty  days 
failing  ; and  immediately  upon  our  arrival,  Mr. 
Data  our  Commander  in  chief,  view’d  the  Fortifi- 
cations of  the  place,  and  three  large  Barques  that 
lay  at  Anchor  in  the  Port.  We  repair’d  the  Forti- 
fications in  a very  little  time,  and  fitted  up  the  three 
Barques.  This  Fort  was  a Square,  confifting  of  large' 
Curtains  flanked  with  four  little  Baftions  ; thcfe 
Flanks  had  but  two  Battlements,  and  the  Walls  were 
fo  low,  that  one  might  eafily  climb  upon  ’em  with- 
out a Ladder.  After  Mr.  de  la  Salle  concluded  the 
Peace  with  the  Iroquefe,  the  King  bellow’d  upon  him 
and  his  Heirs  the  property  of  this  place  ; but  he 
was  fo  negligent,  that  inftead  of  enriching  himfelf 
by  the  Commerce  it  might  have  afforded,  he  was 
confiderably  out  of  pocket  upon  it.  To  my  mind 
this  Fort  is  fituated  very  advantageoufly  for  a Trade 
with  the  five  Irot^uefe  Nations  : For  their  Villages  lys 
in  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Lake,  upon  which 
they  may  tranfport  thdr  Furs  in  Canows  with  more 

eafej. 


Some  KeiP  Voyages 

eafe,  than  they  can  carry  ’em  over-land  to  Hew- 
Tork.  In  time  of  War  I take  it  to  be  indefenfible  J 
for  the  Catarads  and  Currents  of  the  River  are  fuch, 
that  fifty  Irocjuefe  may  there  flop  five  hundred  French^ 
without  any  other  Arms  but  Stones.  Do  but  con- 
fider.  Sir,  that  for  twenty  Leagues  together  the 
River  is  fo  rapid,  that  we  dare  not  fet  the  Canow 
four  paces  off  the  Ihoar  ; Befides,  Canada  being  no- 
thing but  a Forreft,  as  I intimated  above,  ’tis  iffi- 
poflible  to  travel  there  without  falling  every  foot 
into  Ambufcades,  efpecially  upon  the  banks  of  this 
River,  which  are  lin’d  with  thick  Woods,  that  ren- 
der ’em  inacceflible.  None  but  the  Savages  can  skip 
from  Rock  to  Rock,  and  fcour  thro’  the  Thickets,  as  | 
if  ’twere  an  open  Field.  If  we  were  capable  of  | 
fuch  Adventures,  we  might  march  five  or  fix  hun- 
dred Men  by  Land  to  guard  the  C^ianows  that  carry 
the  Provifions  ; but  at  the  fame  time  ’tis  to  be  con- 
fider’d,  that  before  they  arriv’d  at  the  Fort,  they 
would  confume  more  Provifions  than  the  Canows 
can  carry  ; Not  to  mention  that  the  Iro^wfe  would  , 
Hill  out-number  ’em.  As  to  the  particulars  relating  | 
to  the  Fort,  I lhall  take  notice  of  ’em  when  I come  ,j 
to  give  a general  defcription  of  New-Fr<?wc«.  j 

While  we  continued  at  Fort  Frontenac,  the  Iroqucfe  j 
who  live  at  Ganeoujfe  and  Quente,  at  the  diftance  of  j 
feven  or  eight  Leagues  from  thence,  threw  in  upon  | 
us  Harts,  Roe-bucks,  Turkeys  and  Fi/hj  in  ex-  | 
change  for  Needle?,  Knives,  Powder  and  Ball.  To-  j 
wards  the  end  of  Augufi  Mr.  de  la  Barre  joyn’d  us  5 j 
but  he  was  dangeroufly  ill  of  a Feaver,  which 
rag’d  in  like  manner  among  moft  of  his  Militia  5 
fo  that  only  our  three  Companies  were  free 
from  Sick  nefs.  This  Feaver  was  of  the  intermit-  • 
ting  kind  ; and  the  convulfive  Motions,  Tremblings, 
and  frequency  of  the  Pulfe  that  attended  the  cold  j 
Fir,  were  fo  violent,  that  moft  of  oiir  fick  Men 
dy’d  in  the  fécond  or  third  Fit.  Their  Blood  was  j 


to 


Korth- Amcïicié 


\ of  a blackifh  brown  colour,  and  tainted  with  a fort 
I of  yellowifh  Serum,  not  unlike  Pus  or  corrupt  Mat- 
I ter.  Mr.  Phyfician,  who  in  my  opinion 

j knew  as  little  of  the  true  caufes  of  Feavers  as  Hip- 
I f ocrâtes  or  Galetty  and  a hundred  thoufand  befides  | 
Î this  mighty  Phyfician,  1 fay,  pretending  to  trace 
i the  cauie  of  the  Feaver  I now  fpeak  of,  imputed 
I it  to  the  unfavourable  qualities  of  the  Air  and  the 
I Aliment.  His  plea  was>  that  the  excefîîve  heat  of 
the  feafon,  put  the  Vapours  or  Exhalations  into  an 
over-rapid  Motion  j that  the  Air  was  fo  over-ra- 
rify’d>  that  we  did  not  fuck  in  a fufhcicnt  quantity 
of  it  j that  the  fmall  quantity  we  did  receive  was 
loaded  with  Infeels  and  impure  Corpufculum’s  j 
which  the  fatal  neceiïîty  of  Refpiration  oblig’d  us 
to  fwallowj  and  that  by  this  means  nature  was 
put  into  diforder  : He  added,  that  the  ufe  of  Bran- 
dy and  fait  Meat  fower’d  the  Blood,  that  this  fower-» 
nefs  occafion’d  a fort  of  Coagulation  of  the  Chyle 
and  Blood,  that  the  Coagulation  hindred  it  to  cir- 
culate thro’  the  Heart  with  a due  degree  of  Cele- 
rity ; and  that  thereupon  there  infued  an  extraordi- 
nary Fermentation,  which  is  nothing  elfe  but  a 
Feaver.  But  after  all,  to  my  mind  this  Gentleman’s 
Syfteme  was  too  much  upon  the  Irocjuefe  ftrain  j foe 
at  that  rate  the  Diftemper  mufi  have  feiz’d  all  with- 
out diftinélion,  whereas  neither  our  Soldiers  nor  the 
feafon’d  Canadans  were  troubled  with  it  ; for  ic 
raged  only  among  the  Militia,  who  being  Unac- 
quainted with  the  way  of  fetting  the  Boats  with 
Poles,  were  forc’d  at  every  turn  to  get  into  the  water 
and  drag  ’em  up  againft  the  rapid  Stream  ; Now^  the 
waters  of  that  Country  being  naturally  cold^  and 
the  heat  being  exceffive,  the  Blood  might  thereup- 
on freeze  by  way  of  Antiperlflafisy  and  fo  ocêafioni 
the  Feaver  I fpeak  of^  purfuant  to  the  common  Max-» 

1 Im,  Omnis  repent  ina  mutât  to  «/?  ferkulûfàÿ  I.  g'.-  Æ [uâà 
\ dm  ehttnget  are  of  dMgÿtoaé  Cofsfe^uenéii 

© âl 


Some  “Hem  Voyaged 


54 

As  foon  as  Mr.  de  la  Banc  recover'd,  he  imbarqu’^ 
in  order  to  continue  his  inarch  ; tho’  he  might  have/ 
eafily  fenown,  that  after  h:  king  fourteen  or  fifteen 
days  at  that  Fort,  when  the  feafon  v/as  fo  far  ad-^ 
vanc’d,  he  could  not  pretend  to  compsfs  the  end 
of  his  Expedition.  We  row’d  Night  and  Day  the 
Weather  being  very  calm,  and  in  fi  /e  or  fix  days 
came  before  the  River  of  Famine,  where  we  were 
forc’d  to  put  in  upon  the  apprehenfion  of  a Storm. 
Here  we  met  with  a Canow  that  Mr.  Dulhut  had 
fent  from  MijfiUmakinac,  with  advice,  that  purfuant 
to  orders  he  had  ingag’d  the  Hurom  , Outacuas, 
and  fome  other  People , to  joyn  his  Army  ; in 
which  he  had  above  two  hundred 
’•‘s^fCoHreurs  brave  * Foreft  Rangers.  Thefe  News 
were  very  acceptable  to  Mr.  de  la' 


de  Bois  in  the 
Table. 


Bane  ; but  at  the  fame  time  he  was  ve- 


ry much  perplexed  ; for  I’m  pdrfwaded  he  repented 
oftner  than  once,  of  his  entring  upon  an  Expedi- 
tion that  he  forefaw  would  prove  Succefslefs  ; and 
to  aggravate  the  danger  of  his  Enterprife,  the  Jw- 
queje  had  at  that  time  an  opportunity  to  fajl  upon 
us.  In  fine,  after  a mature  confideration  of  the 
Confequences,  and  of  the  Difficulties  that  ftood  in 
the  way,  he  fent  back  the  Canow  to  Mr.  Dulhut, 
with  orders  to  difmifs  the  Foreft  Rangers  and  Sava- 
ges immediately,  where-ever  he  was,  and  by  all 
means  to  avoid  the  approaching  to  his  Troops.  By 
good  luck  Mr.  Dulhut  had  not  yet  reach’d  Niagara,. 
when  he  receiv’d  thefe  Orders  ; with  which  the  Sa- 
vages that  accompany’d  him  were  fo  diflatisfied, 
that  they  threw  out  ail  manner  of  Invedives  againft 
the  French  Nation. 

As  foon  as  Mr.  de  la  Barre  had  difpatch’d  this  Ca- 
now, he  fent  Mr.  le  Moine  to  the  Village  of  the 
Onnontagues,  which  lay  about  eighteen  Leagues  up' 
the  River.  This  Mr.  le  Moine  was  a Gentleman  of 
Normandy,  and  highly  efteem’d  by  the  In'^uiJ'e,  who 

call’d 


to  America. 

I call’d  him  Akoueffan,  i.  e.  the  Vartridge.  His  Orders 
were,  to  indeavour  by  all  means  to  bring  along  with 
him  fome  of  the  old  ftanders  of  that  Nation  j 
and  accordingly  he  return’d  in  a few  days,  accom- 
1 pany’d  with  one  of  their  moft  confiderable  Gran-' 
dees,  who  had  a Train  of  thirty  young  Warriours, 
and  was  diftinguilh’d  by  the  Title  of  the  Grangula. 

; As  foon  as  he  debarqued,  Mr.  de  la  Barre  fent  him 
a Prefent  of  Bread  and  Wine,  and  of  thirty  Sal- 
mon-Trouts, which  they  fiih'd  in  that  place  infuch 
plenty,  that  they  brought  up  a hundred  at  one  eaft 
of  a Net;  At  the  fame  time  he  gave  the  Grandee 
to  underftand,  that  he  congratulated  his  Arrival, 
and  would  be  glad  to  have  an  Interview  with  him 
after  he  had  refted  himfelf  for  fome  days.  You 
muft  know  that  he  had  us’d  the  precaution  of  fend- 
ing the  fick  back  to  the  Colony,  that  the  Irocjaefe 
might  not  perceive  the  weaknefs  of  his  Forces  ; and 
to  favour  the  Stratagem,  Mr.  le  Moine  reprefenced  to 
the  Grangula,  that  the  Body  of  the  Army  was  left 
behind  at  Fort  Frontenac^  and  that  the  Troops  he 
faw  in  our  Camp,  were  the  General’s  Guards.  But 
unhappily  one  of  the  Iroqaefe  that  had  a fmattejing 
of  the  French  Tongue,  having  ffroul’d  in  the  Night- 
time towards  our  Tents,  over-heard  what  we  faid, 
and  fo  reveal’d  the  Secret.  Two  days  after  their 
arrival,  the  Grangda  gave  notice  to  Mr.  de  la  Barré 
that  he  was  ready  for  an  Interview;  and  according- 
ly an  hour  being  appointed,  the  whole  Company 
appear’d  as  the  figure  reprefents  it. 

I The  Grangda  fat  on  the  Eaft  fide,  being  plac’d 
ït  the  head  of  his  Men,  with  his  Pipe  in  his 
Mouth  , and  the  great  Calumet  of  Peace  before 
him.  He  Was  very  attentive  to  the  following  Ha- 
irangue,  pronounc’d  by  our  Interpreters  ; which  ÿou 
îannot  well  underftand,  without  a previous  expliea- 
i tion  of  the  Calumet^  and  the  Golkrs  that  it  mefiti- 

&ÎÏS. 


Some  Kew  Voyages 


The  Calumet  of  Peace  is  made  of  certain  Stones^  ' i 
or  of  Marble,  whether  red,  black,  or  white.  The  |; 
Pipe  or  Stalk  is  four  or  five  foot  long  ; the  body  of  ili 
the  Calumet  is  eight  Inches  long,  and  the  Mouth  or  l,i 
Head  in  which  the  Tobacco  is  lodg’d,  is  three  In-  |i 
ches  in  length  ; its  figure  approaches  to  that  of  a 
Hammer.  The  red  Calumets  are  moft  efteem’d.  p 
The  Savages  make  ufe  of  ’em  for  Negotiations  and  i 
State  Affairs,  and  efpecially  in  Voyages;  for  when  i 
they  have  a in  their  hand,  they  go  where  ;i 

they  will  in  fafety.  Tht  Calumet  is  trimm’d  with|i 
yellow,  white,  and  green  Feathers,  and  has  the:l 
lame  efFed  among  the  Savages,  that  the  Flag  of  i 
friendlhip  has  amongft  us  ; for  to  violate  the  Rights  ;i 
of  this  venerable  Pipe,  is  among  them  a flaming 
Crime,  that  will  draw  down  mifehief  upon  their  i 
Nations.  As  for  the  Colkrsy  they  are  certain  fwathes  1 1 
of  two  or  three  Foot  in  length,  and  fix  Inches  in 
breadth;  being  deck’d  with  little  Beads  made  of  a 
certain  fort  of  fiiells  that  they  find  upon  the  Sea  ; 
Ihoar,  between  New- and  Virginia.  Thefe  Beads 
are  round,  and  as  thick  as  a little  Pea;  but  they 
are  twice  as  long  as  a grain  of  Corn  : Their  colour  ; 
is  either  blew  or  white  ; and  they  are  bor’d  thro’  ; 
juft  like  Pearl,  being  run  after  the  fame  manner  ! 
upon  firings  that  lye  fideways  one  to  another.: 
Without  the  intervention  of  thefe  Coliers,  there’s  no  ; 
bufinefs  to  be  negotiated  with  the  Savages  ; for  be- 
ing altogether  unacquainted  with  writing  , they 
make  ufe  of  them  for  Contrats  and  Obligations. 
Sometimes  they  keep  for  an  Age  the  Coliers  that  they 
have  receiv’d  from  their  Neighbours  ; andinregar4 
that  every  Colkr  has  its  peculiar  Mark,  they  learn  ; 
from  the  old  Perfons,  the  Circumftances  of  the  time , 
and  place  in  which  they  were  deliver’d  ; but  after 
that  age  is  over,  they  are  made  ufe  of  for  new 
Treaties,  : 


to  North- kmçïkti* 

! Mr.  de  la  Barrels  Harangue^  was  to  this  purpofe. 

, * The  King,  my  Mafter,  being  inform’d  that  the 
five  Iroqmfe  Nations  have  for  a long  time  made 
!*  infradlions  upon  the  meafures  of  Peace,  order’d 
me  to  come  hither  with  a Guard,  and  to  fend 
Akoueptn  to  ths  Cmton  oi  the  Onnotagmsy  in  order 
to  an  Interview  with  their  principal  Leaders,  in 
i*  the  Neighbourhood  of  my  Camp,  This  great 
1'  Monarch  means,  that  you  and  I Ihould  fmoak  to- 
gether  in  the  great  Calumet  of  Peace , with  the 
Provifb,  that  you  ingage  in  the  name  of  the 
f Tfonnontouansy  Goyoguans,Onnotagues,  Onnoyoutes,  and 
I'  Agnies^  to  make  reparation  to  his  Subje<fts,  and  to 
j be  guilty  of  nothing  for  the  future,  that  may  oc- 
f cafion  a fatal  rupture. 

\ ‘ The  TfmnontouanSf  Goyogouans,  Onmtagnesy  Omoy^ 

outes  and  Agnies,  have  ftrip’d,  rob’d,  and  abus’d 
^ all  the  For  eft- Rangers,  that  travel’d  in  the  way 
E'  of  Trade  to  the  Country  of  the  Illinefe,  of  the 
^ Oumamis,  and  of  feveral  other  Nations,  who  are 
t'  my  Matter’s  Children.  Now  this  ufage  being  in 
’ high  violation  of  the  Treaties  of  Peace  concluded 
i ' with  my  Predeceflbr , I am  commanded  to  de- 
' mand  Reparation,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  de- 
’ dare,  that  in  calb  of  their  refufal  to  comply  with 
! ' my  demands,  or  of  relapfing  into  the  like  Robbe- 
ries,  War  is  pofitively  proclaim’d. 

1 1 ' This  Colier  mahes  my  words  good, 

\l  ■ The  Warrioursof  thefefive  Nations  have  intro- 
; ; • duc’d  the  E»glijh  to  the  Lakes,  belonging  to  the 
King  my  Mafter,  and  into  the  Country  of  thofe 
] I'  Nations  to  vvhom  my  Mafter  is  a Father  : This 
ll'they  have  done  with  a defign  to  mine  theCom- 
V I merce  of  his  Subjeds,  and  to  oblige  thefe  Nati- 
Î;'  ons  to  depart  from  their  due  Allegiance  j not* 
I'  withftanding  the  Remonftrancçs  of  the  late  Go- 

D 3 * vernpr 


5 8 Same  N.ew  Voyages 

* vernor  of  New-Tork,  who  faw  thro  the  danger  that  I 
^ both  they  and  the  E«gli(h  expos’d  themfelves  to.  j 
^ At  prefent  I am  willing  to  forget  thoie  Aâions  j I 

but  if  ever  you  be  guilty  of  the  like  for  the  futurç,  | 
‘ I have  exprefs  orders  to  declare  War.  | 

This  CoHer  warrants  tny  Words.  ! 

! 

‘The  fame  Warriours  have  made  lèverai  barba-  I 
‘ rpus  Incurfions  upon  the  Country  of  the  Hlinefe^  | 

* and  the  Oumamü.  They  have  maflacred  Men,  | 
‘ Women,  and  ChUdren  ; they  have  took,  bound,  i 
f and  carried  off  an  infinite  number  of  the  Natives  j 

* of  thofe  Countries,  who  thought  themfelves  fe-  i 

‘ cure  in  their  Villages  in  a time  of  Peace.  Thelè  i 
^ÎPeopIeare  my  Mailer’s  Children,  and  therefore  j 
‘ muft  hereafter  ceafe  to  be  your  Slaves.  I charge  i 
f you  to  reftore  ’em  to  their  Liberty,  and  to  fend  . 
‘ ’em  home  without  delay  ; for  if  the  five  Nations  i 
‘ refufe  to  comply  with  this  demand,  I have  express  | 
f order^  to  declare  War.  j 

This  Colier  makes  my  words  good.  ' 

‘ This  is  all  I had  to  fay  to  the  Grangula,  whom  j 
‘ I defire  to  report  to  the  five  Nations,  this  De-  ; 
? datation,  that  my  Mafter  commanded  me  to  | 
‘make.  He  v/ilhes  they  had  not  oblig’d  him  to  | 
‘ fend  a potent  Army  to  the  Fort  of  ! 
French  * * Cataracouy,  in  order  to  carry  on  a i 
It  Fort  { pcQyg  fatal  to  them  ; | 

ron  enac.  < mUCh  troubled, 

‘ if  it  lb  falls  out,  that  this  Fort  which  is  a worH  ! 

* of  Peace,  muft  be  imploy’d  for  a Prifon  to  your  | 

* Militia.  Thefe  mifchiefs  ought  to  be  prevented* 

* by  mutual  endeavours;  The  French  who  are  the, 

^ Brethren  and  Friends  of  the  five  Nations,  will 
‘ never  difturb  their  Repofe;  provided  they  make 
‘ die  fatisfadion  I now  demand,  and  prove  religi- 
i ous  obferyersof  their  Treaties.  I wilh  my  words, 


to  America. 

* may  produce  the  defir’d  effed  ; for  if  they  do  not, 
‘ I am  oblig’d  to  joyn  the  Governor  of  New-rorj6, 
‘ who  has  orders  from  the  King  his  Mafter,  to  af- 
‘ fift  me  to  burn  the  five  Villages,  and  cut  you  off 

Tills  Colier  confirms  my  "word, 

‘ While  Mr.  de  la  Barrel  Interpreter  pronounc’d 
this  Harangue,  the  Grangula  did  nothing  but  look’d 
upon  the  end  of  his  Pipe  : After  the  Speech  was 
finilh’d  he  rofe,  an^  having  took  five  or  fix  turns 
in  the  Ring  that  the  French  and  the  Savages  made, 
he  return’d  to  his  place  , and  Handing  upright 
fpoke  after  the  following  manner  to  the  General, 
who  fat  in  his  Chair  of  State. 

‘ * Onnontio,  I honour  you,  and  all  ^rhisTitU  they 
'the  Warriors  that  accompany  me  do  to  the  Go~ 
^ the  fame:  Your  Interpreter  has  made  0/ Canada. 

' an  end  of  his  Difcourfe , and  now 
' I come  to  begin  mine.  My  Voice  glides  to  your 
' Ear,  pray  liften  to  my  words. 

' Onnontioy  in  fetting  out  from  Quebec,  you  muff 

* needs  have  fancy’d  that  the  fcorching  Beams  oÇ 
' the  Sun  had  burnt  down  the  Forefis  which  render 
' our  Country  unacceffible  to  the  French  ; or  elfe 
' that  the  Inundations  of  the  Lake  had  furrounded 
' our  Cottages,  and  confin’d  us  asPrifoners.  This 
‘ certainly  was  your  thought  ; and  it  could  be  no^- 
' thing  elfe  but  the  curiofity  of  feeing  a burnt  or 
' drown’d  Country,  that  mov’d  you  to  undertake  a 
'Journey  hither.  But  now  you  have  an  opportu- 

* nityof  being  undeceiv’d,  for  I and  my  warlike 
' Retinue  come  to  affure  you,  that  the  7(onontomns, 
' Gcyogamns,  Onnontagues,  Onnoyoutes  and  Agnies,  are 
' not  yet  deftrcy’d.  I return  you  thanks  in  the'ir 
/ name,  for  bringing  into  their  Country  the 

' met  of  Peace,  that  your  Predeceffor  receiv^'d  from 

* thfirh^nd§.  At  thç  fame  time  1 congratulate  your 

P 4 * Happinefs, 


4P  Some  New  Voyages 

. ^ Happinefs,  in  having  left  under  Ground 

IxFiknifZ  * ^ fhat  has  been  fo  of- 

Peiice.  * ten  dy’d  with  the  blood  of  the  French. 

• J muii  tell  you,  Onmntio,  I am  not  a- 
‘ fleep,  my  Eyes  are  open  ; and  the  Sun  that  vouch- 

* fafes  the  light,  gives  me  a clear  view  of  a great 
^ Captain  at  the  head  of  a Troop  of  Soldiers,  who 
‘ fpeaks  as  if  he  were  afleep.  He  pretends  that  he 

* do’s  not  approach  to  this  Lake  with  any  other 

* view,  than  to  fmoak  with  the  Onnotagues  in  the 
‘ great  Calumet  ; but  the  Grangula  knows  better 
^ things,  he  fees  plainly  that  the  OnnoMio  mean’d  to 

' knock  ’em  on  the  Head,  if  the  French  Arms  h?d  - 
‘ iiot  been  fo  much  weaken’d. 

‘I  perceive  that  the  Oww£)»no  raves  in  a Gamp  of 
' Ock  People,  v^hofe  lives  the  great  Spirit  has  fav’d  ' 

* by  vifiting  them  with  Infirmities.  Do  you  hear, 

‘ Onnentio,  our  Women  had  took  up  their  Clubbs  j 

* and  the  Children  and  the  old  Men,  had  vifited 
‘ your  Camp  with  their  Bows  and  Arrows,  if  our 

* Warlike  Men  had  not  ftop’d  and  difarm ’d  ’em, 

* when  JkoHejJan  your  AmbalTadour  appear’d  before 

* my  Village.  But  I have  done.  I’ll  talk  no  more  . 
I of  that. 

‘You  muft know,  Onmntio,  we  have  robb’d  no 

* French- Mm,  but  thofe  who  fupply’d  the  7//i»e/è  and 
‘ ûitOumamis  (our  Enemies)  with  Fufees,with  Pow- 

* der,  and  with  Ball  : Tiiefe  indeed  we  took  care 
‘ of,  becaufe  fuch  Arms  might  have  coft  us  our  life. 

‘ Our  Condud  in  that  point  is  of  a piece  with  that 

of  the  Jefuits,  who  ftaveallthe  barrelsof  Brandy 

* that  are  brought  to  our  Cantons,  left  the  People 

* getting  drunk  Ihould  knock  them  in  the  Head., 

* Our  Warriours  have  no  Beavers  to  give  in  ex- 
change  for  all  the  Arms  they  take  from  th^French  ; 

* and  as  for  the  old  fuperannuated  People,  they  do,  | 

S po*  think  of  bearing  Arms.  i 


to  Nortf7  h.mcnc£  41 


This  Golier  comprehends  my  word. 

* We  have  conduced  the  Engli^s  to  * ^-^«7  pretend 

* our  * Lakes,  in  order  to  traffick  with 

‘ the  Outaouasy  and  the  Hurons  ; juft  as  ® ^ ® '* 

^ the  Algonkins  conduced  the  French  to  our  five  Can- 
‘ tons,  in  order  to  carry  on  a Commerce  that  the  Eng- 

* Ujh  lay  claim  to  as  their  Right.  We  are  born  Free- 
‘ men,  and  have  no  dépendance  either  upon  the 
^ Onnontio  or  thef  Cer/<?r.  We  have  a 

‘ power  to  go  where  we  pleafe,  to  con- 

* dud  who  we  will  to  the  places  we  re-  Governor  of 
' fort  to,  and  to  buy  and  fell  where  New-Yotk. 

‘ we  think  fit.  If  your  Allies  are  your 

^ Slaves  or  Children,  you  may  e’en  treat  ’em  as 
‘ fuch,  and  rob  ’em  of  the  liberty  of  entertaining 
‘ any  ocher  Nation  but  your  own. 

This  Colier  contains  my  word. 

'We  fell  upon  the  iRineÇe  and  the  Oumamis,  be- 
' caufe  they  cut  down  the  trees  of  Peace  that  ferv’d 
‘ for  limits  or  boundaries  to  our  Frontiers.  They 
' came  to  hunt  Beavers  upon  our  Lands  j and  èon- 
' trary  to  the  cuftom  of  all  the  Savages,  have  car- 
‘ried  off  whole  Stocks,  ||  both  Male 
‘ and  Female.  They  have  ingag’d  the 
' Chaouanons  in  their  intereft,  and  en-  a capital 
‘ tercain’d  ’em  in  their  Country.  They  Crime  to  de- 
' fupply’d  ’em  with  Fire-Arms,  after 
‘ the  concerting  of  ill  defigns  againft  us.  sakZnt!^ 
'We  have  done  lefs  than  the  Eng-' 

' lijh  and  the  French,  who  without  any  right,  have 
‘ ufurp’d  the  Grounds  they  are  now  poffefs’d  of  j 
' and  of  which  they  have  diflodg’d  feveral  Nations, 
' in  order  to  make  way  for  their  building  of  Cities, 
; Villages,  and  Forts, 

Thk 


4^ 


Some  ISlew  Voyages 

This  Colier  contains  my  word. 


^ * I give  you  to  know,  Onnontio,  that  my  Voice  .] 

* is  the  Voice  of  the  five  Iroquefe  Cantons.  This  is  ■: 

^ their  Anfwer,  pray  incline  your  Ear,  and  liften  to  ^ 
' what  they  reprefent.  . 

‘ The  Tfonontomnsy  Goyogouansy  Onnontagues,  Onnoy- 

* outes,  and  Agnies  declare,  that 

* Interring  the  Axe,  ‘ they  interr’d  * the  hXQ  a.tCata~  I 

ftgmfies  the  waktngef  c the  prefcncc  of  your  I 

ging  of  it  up  importe  Predeceffor,  m the  very  center  | 
a Declaration  of  War.  ' of  the  Fort  J and  planted  the  I 

* Tree  of  Peace  in  the  fame  place, 

^ that  it  might  be  carefully  preferv’d  ; that  ’twas  | 

* then  (iipulated,  that  the  Fort  fiiould  be  us’d  as  a | 

* place  of  retreat  for  Merchants,  and  not  a refuge  3 
‘ for  Soldiers  ; and  that  inftead  of  Arms  and  Am- 

* munition,  it  fiiould  be  made  a Receptacle  of  only 
‘ Beaver-Skins, and  Merchandize  Goods.  Be  it  known 

‘ to  you,  Onmntio,  that  for  the  future  you  ought  to  ; 

* take  care,  that  fo  great  à number  of  Martial-Men  • ^ 

* as  I now  fee,  being  fiiut  up  in  fo  fmall  a Fort,  do  I 
‘not  ftifle  and  choak  the  Tree  of  Peace.  Since  it  f 

* took  Rootfo  eafily,  it  muft  needs  be  of  pernicious  ! 
‘ confequence  to  flop  its  growth,  and  hinder  it  to  ■ ' 

* fiiade  both  your  Country  and  ours  with  its  Leaves,  | ■ 

‘ 1 do  afiure  you,  in  the  name  of  the  five  Nations,  î ; 
‘ that  our  Warriours  fiiall  dance  the  Dance 

‘under  its  branches;  that  they  fiiall  reft  inTran- 

‘ quility  upon  their  f Matts,  and  , 
fThie  Vhrafe  fgm-  < j^gygr  dig  up  the  Axe  to  cut 
fies  eeping  t e eace.  f Tree  of  Peace  ; till 

‘ fucli  time  as  the  Onmntio  and  the  Corlar,  do  ei-  | 

* thcr  joyntly  or  feparately  offer  to  invade  the  | 
‘ Country,  that  the  great  Spirit  has  difpos’d  of  in  ] 
‘ the  favour  of  our  Ançeftors. 


\ 


?. 


tf 


to  Nori/;  America, 


45 


^hîs  Golier  contains  my  "morà  ; ani  the  other  compre- 
hends the  power  granted  to  me  by  the  five  Na- 
tions. 

Then  the  Grangula  addrefs’d  himfelf  to  Mr.  îe 
Moine,  and  fpoke  to  this  purpofe. 

‘ 4koueJfan,  take  Heart,  you  are  a Man  of  Senfe  ; 
‘ {peak  and  explain  my  meaning  j be  fure  you  for- 

* get  nothing,  but  decIareaH  that  thy  Brethren  and 

* thy  Friends  reprelent  to  thy  chief  Onnontio,  by  the 
^ voice  of  the  Grangula,  who  pays  you  all  Honour 

* and  Refped,  and  invites  you  to  accept  of  this  Pre- 
fent  of  Beavers,  and  to  aflift  at  his  Feaft  imme- 

f diately. 

‘ This  ether  Prefent  of  Beavers  is  fent  by  the  five 

* Nations  to  the  Onnontio. 

As  foon  as  the  Grangula  had  done,  Mr.  It  Moine 
j and  the  Jefuits  that  were  prefent,  explain’d  his  an- 
fwer  to  Mr.  delà  Barre,  who  thereupon  retir’d  to  his 
Tent  and  ftorm’d  and  blufter’d,  till  fome  body 
came  and  reprefcnted  to  him,  that,  Iroca  Progenies 
pefcit  habere  modos,  i.  e.  The  Iroquefe  are  always  upon 
extreams.  The  Grangula  danc’d  after  the  Iroijuefe 
manner,  by  way  of  prelude  to  his  Entertainment  ; 
after  which  he  regal’d  feveralof  the  Fremh.  Two 
days  after  he  and  his  Martial-  Retinue  return’d  to 
their  own  Country , and  our  Army  fet  out  for 
Monreal.  As  foon  as  the  General  was  on  board,  to- 
I gether  with  the  few  healthy  Men  that  remain’d, 
the  Canows  were  difpers’d,  for  the  Militia  ftragled 
here  and  there,  and  every  one  made  the  beft  of 
I his  way  home.  Our  three  Companies  indeed 
kept  together,  becaufe  all  of  us,  both  Officers  and 
Soldiers,  were  carried  in  flat-bottom’d  Boats,  made 
of  Deal  on  purpofe  for  our  ufe.  However,  I could 
|?ave  wiih’d  to  have  run  dpvvn  the  fall^  and  Cata- 


44  "Kew  Voyages 

raâs  in  the  fame  Canow  that  brought  mé  up,  for 
every  body  thought  we  fhould  have  been  caft  a- 
way  at  thefb  Paffes,  which  are  full  of  Eddy’s  and 
Rocks  ; and  ’twas  never  heard  before,  that  fuch  Pre- 
cipices were  pals’d  with  Deal  Boats  either  upwards  or 
downwards.  But  we  were  forc’d  to  run  ali  hazards, 
and  had  certainly  been  fwallow’d  up  in  thofe  Moun- 
tains of  Water,  if  we  had  not  oblig’d  feveral  Ca- 
nowsto  /hoot  the  Cataraélsat  the  head  of  our  Boars, 
in  order  to  /hew  us  the  way  ; at  the  fame  time  we 
had  prepar’d  our  Soldiers  for  rowing,  and  /hieving 
upon  occafion.  Do  but  confider.  Sir,  that  the  Cur- 
rents run  as  faft  as  a Cannon  Ball  ; and  that  or  e 
falfeftroak  of  the  Oar,  would  have  run  us  unavoid- 
ably upon  the  Rocks  j for  we  are  oblig’d  to  fte-r  a 
Zig-zag  courfe  purfuant  to  the  thread  of  the  Stream, 
which  has  fifty  windings.  The  Boati  wh;ch  are 
loaded  are  fometimes  lo/f  in  thofe  places.  But  after 
all,  tho’  therifque  we  run  he  very  g'^ear,  ; et  by 
way  of  Compenfation,  one  has  the  fatisfa<S:ion  of 
running  a great  way  in  a little  time  ; for  we  run 
from  Gakte  to  this  Town  in  two  days  time,  not- 
with/ianding  that  we  crofs’d  the  two  ttagnating  Lakes 
I took  notice  of  before. 

As  foon  as  we  landed,  we  receiv’d  arivxe  that 
Chevalier  de  Callieresvja.5  corns  to  fcppiy  the  ’’oom 
of  Mr.  Perrotj  the  Governor  of  this  place,  jvi. 
rot  has  had  feveral  fcufiles  with  Mi.  de  FmitenM^  and 
Mr.  de  la  Barre  ; of  which  you  may  expert  a far- 
ther account,  when  I am  better  inform’d.  A.;  . .e 
World  blames  our  General  for  his  bad  i : 
’Tis  talk’d  publickly,  that  his  only  defign  .vas  to 
cover  the  fending  of  feveral  Canowsto  tra/fickwith 
the  Savages  in  thofe  Lakes  for  Beaver-Skins.  The 
People  here  are  very  bufie  in  wafting  over  to  Court 
a thoufand  Calumnies  againft  him  ; both  the  Cler- 
gy and  the  Gentlemen  of  the  long  Robe,  write  in 
his  difad  vantage.  Tho’  after  alL  thg  whole  charge  is 

falfe  Î 


to  America.  4f 

falfe  ; for  the  poor  Man  could  do  no  more  than  he 
did.  Juft  now,  I was  inform’d  that  Mr.  Hainmt, 
Mr.  Montortier^  and  Mr.  Durivau,  three  Captains  of 
Ships,  are  arriv’d  at  Quelfec,  with  a defign  to  pais 
i the  Winter  there,  and  to  affift  him  as  Counlèüors  ; 

and  that  the  laftof  thefe  three  has  brought  with  him 
: an  Independent  Company,  to  be  commanded  by 
I himfelf. 

I ftiall  have  no  opportunity  of  writing  again  be- 
fore the  next  Spring  j for  the  laft  Ships  that  are  to 
, return  for  France  this  year,  are  now  ready  to  fail. 

J af»f  S I Rf  TourSy  &C. 


LETTER  Vm. 

Dated  at  Monreal,  June  28.  i68j. 

? Reprefenting  the  Fortifications  of  Monreal,  and 
the  indijcreet  Zeal  of  the  Vriefls  ^ who  are 
Lords  of  that  Town  : With  a Defcription  of 
I Chambli,  and  of  the  Commerce  of  the  Savages 
■ upon  the  great  Lakes. 

SIR, 

\ T Have  juft  receiv’d  yours,  by  a fmall  Vefîèl  of 
i J,  Bourdeaux  loaded  with  Wine  ; which  is  the  firft 
that  came  to  Quebec  this  Year.  I am  mightily  pleas’d 
to  hear  that  the  King  has  granted  to  Mr.  de  la  Salk 
four  Ships,  to  go  upon  the  Difcovery  of  the  Mouth 
of  the  Mijfififi  ; and  cannot  but  admire  your  Curio- 
fity,  in  defiring  to  know  the  Occurrences  of  this 
Place,  and  how  1 {pent  my  time  in  the  Winter. 

Mr.  de  Callieres  was  no  (boner  polTefs’d  of  his  Go- 
vernment, than  he  order’d  all  the  Inhabitants  of  this 
Town,  and  of  the  adjacent  Country,  to  cut  down 
and  bring  in  great  Stakes,  of  fifteen  Foot  in  length. 


Some  ISlew  Voyages  | 

to  fortifie  the  Town.  During  the  Winter,  thefeOrà 
ders  were  purfued  with  fo  much  Application^  that 
all  things  are  now  ready  for  making  the  Inclofurej 
in  which  five  or  fix  hundred  Men  are  to  be  imploy’d. 

I {pent  part  of  the  Winter  in  Hunting  with  the  Ah^  1 
gonkinsy  in  order  to  a more  perfe<5l  knowledge  of  i 
their  Language  j and  the  tell  I (pent  in  this  Place, 
with  a great  deal  of  uneafinefs  : for,  here  we  can- 
not enjoy  our  felves,  either  at  Play,  or  in  vifiting 
the  Ladies,  but  ’tis  prefently  carried  to  the  Cu- 
rate’s ears,  who  takes  pubiick  notice  of  it  in  the 
Pulpit.  Kis  Zeal  goes  fo  far,  as  even  to  name 
the  Peifons  : and  fince  he  refules  the  Sacrament  of 
the  Holy  Supper  to  Ladies  of  Quality,  upon  the  moil 
{lender  Pretences,  you  may  eafily  gue{s  at  the  other  ^ 
fteps  of  his  indiferetion.  You  cannot  imagine  to 
what  a pitch  thefe  Ecclefiaiiical  Lords  have  ferew’d  ! 
their  Authority:  They  excommunicate  all  the  ' 
Masks,  and  wherever  they  fpy  ’em,  they  run  after  ' 
’em  to  uncover  their  Faces,  and  abule  ’em  in  a re-  ' 
proachful  manner  : In  fine,  they  have  a more  watch-  ‘ 
fill  eye  over  the  Conduft  of  the  Girls  and  married  | 
Women,  than  their  Fathers  and  Husbands  have,  f 
They  cry  out  againft  thole  that  do  not  receive  the  1'^ 
Sacrament  once  a Month  j and  at  Eafier  they  oblige  j* 
all  forts  of  Perfons  to  give  in  Bills  to  their  CodfelTors.  1“ 
They  prohibit  and  burn  all  the  Books  that  treat  of  |* 
any  other  Subjed  but  Devotion.  When  I think  of 
this  Tyranny,  I cannot  but  be  inrag’d  at  the  imper- 
tinent Zeal  of  the  Curate  of  this  City.  This  inhu-  * 
mane  Fellow  came  one  day  to  my  Lodging,  and 
finding  the  Romance  of  the  Adventures  of  Petronita  P 
upon  my  Table,  he  fell  upon  it  with  an  unimagina-  ® 

ble  fury,  and  tore  out  almofl:  all  the  Leaves.  This  if 

Book  1 valued  more  than  my  Life,  beeaule  ’twas  not  P 
caftratedj  and  indeed  I was  fo  provok’d  when  I faW  •! 
it  all  in  wrack,  that  if  my  Landlord  had  not  held  i ^ 
me,  I had  gone  immediately  to  that  turbulent  Pa-  I 'i 

fior’ÿ  I 


i to  l^onh  Amcxks.,  47 

ftor’s  Houfe,  and  would  have  pluck’d  out  the  Hairs 
of  his  Beard  with  as  little  mercy  as  he  did  the  Leaves 
of  my  Book.  Thcfe  Animals  cannot  content  them- 
! felves  with  the  ftudying  of  Mens  Adions,  but  they 
• muft  likewife  dive  into  their  Thoughts.  By  this 
; Sketch,  Sir,  you  may  judge  what  a pleafant  Life  we 
lead  here. 

The  50th  of  the  laft  March  the  Ice  melted  ; and 
Î the  River  being  then  open,  I was  fent  with  a fmall 
ÿ Detachment  to  Chambli  : for  commonly  the  Sun  re- 
( fumes  its  Vigour  here  much  about  that  time.  Cham- 
X bit  Bands  on  the  brink  of  a Bafin,  about  five  or  fix 
Î Leagues  off  this  Place  : That  Bafin  is  two  Leagues  in 
i Circumference,  and  receives  the  Lake  of  Champlain 
i by  a Water-fall  that  is  a League  and  a half  in  length  ; 

Îout  of  which  there  arifes  a River  that  difembogues  at 
Sorel  into  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  as  I intimated  a- 
ibove  in  my  fourth  Letter.  In  former  timet  this 
* Place  had  a great  Trade  in  Beaver-skins,  which  is 
jnow  decay’d:  for  the  Soccokü,  the  Mahlngans,  and 
i the  Openangos,  us’d  formerly  to  refort  thither  in  fhoals, 
Ato  exchange  their  Furs  for  other  Goods  ; but  at  pre- 
dfent  they  are  retir’d  to  the  English  Colonies,  to  avoid 
3 the  purfuit  of  the  Iro^uefe.  The  Champlain  Lake, 
1 which  lies  above  that  Water- fall,  is  eighty  Leagues  in 
circumference.  At  the  end  of  this  Lake  we  met  with 
another.  Call’d  S.  Sacrement,  by  which  one  may  go 
very  eafily  to  New-Tcrk, thete  being  but  a Land-carri- 
age of  two  Leagues  from  thence  to  the  River  Du  Per, 
which  falls  into  the  Manathe.  While  I was  at  Cham- 
Mi,  I f^w  two  Canows  loaded  with  Beaver-skins  pafs 
' privately  by  that  way  j and  ’twas  thought  they  were 
fent  thither  by  Mr.  de  la  Barre.  This  fmuggling  way 
of  Trade  is  exprefly  prohibited:  for  they  are  oblig’d 
. to  carry  thefe  Skins  before  the  Office  of  the  Compa- 
ny, w'here  théy  are  rated  at  an  Hundred  and  6o  per 
Cent,  lefs  than  the  Englijh  buy  ’em  at  in  their  Colo- 
nies. But  the  little  Fort  that  Bands  at  the  bottom 

of 


48  Some  New  Voydges 

of  the  Water-fall,  upon  the  brink  of  the  Bafin 
Chambli,  being  only  fingle  Pallifadocs,  it  cannot  hin 
der  People  to  pafs  that  way  j efpecially  confiderin 
that  the  Profpeâ:,  of  fo  great  a profit,  renders  th 
PalTengers  the  more  daring.  The  Inhabitants  of  the 
adjacent  Villages  are  very  much  expos’d  to  the  Incur 
fions  of  the  Iroejuefe  in  time  of  War.  Notwithftand- 
ing  the  weaknefs  of  the  Fort,  I continued  in  that 
place  a Month  and  a half,  and  then  I return’d  hither, 
where  Mr.  de  la  Bane  arriv’d  fome  days  after  ; being 
accompany’d  with  Mr.  Hennaut,  Mr.  Montorti'&r^  anc 
Mr.  du  Rivau.  Much  about  the  fame  day  there  ar- 
riv’d or  ;o  Canows,  belonging  to  the  Coureurs  de 
Bûüy  being  homeward  bound  from  the  great  Lakes, 
and  laden  with  Beaver-skins.  The  Cargo  of  each 
Ganow  amounted  to  40  Packs,  each  of  which  weighs 
yo  pound,  and  will  fetch  yo  Crowns  at  the  Farmers 
Office.  Thefe  Canows  were  follow’d  by  yo  more 
of  the  Outaouas  and  Hurons,  who  come  down  every 
Year  to  the  Colony,  in  order  to  make  a better  Mar 
ket  than  they  can  do  in  their  own  Country  of  Mijji- 
limakinacy  which  lies  on  the  Banks  of  the  Lake  of 
Hurons  y at  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  the  lllmfe. 
Their  way  of  Trading  is  as  follows. 

Upon  their  firft  Arrival,  they  incamp  at  the  di- 
fiance  of  five  or  fix  hundred  Paces  from  the  Town 
The  next  day  is  fpent  in  ranging  their  Canows,  un- 
loading their  Goods,  and  pitching  their  Tents,  which 
are  made  of  Birch  Bark.  The  next  day  after,  they  (t 
demand  Audience  of  the  Governour  General  j which  Î® 
is  granted  ’em  that  fame  day  in  a publick  place.  Up- 
on this  Occafion,  each  Nation  makes  a Ring  for  it 
felf;  the  Savages  fit  upon  the  Ground  with  their  Pipes 
in  their  Mouths,  and  the  Governour  is  feated  in  an 
arm’d  Chair  ; after  which,  there  ftarts  up  an  Orator 
or  Speaker  from  one  of  thefe  Nations,  who  makes 
an  Harangue,  importing,  ‘ That  his  Brethren  are 
‘ come  to  vifit  the  Governour  general,  and  to  renew 

‘ wjtbl 


* 


to  KTor^^-Amêrici.’ 


With  him  their  wonted  Friendihip  : That  their  chief 
View  is,  to  promote  the  Intereft  of  the  French^  fome 
of  whom  being  unacquainted  with  the  way  of 
Traffick,  and  being  too  Weak  for  the  tranfporting 
of  Goods  from  the  Lakes,  would  be  unable  to  deal 
in  Beaver-skins,  if  his  Brethren  did  not  come  itt 
perfon  to  deal  with  ^em  in  their  own  Colonies? 

! That  they  know  very  well  how  acceptable  their 
I Arrival  is  to  the  Inhabitants  oïMonreal^  in  regard  of 
I the  Advantage  they  reap  by  it  : That  in  regard  thâ 
i Beaver- skins  are  much  valued  in  France^  and  the 
. French  Goods  given  in  exchange  are  of  an  inconli- 
'j  derable  Value,  they  mean  to  give  the  French  fuffici» 
ijl  ent  proof  of  their  readinefs  to  furnilh  ’em  with 
^ what  they  defire  fo  earneftly  : That  by  way  of  pre- 
IÎ  paration  for  another  Years  Cargo,  they  are  come 
^ to  take  in  Exchange,  Fufees,  Powder,  and  Ball^ 
5 in  order  to  hunt  great  numbers  of  Beavers,  or  to 
y gall  the  Iroquefe,  in  cafe  they  offer  to  difiurb  thes 
f,  French  Settlements  : And,  in  fine.  That  in  eonfir- 
; mation  of  their  Words,  they  throw  a Purcelain 
{Colter  with  fome  Beaver-skins  to  the  Kitchi-OkitnA 
I ( fo  they  call  the  Governour-General  ) whofe  Pro-i 
Itedion  they  lay  cUim  to  in  cafe  of  any  Robbery  of 
j,  Abufe  committed  upon  ’em  in  the  Town. 

The  Spokefman  having  made  an  end  of  his 
peech,  returns  to  his  Place,  and  takes  up  his  Pipe; 
■1,  nd  then  the  Interpreter  explains  the  Subftance  of 
j.  |ie  Harangue  to  the  Governour,  who  commonly 
] ives  a very  civil  Anfwer,  efpecially  if  the  Prefent 
.evaluable:  in  confideration  of  which,  be  likewifè 
ÿ lakes  them  a Prefent  of  fome  trifling  things.  Thil 
■fipnC)  the  Savages  rife  up,  and  return  to  their  Hutts 
y,>  make  fuitable  Preparations  for  the  enfuing  Truck# 
•j,;  The  next  day  the  Savages  make  their  Slaves  carry 
jj  le  Skins  to  the  Houfes  of  the  Merchants,  who  bar« 
.jj  .iin  with  ’em  for  fuch  Cloaths  as  they  want.  All  thi 
ihabitants  of  Mowed  are  allow’d  to  traffick  witll 
j ■ Ê. 


5^ 


Some  îiew  Voyages 


’em  in  any  Commodity  but  Wine  and  Brandy  j thefc! 
two  being  excepted  upon  the  account  that  whenl 
the  Savages  have  got  what  they  wanted,  and  have  a- 
ny  Skins  left,  they  drink  to  excefs,  and  then  kill 
their  Slaves;  for  when  they  are  in  drink,  they  quaif 
rel  and  fight  ; and  if  they  were  not  held  by  thoftj 
who  are  lober,  wou’d  certainly  make  Havock  one' 
of  another.  However,  you  muft  obferve,  that  none^ 
of  ’em  will  touch  either  Gold  or  Silver.  ’Tis  a co- 
mical fight,  to  fee  ’em  running  from  Shop  to  Shop, 
ftark  naked,  with  their  Bow  and  Arrow.  The  ni- 
cer fort  of  Women  are  wont  to  hold  their  Fans  be- 
fore their  eyes,  to  prevent  their  being  frighted  with! 
the  view  of  their  ugly  Parts.  But  thefe  merry  Com-! 
panions,  who  know  the  brisk  She-Merchants  as  well! 
as  we,  are  not  wanting  in  making  an  Offer,  which! 
is  fometimes  accepted  of,  when  the  Prefen  t is  oil 
good  Mettle.  If  we  may  credit  the  common  Reporti 
there  are  more  than  one  or  two  of  the  Ladies  of  this 
Country,  whofe  Conftancy  and  Vertuc  has  held  out 
againft  the  Attacks  of  feveral  Officers,  and  at  the! 
fame  time  vouchfaf’d  a free  accefs  to  thefe  nafty 
Lechers.  ’Tis  prefum’d  their  Compliance  was  the! 
Effed  of  Curiofity,  rather  than  of  any  nice  Relilh  j 
for,  in  à word,  the  Savages  are  neither  brisk,  nor 
confiant.  But  whatever  is  in  the  matter,  the  Wo- 
men are  the  more  excufabie  upon  this  Head,  thatj 
fuch  Opportunities  are  very  unfrequcnt.  | 

As  foon  as  the  Savages  have  made  an  end  of  their; 
Truck,  they  take  leave  of  the  Governour,  and  fo  re-; 
turn  home  by  the  River  of  Outaouas.  To  conclude,! 
they  did  a great  deal  of  good  both  to  the  Poor  and 
Rich  ; for  you  will  readily  apprehend,  that  everyj 
body  turns  Merchant  upon  fuch  occafions. 


lat^j  SIRf  Towrtf  &c. 


LETTER 


to  Ho/z/p'America. 


LETTER  IX. 

Dated  at  BoHchertiUIe,  O(5lob.  z.  léSf. 

Being  an  Account  of  the  Commerce  and  Trade  of 
Monreal  ; Of  the  Arrival  of  the  Marquis  of 
Denonville  voith  fome  Troops  ; and  of  the  recal- 
iing  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre.  With  a curious  De~ 
fcription  of  certain  Licenfes  for  Trading  in  Bed^ 
ver'skins  in  the  remote  Countries, 

I SIR, 

I Receiv’d  yotir  fécond  Letter  three  Weeks  ago,  biit 
could  not  fend  a fpeedier  Anfwer,  by  reafbn  that 
none  of  our  Ships  have  yet  fet  Sail  for  France.  Since 
you  want  to  know  the  nature  of  the  Trade  of  Mon-, 
teal,  be  pleas’d  to  take  the  following  Account. 

Almoft  all  the  Merchants  of  that  City  aét  only  on 
the  behalf  of  the  Quebec  Merchants,  whofe  Factors 
they  are.  The  Barques  which  carry  thither  dry 
Commodities,  as  well  as  Wine  and  Brandy,  are  but 
few  in  number;  but  then  they  make  feveral  Voyages 
in  one  Year  from  the  one  City  to  the  other.  The 
iinhabitants  of  the  Ifland  of  Monreal,  and  the  adja-^ 
cent  Cantons,  repair  twice  a Year  to  the  City  of 
Monreal,  where’ they  buy  Commodities  fifty  per  Cent, 
dearer  than  at  Quebec.  The  Savages  of  the  neigh- 
bouring Countries,  whether  fettled  Or  erratick,  Car- 
ry thither  the  Skins  of  Beavers;  Elks,  Caribous,  Po- 
ses, and  wild  Cats  ; all  which,  they  truck  for  Fufee^, 
Powder,  Lead,  and  other  Necelfaries.  There  every 
>ne  is  allow’d  to  trade  ; and  indeed  ’tis  the  bell  placé 
or  the  getting  of  an  Eftate  in  a Ihoft  tirneii  . All  the 
yierchants  have  fueh  a pérféiS  good  nnderftafiding 
>ns  with  Another;  thé'ÿ  gll  fell  ii  the  toil  prfcé, 

È'  i Bïïf 


5 2 Some  New  Voyages 

But  when  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Country  find  theit* 
Prices  exorbitant,  they  raife  their  Commodities  in 
proportion.  The  Gentlemen  that  have  a Charge  of 
Children,  efpecially  Daughters,  are  oblig’d  to  be 
good  Husbands,  in  order  to  bear  the  Expence  of  the 
magnificent  Cloaths  with  which  they  are  fet  ofFj 


for  Pride,  Vanity,  and  Luxury,  reign  as  much  in 


New  France  as  in  Old  France.  In  my  opinion,  ’twould 
do  well,  if  the  King^would  order  Commodities  to 
be  rated  at  a reafonable  Price,  and  prohibit  the  fel- 
ling of  Gold  or  Silver  Brocadoes,  Fringes,  and  Rib- 
bands, as  well  as  Points  and  rich  Laces. 

The  Marquis  of  Denonville  is  come  to  fucceed 
Mr.  de  la  Barre  in  the  quality  of  Governour-General  ; 
for  the  King  has  recall’d  Mr.  de  la  Barre^  upon  the 
Accufations  laid  againft  him  by  his  Enemies.  To  be 
fure,  you  who  are  in  France  know  better  than  I,  that 
Mr.  de  Denonville  was  Maître  de  Camp  to  the  Queen's 
Regiment  of  Dragoons,  which  Place  he  fold  to 
Mr.  Murcey  when  the  King  beftow’d  this  Govern- 
ment upon  him  ; and,  that  he  brought  with  him 
fome  Companies  of  Marines,  befides  his  Lady  and 
his  Children  : for  it  feems  the  danger  and  inconve- 
niencies  that  attend  fuch  a long  and  troubIefome| 
Voyage,  made  no  Imprelîion  upon  her.  This  Go- j® 
■vernour  flay’d  at  firft  fome  Weeks  at  Quebec,  after  ||® 
which  he  came  to  Monreal,  with  çoo  or  600  Menjfi 
©f  Regular  Troops,  and  fent  back  the  Captains  Hat- 
naut,  Adontortkr,  and  du  Rivo,  with  feveral  other  Of- 
ficers. His  Army  is  now  in  Winter  Quarters  all 
round  Monreal.  My  Quarters  are  at  a Place  call’d 
Bturberville,  which  lies  at  the  diftance  of  three  Leagues  L; 
from  Monreal.  I have  been  here  fifteen  Days,  and 
in  all  appearance  fiiall  live  more  happily  than  in  the 
Town,  abating  for  the  Solitude  j for  at  leaft  1 lhall 
have  no  other  oppolition  to  encounter  in  the  cafe  of 
Balls,  Gaming,  or  FealHng,  but  the  zealous  Freaks 
of  a fiily  Prielt.  I am  inform’d,  chat  cheGovernourj 

has 


lit 


to  North  Amtnc£ 


53 


has  given  Orders  to  compleat  the  Fortifications  of 
Monreal,  and  is  now  ready  to  embarque  for 
where  our  Governours  commonly  pafs  the  Winter. 
The  Savages  I fpoke  of  in  my  laft,  met  the  Iroquefe 
upon  the  great  River  of  the  Outaouas,  who  inform’d 
’em  that  the  EngUfli  were  making  Preparations  to 
tranfport  to  their  Villages  in  Miffilimakinac,  better 
and  cheaper  Commodities  than  thofe  they  had  from 
the  French.  This  piece  of  News  did  equally  alarm 
the  Gentlemen , the  Pedlers  call’d  Coureurs  de  Boü, 
and  the  Merchants  j who,  at  that  rate,  would  be 
confiderable  Lofers:  for  you  muft  know,  that  Cana-- 
da  fubfifts  only  upon  the  Trade  of  Skins  or  Furrs, 
three  fourths  of  which  come  from  the  People  that 
live  round  the  great  Lakes  : So  that  if  the  Englijh 
Ihould  put  fuch  a Defign  in  execution,  the  whole 
Country  would  fufFer  by  it  ; erpecially  confidering, 
that  ’twould  fink  certain  Licenfes  : an  Account  of 
>vhich  will  be  proper  in  this  place. 

Thefe  Licenfes  are  granted  in  Writing  by  the  Go- 
vernours General,  to  poor  Gentlemen  and  old  Offi- 
cers who  have  a Charge  of  Children.  They  are  dif- 
jPos’d  of  by  the  King’s  Orders  ; and  the  Defign  of 
’em  is,  to  enable  fuch  Perfons  to  fend  Comrnodities 
to  thele  Lakes.  The  Number  of  the  Perfons  thus 
impower’d,  ought  not  to  exceed  twenty  five  in  one 
Year  : but  God  knows  how  many  more  have  private 
(Licenfes.  All  other  Perfons,  of  what  Quality  or 
Condition  foever,  are  prohibited  to  go  or  fend  to 
thefe  Lakes,  without  fuch  Licenfes,  under  the  pain 
(of  Death.  Each  Licenfe  extends  to  the  lading  of 
rtwo  great  Canowsj  and  whoever  procures  a whole 
v-Dr  a half  Licenfe  for  himfelf,  may  either  make  ufe 
|of  it  himfelf,  or  fell  it  to  the  higheft  Bidder.  Com- 
|:nonly  they  are  bought  at  fix  hundred  Crowns  a - 
èpiece.  Thofe  who  purchafe’em  are  at  no  trouble 
in  finding  Pedlars  or  Foreft- Rangers  to  undertake 
• .‘  :hs  long  Voyages,  which  fetch  the  mofi:  confiderabi^ 

E 5 Gains, 


54  Metp  Vopges  | 

Gains,  and  commonly  extend  to  a Year,  and  fome'^  !' 
times  more.  The  Merchants  put  into  the  two  Ca-  | 
nows  ftipulated  in  the  Licenfe,  (ix  Men  with  a thou-?  i. 
fand  Crowns- worth  of  Goods,  which  are  rated  to  | 
the  Pedlars  at  fifteen  per  Cent,  more  than  what  they 
are  fold  for  in  ready  Money  in  the  Colony.  When  |i 
the  Voyage  is  perform’d,  this  Sum  of  a thoufand  |i 
Crowns  commonly  brings  in  feven  hundred  per  Cent,  j 
clear  profit,  and  foraetimes  more,  fometimes  lefs  ; !j 
for  thefe  Sparks  call’d  Coureur i de  Bois  bite  the  Sava-  ij 
ges  moft  dexteroufly,  and  the  lading  of  two  Ca- 
nows,  computed  ac  a thoufand  Crowns,  is  a Pur- 
chafe  for  as  many  Beaver-skins  as  will  load  four  Ca- 
nows:  Now,  four  Canpws  will  carry  a hundred  and  Î 
fixty  Packs  of  Skins,  that  is,  forty  a-piece;  and  If 
reckoning  each  Pack  to  be  worth  fifty  Crowns,  the  || 
value  of  the  whole  amounts  to  eight  thoufand  | 
Crowns.  As  to  the  Repartition  of  this  extravagant  ,i 
Profit,  ’tis  made  after  the  following  manner  : In  the  li 
firft  place,  the  Merchant  takes  out  of  the  whole  bulk  J 
fix  hundred  Crowns  for  the  Purchafe  of  his  Licenfe;  | 
then  a thoufand  Crowns  for  the  prime  Coft  of  the  i 
exported  Commodities.  After  this,  there  remains  ü 
6400  Crowns  of  Surplufage,  out  of  which  the  Mer-  ' 
chant  takes  (orty  per  Cent,  for  Bottomree,  which  a-  ■ 
mounts  to  2^60  Crowns;  and  the  Remainder  is  di-  \ 
vided  equally  among  the  fix  Coureurs  de  Bois,  who  get  ' ; 
little  more  than  600  Crowns  a-piece  : and  indeed  I 
muft  fay  ’tis  fairly  earn’d  ; for  their  Fatigue  is  in- 
conceivable. In  the  mean  time,  you  muft  remark, 
that  over  and  above  the  foregoing  profit,  the  Mer-  : 
chant  getjs  2 j per  Cent,  upon  his  Beaver- skins  by  car- 
rying them  to  the  Office  of  the  Farmers  General,  i 
where  the  Price  of  four  forts  of  Beaver-skins  is  fix’d.  ' 
If  the  Merchant  fells  thefe  Skins  to  any  private  Man 
in  the  Country  for  ready  Money,  he  is  paid  in  the, 
current  Money  of  the  Country,  which  is  of  lefs  va-  ; 
tuè  than  the  Bills  of  Exchange  that  the  Diredor  of  | 


f 

re 

:y 

is 

at 

r- 

of 

lis 

:b 

/ 

ar 

Id 

3- 

n, 


to  Korth’Ammc^l 


5f 


that  Office  draw's  upon  Rochel  or  Pam;  for  there 
they  are  paid  in  French  Livres,  which  are  twenty 
Sohy  whereas  a Canada  Livre  is  but  fifteen  Soh.  This 
Advantage  of  2 y fer  Cent,  is  call’d  le  Benefice;  but 
I take  notice,  that  ’tis  only  to  be  had  upon  BeaVer- 
i skins  ; for,  if  you  pay  to  a (Quebec  Merchant  400  C<?- 
‘W4!  Livres  in  Silver,  and  take  from  him  a Bill  of 
Exchange  upon  his  Correfpondent  in  France  y his 
— Correfpondent  will  pay  no  more  than  500  French 
Livres,  which  is  a juft  Equivalent. 

This  is  the  laft  Intelligence  I ffiall  give  you  for 
this  Year,  which  has  already  brought  in  a very  cold 
Autumn.  The  Quebec  Ships  muft  fet  Sail  in  the  mid- 
dle of  November j purfuant  to  the  wonted  Cuftom, 
I am, 

S I Ry 

Toarsy  &C. 


LETTER  X, 

Dated  at  Boucherville  July  8. 1686. 

^.elating  the  Arrival  of  Mr.  de  Champigni,  in 
the  room  of  Mr.  de  Meules,  who  is  recall'd  to 
France  ; the  arrival  of  the  Troops  that  came 
along  with  himy  the  curiofity  of  the  RacketSy 
dnd  the  way  of  hunting  Elks  ; vpith  a Pefcrip- 
tion  of  that  Animal, 

SIR, 

T Hough  I have  not  heard  from  you  this  year, 
yet  I will  not  flight  this  opportunity  of  wri- 
ting to  you.  Some  Ships  from  France  are  arriv’d  at 
Quebec^  and  have  bi-pught  over  Mr.  de  Cbamfigm  No- 

E 4 tw.'î 


5^ 


«lit 


0É( 


Some  'Hew  Voyages 

roua,  with  fome  Companies  of  Marines.  He  corne» 
to  fupply  the  place  of  Mr.  de  Meules,  whom  the 
King  recalls  upon  the  unjuft  complaints  that  are 
made  of  him.  He  is  charg’d  with  preferring  his 
private  Intereft  to  the  publick  Good  ; but  the  charge 
is  falfe,  and  he  will  eafily  clear  himfelf.  I am  apt 
to  believe  he  may  have  carry’d  on  fome  under- 
hand Commerce^  but  in  fo  doing  he  injur’d  no  bo- 
dy j nay,  on  the  contrary  he  has  procur’d  Bread 
for  a thoufand  poor  Creatures,  that  without  his  AC- 
ftftance  would  have  ftarv’d  for  Hunger.  This  new 
Intendant  is  defcended  of  one  of  the  moft  Illuftri- 
ous  Families  of  the  Robe  in  France.  He  is  faid  to 
be  a Man  of  Honour,  and  Fame  entitles  his  Lady  to 
a diftinguifhing  Merit  : I underftand,  he  and  Mr. 
jPenonvilie âte  bound  fpeedily  îor  Monreal,  where  they 
mean  to  take  a review  of  the  Inhabitants  of  this  J 
Ifland,  and  of  the  îsJeighbouring  Cantons.  Prcba-  L 
bly,  they  take  fuch  precautions  in  order  to  fome  L 
new  effort  againft  the  Iroefuefe.  Laft  Winter  we  had  |jli 
no  new  Occurrences  in  the  Colony.  I fpent  the  L 
V/hole  Winter  gtthe  hunting  of  Orignals  or  Elks  a-  |« 
long  with  the  Savages,  whole  Language  I am  lear-  'k 


St 

tk 


tm 


ning,  as  Ï have  intimated  to  you  feveral  times 
The  hunting  of  Elks  is  perform’d  upon  the  Snow, 
with  fuch  Rackets  you  fee  defign’d  in  the  annex’d 
Cutt.  Thefe  are  two  Foot  and  a half  long,  | 

and  fourteen  Inches,  broad  ; their  ledges  are  made  | 
of  a very  hard  Wood,  about  an  Inch  thick,  that  \ 
faftens  the  Net  juft  like  a Tennis  Racket,  from 
which  they  differ  only  in  this  ; that  thofe  for  the 
Tennis  are  made  of  Gut-ftrings,  whereas  the  others 
are  made  of  litçle  thongs  of  the  skins  of  Harts  or 
plks,  In  the  Cut,  you  may  perceive  two  little  fpars  |l! 
of  Wood,  which  run  a-crofs  to  render  the  Net  fir- 
mer and  ftiffer.  The  hole  that  appears  by  the  two 
Ratchets,  is  the  place  in  whicli  they  put  the  Toes 
and  fore- part  of  the  Footj  fq  that  ’tis  tied  faft  by 


to  Nort/;- America.  5 7 

i:he  two  Latchets,  which  run  twice  round  about  the 
ieel,  and  every  ftep  they  make  upon  the  Snow, 
.he  fore-part  of  the  Foot  finks  into  that  hole,  as  of- 
:en  as  they  raife  their  Heel.  By  the  help  of  this 
Contrivance  they  walk  fatter  upon  the  Snow,  than 
jne  can  do  with  Shoes  upon  a beaten  path  : And 
ndeed  ’tis  fo  neceflary  for  them,  that  'twould  be 
Dtherwife  impoHible  not  only  to  hunt  and  range 
:be  Woods,  but  even  to  go  to  Church,  notwith- 
ttanding  they  are  fo  near  ; for  commonly  the  Snow 
s three  or  four  Foot  deep  in  that  Country  during 
;he  Winter.  Being  oblig’d  to  march  thirty  or  forty 
Leagues  in  the  Woods  in  purfuit  of  the  above- 
jinention’d  Animals,  I found  that  the  fatigue  of  the 
fourney  equal’d  the  pleafure  of  it. 

The  Orignal  is  a fort  of  Elk,  not  much  different 
From  that  we  find  in  Mufcovy.  *Tis  as  big  as  an 
Auvergne  Moyle,  and  much  of  the  fame  lhape,  aba- 
iting  for  itsMuzzle,  itsTail,  and  its  great  flat  Horns, 
which  weigh  fometimes  ;oo,  and  fometimes  400 
weight,  if  we  may  credit  thofe  who  pretend  to  have 
weigh'd  ’em.  This  Animal  ufually  reforts  to 
planted  Countries.  Its  Hair  is  long  and  brown  ; 
and  the  Skin  is  ttrongand  hard,  but  not  thick.  The 
iFlelh  of  the  Orignal,  efpecially  that  of  the  Female 
iforti,  eats  delicioufly  ; and  ’tis  faid,  that  the  far 
hind  Foot  of  the  Female  kind,  is  a Cure  for  the 
Falling-Sicknefs  ; it  neither  runs  nor  skips,  but  its 
trot  will  almoft  keep  up  with  the  running  of  a Hart. 
The  Savages  alTure  us,  that  in  Summer  ’twill  trot 
three  Days  and  three  Nights  without  intermiffion. 
This  fort  of  Animals  commonly  gather  into  a body 
towards  the  latter  end  of  Autumn;  and  the  Herds  are 
largett  in  the  beginning  of  the  Spring,  at  which  time 
the  file  ones  are  in  rutting  ; but  after  their  heat  is  over, 
they  all  difperfe  themfelves.  We  hunted  ’em  in 
the  following  manner  : Firft  of  all,  we  went  40 
Ijeagues  to  çhe  Northward  <?î  îbe  River  of  St.  Lau- 

mçs. 


î8  Some  New  Voyages 

rencty  where  we  found  a little  Lake  of  three  or  four 
Leagues  in  Circumference,  and  upon  the  banks  of 
that  Lake,  we  made  Hutts  for  our  felves  of  the  barks 
of  Trees, having  firft  clear’d  the  Ground  of  the  Snow 
that  cover’d  it.  Incur  Journey  thither,  we  kill’d 
as  many  Hares  and  Wood'hens,  as  we  could  eat. 
When  we  had  fitted  up  our  Hutts,  the  Savages  went 
out  upon  the  difcovery  of  the  Elks,  fome  to  the 
Northward,  and  fome  to  the  South,  tothediftance 
of  two  or  three  Leagues  from  the  Hutts.  As  foon 
as  they  difcover’d  any  frefh  foot-fteps,  they  de- 
tach’d one  of  their  number  to  give  us  notice,  tothe 
end,  that  the  whole  Company  might  have  the  plea- 
fure  of  feeing  the  chace.  We  trac’d  thefe  foot- 
fteps  fometimes  for  one,  and  fonietimes  for  two 
Leagues,  and  then  fell  in  with  five,  ten,  fifteen  or 
twenty  Elks  in  a body  j which  prefently  betook 
themfelves  to  flight,  whether  a part  or  in  a Body, 
and  funk  into  the  Snow  up  to  their  Breaft.  Where 
the  Snow  was  hard  ai  d condenfated,  or  where  the 
froft  following  wet  Weather  had  glaz’d  it  above, 
we  came  up  with  ’em  after  the  chace  of  a quarter 
of  a League  : But  when  the  Snow  was  fofc  or  juft 
fallen,  we  were  forc’d  to  purfue  ’em  three  or  four 
Leagues  before  we  could  catch  ’em,  unlefs  the  Dogs 
happen’d  to  flop ’em  where  the  Snow  was  very  deep. 
When  we  came  up  with  them,  the  Savages  fired 
upon  ’em  with  Fufecs  If  the  Elks  be  much  inrag’d 
they’ll  fometimes  turn  upon  the  Savages,  who  co- 
ver themfelves  with  Boughs  in  order  to  keep  oflp their 
Peer,  with  which  they  would  crulh  ’em  to  pieces. 
As  foon  as  they  are  kill’d,  the  Savages  make  new 
Hutts  upon  the  fpot,  with  great  Fires  in  the  mid- 
dle ; while  the  Slaves  are  imploy’d  in  fleaing  ’em, 
and  fh  etching  out  the  Skins  in  the  open  Air.  One 
of  the  Soldiers  that  accompany’d  me,  told  me  one 
Day,  that  to  withftand  the  violence  of  the  Cold, 
one  ought  to  have  his  Blood  compos’d  of  Çrandy, 


to  Norf/?- America.'  5p 

lis  Body  of  Brafs,  and  his  Eyes  of  Glafs  : And  I 
iiuft  fay,  he  had  fome  ground  for  what  he  fpoke, 
i)r  we  were  forc’d  to  keep  a Fire  all  round  us,  all 
'le  Nightlong.  Aslongasthe  Flefhof  tbefeAni- 
lials  lafts,  the  Savages  feldom  think  of  Birring  ; 
■ut  when  ’tis  all  confum’d,  they  then  look  out  for 
: new  Difcovery.  Thus  they  continue  to  hunt, 
II  the  Snow  and  the  Ice  are  melted.  As  foon  as  the 
reat  thaw  commences^  ’tis  impoffible  for  ’em  to 
'•avel  far  ; fo  that  they  content  themfelves  with  the 
illing  of  Hares  and  Partridges,  which  are  very 
;umerous  in  the  Woods.  When  the  Rivers  are 
jlear  of  the  Ice,  they  make  Canows  of  the  Elk-skins, 
j/hich  they  fow  together  very  eafily,  covering  the 
learns  with  a fat  fort  of  Earth  inftead  of  pitch. 
This  work  is  over  in  four  or  five  days  time,  after 
;hich  they  return  home  in  the  Canows  with  all 
heir  Baggage. 

i This,  Sir,  was  our  Diverfion  for  three  Months  in 
he  Woods.  We  took  fifty  fix  Elks,  and  might  have 
lin’d  twice  as  many,  if  we  had  hunted  for  the  be- 
nefit of  the  Skins.  In  the  Summer  feafon,  the  Sa- 
ages  have  tw'o  ways  of  killing  ’em,  both  of  which 
Ire  equally  troublefom.  One  confifts  in  hanging  a 
vope-gin  between  two  Trees,  upon  a Pafs  furroun- 
(ed  with  Thorns  j the  other  is  compafs’d  by  craui- 
ng  like  Snakes  among  the  Trees  and  Thickets,  and 
.pproaching  to ’em  upon  the  Leeward  fide,  fo  that 
hey  may  be  (hot  with  a Fufee.  Harts  and  Cari- 
)0us  are  kill’d  both  in  Summer  and  Winter,  after 
he  fame  manner  with  the  Elks  j excepting  that  the 
Cariboo’s,  which  are  a kind  of  wild  Aifes,  make  an 
:afie  efcapç  when  the  Snow  is  hard,  by  vertue  of 
heir  broad  Feet;  whereas  the  Elk  finks  as  fail  ay 
le  rifes.  In  fine,  I am  fo  well  pleas’d  with  the 
ranting  of  this  Country,  that  I have  refolv’d  to  im- 
oloy  all  my  leifure  time  upon  that  Exercife.  The 
ravages  have  promifed,  that  in  three  Months  time 
, ..  ‘ I 


6o  Some  Hew  Voyages  I 

I (hall  fee  other  forts  of  chafes,  which  will  prove  id 
lefs  fatiguing,  and  more  agreeable.  I am,  I 


SIR, 

Tours,  See. 


L E T T E R Xh  f 

ill 

D&ted  it  Boucherville  May  28.  1687. 

II 

Beitir  a curious  Defeription  of  the  Hunting  of  M-.  f 
vers  Animals.  | 

^ I jlli 

YO  U complain  that  the  laft  year  you  receiv’d  |ii 
but  one  of  my  Letters,  dated  July  8.  and  i 
with  the  fame  breath  aiïure  me,  that  you  writ  two  to  1 i; 
me,  neither  of  which  is  come  to  hand.  I receiv’d  ' 
a Letter  from  you  this  Day,  which  is  fo  much  the  ! 
more  acceptable,  that  I thought  you  had  been  dead,  | 
and  that  I find  you  continue  to  give  proof  of  your  :| 
remembrance  of  me.  I find  by  your  Letter,  that  | 
you  have  an  agreeable  reli/h  for  the  curious  Elk-  | 
Hunting  in  this  Country,  and  that  a further  ac-  j 
countof  ourother  hunting  Adventures,  would  meet  j 
with  a welcome  Reception.  This  Curiofity,  indeed,  j 
is  worthy  of  fo  great  a Hunts*Man  as  your  felf  5 | 
but  at  prefent  I nnift  beg  your  excufe  as  to  the  Bea-  ij 
ver-hunting,  for  I know  nothing  of  it  yet  but  by  || 
hear- fay.  1, 

In  the  beginning  of  September,  I fet  out  in  a Ca-  ] 
now  upon  feveral  Rivers,  Marlhes,  and  Pools,  that , i 
difembogue  in  the  Champlain  Lake,  being  accom-  ; 
pany’d  with  thirty  or  forty  of  the  Savages  that  are  j 
very  expert  in  Shooting  and  Hunting,  and  perfe<aiy  j 

well  ' 


to  No/t/;- America.  6 r 

i'ell  acquainted  with  the  proper  places  for  finding 
Vater-foul,  Deer,  and  other  fallow  Beafis.  The 
rft  Poft  we  took  up  was  upon  the  fide  of  a Marlh  or 
en  of  four  or  five  Leagues  in  Circumference  j and 
hen  we  had  fitted  up  our  Hutts,  the  Savages  made 
lutts  upon  the  Water  in  feveral  places.  Thefe  Wa- 
:r-Hutts  are  made  of  the  branches  and  leaves  of 
'"rees,  and  contain  three  or  four  Men  : For  a Decoy 
ley  have  the  skins  of  Geefe,  Buftards,  and  Ducks, 
ry’d  and  fluff’d  with  Hay,  the  two  feet  being  made 
ift  with  two  Nails  to  a fmall  piece  of  a light  plank, 
Khich  floats  round  the  Hutt.  This  place  being  fre- 
uented  by  wonderful  numbers  of  Geefe,  Ducks, 
luflards,  Teals,  and  an  infinity  of  other  Fowl  un- 
nown  to  t\\Q  Europeans ^ when  thefe  Fowls  fee  the 
ruff’d  Skins  fwimming  with  the  Heads  ereéled,  as  if 
hey  were  alive,  they  repair  to  the  fame  place,  and 
3 give  the  Savages  an  opportunity  of  (hooting  ’em, 
lither  flying,  or  upon  the  Water  ; after  which  the 
Ravages  get  into  their  Canows  and  gather  ’em  up. 
jFhey  have  likewife  a way  of  catching  ’em  with 
j'Jets,  ftretch’d  upon  the  furface  of  the  Water  at  the 
lintries  of  the  Rivers.  In  a word,  we  eat  nothing 
put  Water- fowl  for  fifteen  Days;  after  which  we 
'efolv’d  to  declare  War  againft  the  Turtle-Doves, 
vhich  are  fo  numerous  in  Canada^  that  the  Bifhop 
ias  been  forc’d  to  excommunicate  ’em  oftner  than 
mce,  upon  the  account  of  the  Damage  they  do 
0 the  ProduA  of  the  Earth.  With  that  view,  we 
mbarqued  and  made  towards  a Meadow,  in  the 
Njeighbourhood  of  which,  the  Trees  were  cover’d 
vith  that  fort  of  Fowl,  more  than  with  Leaves:  For 
uft  then  ’twas  the  feafon  in  which  they  retire  from 
he  North  Countries,  and  repair  to  the  Southern 
Climates;  and  one  would  have  thought,  that  ail 
he  Turtle-Doves  upon  Earth  had  chofe  to  pafs  thro’ 
his  place.  For  the  eighteen  or  twenty  days  that 
ve  flay’d  there,  I firmly  believe  that  a thoufand 

Men 


6 1 Some  New  Voyagès 

Men  might  have  fed  upon  ’em  heartily,  withoui 
putting  themfelves  to  any  trouble.  You  muft  know, 
that  through  the  middle  of  this  Meadow  there  runs 
a Brook,  upon  which  I and  two  young  Savages  Ihoi 
feveral  Snipes,  Rayles,  and  a certain  fort  of  Fowl 
call’d  Buteurs  de  faux,  which  is  as  big  as  a Quail,  and 
eats  very  delicioufly. 

In  the  fame  place  we  kill’d  fome  Mmk-Rats,  or 
a fort  of  Animals  which  refemble  a Rat  in  their 
fhape,  and  are  as  big  as  a Rabbet.  The  Skins  of 
thefe  Rats  are  very  much  valued,  as  differing  but 
little  from  thofe  of  Beavers.  Their  Tefticles  fmell 
fo  ftrong  of  Musk,  that  no  Civet  or  Antilope  that 
Afia  affords,  can  boaft  of  fuch  a ftrong  and  fweet 
fmell.  Wefpy’d  ’em  in  the  Mornings  and  Evenings, 
at  which  time  they  ufually  appear  upon  the  Water 
with  their  Nofe  to  the  Windward,  and  betray  them- 
lelves  to  the  Huntfmen,  by  the  curling  of  the  Wa- 
ter. ThQ  Fouteraux,  which  are  an  amphibious  fort  of 
little  Pole- Cats,  are  catch’d  after  the  fame  manner* 
I was  likewife  entertain’d  upon  this  bccaffon,  with 
the  killing  of  certain  little  Beafîs,  call’d  or 

Whiftlers,  with  allufion  to  their  wonted  way  of 
whiffling  or  whizzing  at  the  Mouth  of  their  Holes 
in  fair  Weather.  They  are  as  big  as  Hares,  but 
fomewhat  fhorter,  their  Fle/h  is  good  for  nothing, 
but  their  Skins  are  recommended  by  their  rarity. 
The  Savages  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  hearing 
one  of  thefe  Creatures  whiffle  for  an  hour  together, 
after  which  they  fhot  it.  To  gratifie  the  curiofity 
I had  to  fee  fuch  diverfity  of  Animals,  they  made 
a diligent  fearch  for  the  Holes  or  Dens  of  the  Car- 
caicux,  and  having  found  fome  at  the  diftance  of 
two  or  three  Leagues  from  the  Fen  upon  which  we 
vvere  ported,  they  condu(ffed  me  to  the  place.  At 
the  break  of  day  we  planted  our  felves  round  the 
Holes,  with  our  Bellies  upon  the  Ground  ; and  left 
fome  Slaves  to  hold  the  Dogs  a Musket-rnot  behind 

i 


I to  Nori/?  America.  6\ 

js.  As  foon  as  thefe  Animals  perceiv’d  Day^light, 
:hey  came  out  of  their  Holes,  which  were  immedi- 
ately ftop’d  up  by  the  Savages,  and  upon  that  the 
Dogs  fetch’d  ’em  up  with  eafe.  We  faw  but  two 
|jf  ’em,  which  made  a vigorous  defence  againfl:  the 
Dogs,  but  were  ftrangled  after  a difpute  of  half  an 
hour.  Thefe  Animals  are  not  unlike  a Badger,  on- 
,y  they  are  bigger,  and  more  mifehievous.  Tho* 
our  Dogs  fliew’d  a great  deal  of  Courage  in  attack- 
|ng  tïiQCarcaioux,  they  betray’d  their  Cowardice  the 
jiext  day  in  a rencounter  with  a Porcupine,  which 
jive  fpy’d  upon  a little  Tree.  To  obtain  the  pleafure 
bf  feeing  the  Porcupine  fall,  we  cut  down  the  Tree; 
put  neither  the  Dogs  nor  we  durft  go  near  it  ; The 
Dogs  only  bark’d  and  jump’d  round  it  ; foritdart- 
|;d  its  long  and  hard  hair  like  fo  many  Bodkins, 
:hree  or  four  paces  off.  At  laft  we  pelted  it  to 
3eath,  and  put  it  upon  the  fire  to  burn  off  its  Darts  t 
after  which  we  fcaided  it  like  a Pig,  took  out  the 
[ntrails,  and  roafted  it  : But  tho’  ’twas  very  far,  f 
could^  notrelifh  itfo  well  as  to  comply  with  the 
iiflertion  of  the  Natives,  who  alledge,  that  it  eats 
iS  well  as  a Capon  or  a Partridge, 
j ^ After  the  Turtle-Doves  had  all  pafs’d  over  the 

I ace,  in  queftof  their  Southern  retreats,  the  Sa- 
iges  offer’d  to  fend  fome  of  their  number  with 
anows  to  conduft  me  home,  before  the  Rivers 
id  Lakes  were  frozen  over;  for  therofelves  were 
'tarry  out  for  the  Elk-hunting;  and  they  imagin’d 
at  tne  Cold  and  Hard/hip  attending  that  Exercife* 
id  made  me  fick  of  it  the  year  before.  Howe- 
:r,  we  had  then  a Month  good  before  the  com- 
encement  of  the  Froft,  and  in  that  interval  of 
ne,  they  proffer  d to  entertain  me  with  more 
I diverting  Game  than  any  I had  feen  before.  They 
)t>ro^s’d  to  go  fifteen  or  fixteen  Leagues  further  up 
Country,  alfuring  me,  that  they  knew  of  a cer- 
1 am  place  that  had  she  moft  advantageous  fituatl- 
I on 


6^  Some  "Kew  Ployages 

on  in  the  World,  both  for  Pleafure  and  Profit,  an^ 
that  afforded  great  plenty  of  Otters,  of  the  Skins  of 
which  they  mean  a to  make  a great  Cargoe.  Ac* 
cordingly  we  pull’d  down  our  Hurts,  and  having 
imbarqu’d  in  our  Canows,  fail’d  up  the  River,  till 
we  came  to  a little  Lake  of  two  Leagues  in  Circum-, 
ference,  at  the  end  of  which  we  faw  another  great-*' 
er  Lake,  divided  from  this  by  an  Ifthmus  of  i yo 
Paces  in  length.  We  pitch’d  our  Hurts  at  the  di- 
ftance  of  a League  from  that  Ifthmus  ; and  fome 
of  the  Savages  fifh’d  for  Trouts,  while  the  reft  were 
imploy’d  in  laying  Traps  for  the  Otters  upon  the 
brinks  of  the  Lake.  Thefe  Traps  are  made  of  five 
Stakes  plac’d  in  the  form  of  an  oblong  Quadrangle, 
fo  as  to  make  a little  Chamber,  the  Door  of  which 
is  kept  up,  and  fupported  by  a Stake.  To  the  mid- 
dle of  this  Stake  they  tyea  firing  which  paffes  thro’ 
a little  fork,  and  has  a Trout  well  faften’d  to  the 
end  of  it.  Now,  when  the  Otter  comes  on  fhoar, 
and  fees  this  bait,  he  puts  above  half  his  Body  in- 
to that  fatal  Cage,  in  order  to  fwallow  the  Filh  ; 
but  he  no  fooner  touches,  than  the  firing  to  which 
’tis  made  faft  pulls  away  the  Stake  that  fupports  the 
Door,  upon  which  an  heavy  and  loaded  Door  falls 
upon  his  Reins  and  quafhes  him.  During  our  Pil- 
grimage in  that  part  of  the  Country,  the  Savages 
took  above  two  hundred  and  fifty  Canada  Otters  j 
the  Skins  of  which  are  infinitely  prittier  than  thofe 
of  Mufcovy  or  Sweden.  The  beft  of  ’em  which  are 
not  worth  two  Crowns  in  this  place,  are  fold  in 
France  for  four  or  five,  and  fometimes  for  ten,  if 
they  are  black  and  very  rough.  As  foon  as  the  Sa- 
vages had  fet  their  Traps,  they  gave  orders  to  their 
Sl-ives  to  go  round  the  Lake  every  Morning,  in  or- 
der to  take  out  the  amphibious  Animals.  After 
that  they  conduced  me  to  the  above-men tion’d  Ifth- 
mus, where  I was  furpriz’d  to  fee  a fort  of  a Park 
or  Fence  made  of  Trees,  fell’d  one  upon  another. 


to  North'Atnèïki. 

and  interlac’d  with  Thorns  and  Branches  j with  a 
.quadrangular  inclofure  of  Stakes  at  the  end  of  jr, 
[the  entry  of  which  was  very  narrow.  They  gave 
me  to  know,  that  they  ufed  to  hunt  Harts  in  that 
place,  and  promis’d  to  divert  me  with  the  fhew,  as 
[foon  as  the  Inclofures  were  a little  mended.  In  et- 
Sfeâ:,  they  carry’d  me  two  or  three  Leagues  off,  up- 
bn  fuch  Roads  as  had  nothing  on  either  fide  but 
[Fens  and  Marlhes  j and  after  they,  had  difpers’d  them- 
jelves,  fome  on  one  hand  and  fome  on  the  other, 
[A^ith  a Dog  for  every  Man  j I faw  a great  many 
parts  running  to  and  again,  in  queft  of  places  of 
iafety.  The  Savage  that  I kept  company  with, 
riffur’d  me,  that  he  and  I had  no  occafion  to  walk 
jrery  faft,  becaufe  he  had  took  the  ftraighteft  and, 
the  neareft  Road.  Before  us  we  faw  above  ten 
[darts,  which  were  forc’d  to  turn  back,  rather  than 
irow  themfelves  into  the  Marfli,  of  which  they 
3uld  never  get  clear.  At  laft,  after  walking  a 
[reat  pace,  and  running  now  and  then,  we  arriv’d 
the  Park,  and  found  the  Savages  lying  flat  upon 
fpe  Ground  all  round  it,  in  order  to  fltut  up  the 
|ie  entry  of  the  flake  Inclofure  as  foon  as  the  Harts 
iter’d.  We  found  thirty  five  Harts  in  the  place, 
id,  if  the  Park  had  been  better  fenc’d,  we  might 
ive  had  above  fixty  ; for  the  nimbleft  and  lighteft 
' ’em,  skip’d  over  before  they  came  to  enter  the 
liclofure.  We  kill’d  a great  many  of  ’em,  but 
lar’d  the  Dams,  becaufe  they  were  great  with  youqg. 
ask’d  of  the  Savages  the  Tongues  and  the  Marrow 
" the  Harts,  which  they  gave  me  very  readily. 
Ihe  Flefli  was  very  fat,  but  not  delicious,  except- 
|g  fome  few  bits  about  the  Ribs.  But  after  all, 
|is  was  not  our  only  Game  ; for  two  days  after 
went  a Bear-hunting,  and  the  Savages  who  fpend 
Iree  parts  of  four  of  their  life  in  Hunting  in  the 
f oods,  are  very  dexterous  at  that  Exercife,  efpeci- 
I y in  Angling  out  the  Trunks  of  the  Trees  upon 

F which 


66  , Some  Ne«?  Ployages  | 

which  the  Bears  Neftle.  I could  not  but  admire  ! 
their  knowledge  in  that  Point,  when,  as  we  were  j 
walking  up  and  down  in  a Foreft,  at  the  diftance  i 
of  an  hundred  Paces  one  from  another,  I heard  one  | 
Savage  call  to  another,  Heres  a Bear.  I askt  ’em  how  | 
he  knew  that  there  was  a Bear  upon  the  Tree  which  | 
he  knock’d  with  his  Axe  ; and  they  all  reply’d,  that  | 
’twas  as  eafily  diftinguilh’d  as  the  print  of  an  Elks  1 
foot  in  the  Snow.  For  five  or  fix  times  they  never  j 
mifs’d  ; for  after  they  had  knock’d  two  or  three  | 
times  upon  the  Trunk  of  the  Tree,  the  Bear  came  | 
out  of  its  hole,  and  was  prefently  fhot.  The  Cana^  j 
tla  Bears  are  extream  black,  but  not  mifchievous,  ji 
for  they  never  attack  one,  unlefs  they  be  wounded  ji 
or  fir’d  upon.  They  are  fo  fat,  efpecially  in  the  j ( 
Autumn,  that  they  can  fcarce  walk  : Thofe  which  1 1 
we  kill’d  were  extream  fat,  but  their  fat  is  good  for  1 1 
nothing  but  to  be  burnt,  whereas  their  Flelh,  and,  li 
above  all,  their  Feet  are  very  nice  Viduals.  The  i 
Savages  affirm,  that  no  Flelh  is  fo  delicious  as  that  i 
of  Bears  ; and  indeed,  I think  they  are  in  the  right  1 1 
of  it.  While  we  rang’d  up  and  down  in  queft  of  j il 
Bears,  we  had  the  pleafure  of  fp>fing  foine  Martins  i i 
and  wild  Cats  upon  the  branches  of  the  Trees,  which  j o 
the  Savages  Ihotin  the  Head  to  prefer ve  their  Skin.  \ 
But  the  mofi  Comical  thing  I faw,  was  the  Stupi-  j 1! 
dity  of  the  Wood-hens,  which  fit  upon  the  Trees  j « 
in  whole  Flocks,  and  are  kill’d  one  after  another,  ! I 
without  ever  offering  to  ftir.  Comrnonly  the  Sa-  i i 
vages  fiioot  at  ’em  with  Arrows,  for  they  fay  they  I 
' are  not  worth  a Ihoot  of  Powder,  which  is  able  to  ; I 
kill  an  Eik  or  an, Hart.  1 have  ply’d  this  fort  of  f I 
Fowling  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  our  Cantons  orjij 
Flabitations  in  the  Winter  time,  with  the  help  of  a i É 
Dog  who  found  out  the  Trees  by  fcent,  and  then  ! I 
bark’d;  upon  which  I approach’d  to  the  Tree^  and  I|1 
found  the  Fowls  upon  the  Branches.  Wheiî  i iiit 
the  thaw  came,  I went  two  or  three  Leagues  fur-  i li 

ther  ! « 


to  î^orth- Amcncâ,. 


ther  up  the  Lake,  in  Company  with  fome  Canadefe, 
on  purpole  to  fee  that  Fowl  flap  with  its  Wings. 
Believe  me,  Sir,  this  fight  is  one  of  the  greateft  Cu- 
rioficies  in  the  World  ; for  their  flapping  makes  a 
noife  much  like  that  of  a Drum  all  about,  for  thô 
fpace  of  a Minute  or  thereabouts  j then  the  noife 
ceafes  for  half  a quarter  of  an  Hour,  after  which 
it  begins  again.  By  this  noife  we  were  direded  to 
the  place  where  the  unfortunate  Moor-hens  fat, 
and  found  ’em  upon  rotten  mofly  Trees,  By  flap- 
ping one  Wing  againft  the  other,  they  mean  to  call 
their  Mates  j and  the  humming  noife  that  infues 
thereupon,  may  be  heard  half  a quarter  of  a League 
; off.  This  they  do  only  in  the  Months  of  Jpril^ 

' May,  September,  and  OEioher  ; and,  which  is  very  re- 
markable, a Moorhen  never  flaps  in  this  manner, 
but  upon  one  Tree.  It  begins  at  the  break  of  day, 
and  gives  over  at  nine  a Clock  in  the  Morning,  till 
about  an  hour  before  Sunfet  that  it  flutters  again, 
•and  continues  fo  to  do  till  Night  t I proteft  to  you, 
ithat  I have  frequently  contented  my  felf  with  fee- 
ing and  admiring  the  flapping  of  their  Wings  with- 
out offering  to  fiioot  at  ’em. 

: Befides  the  pleafure  of  fo  many  different  forts  of 
Diverfion,  I was  likewife  entertain’d  in  the  Woods 
with  the  company  of  the  honeft  old  Gentlemen  that 
liv’d  in  former  Ages.  Honeft  Homer,  the  amiable 
Anacreon,  and  my  dear  Lucian,  were  my  infepara- 
ble  Companions.  Arijiotk  too  defir’d  paffionately 
to  go  along  with  us,  but  my  Canow  was  too  little 
;o  hold  his  bulky  Equipage  of  Peripatetick  Silo- 
gifms  : So  that  he  was  e’en  fain  to  trudge  back  to 
he  Jefuits,  who  vouchfaf ’d  him  a very  honourable 
leception.  I had  a great  deal  of  reafon  to  rid  my 
elf  of  that  great  Philofopher’s  Company  j for  his 
idiculous  Jargon,  and  his  fenfelefs  Terms,  would 
rave  frighted  the  Savages  out  of  their  wits.  Fare- 
ivell,  Sir,  I am  now  arriv’d  at  once  at  the  end  of 

Fa'  mt  • 


68  Some  l^w  Voyages 

my  Game  and  my  Letter.  I have  heard  no  News 
from  QuebeCf  where  they  continue  to  make  mighty 
Preparations  for  fome  confiderable  Enterprife.  Time, 
will  difcover  a great  many  things,  an  Account  of  e 
which  I mean  to  tranfmit  to  you  by  the  Ships  that  I 
are  to  leave  this  Harbour  in  the  end  of  Autumn.  I 
conclude  with  my  ulual  Compliment, 


LETTER  XIÎ. 


Tours,  See,  i 


I 

{ 


Dated  at  St.  Helens,  over-againft  Monreal, 

June  8.  I 6 8 7. 

' ^ ■ 

the  Chevalier  Vaudreuil  arrives  in  Canada  i i 
with  fonte  Troops.  Both  the  Regular  Troops  ; I 
and  the  Militia,  are  pofled  at  St,  Helens,  in  jp 
a readme fs  to  march  again  ft  the  Iroquefe. 


SIR, 

I Have  fuch  a budget-full  of  News,  that  I know 
not  where  to  begin.  I receiv’d  Letters  but  now 
from  Mr.  Senelayh  Office  ; by  which  I have  Advice, 
that  Orders  are  fent  to  Mr.  DemnviUe  to  allow  me  to 
go  for  France,  upon  niy  private  Concerns.  No  lon- 
ger fince  than  Yefterday,  he  told  me  I fliould  have 
Leave  to  go  after  the  Campaign  is  over.  My  Rela- 
tions write,  that  the  procuring  of  this  Leave  coft  'em 
a great  deal  of  pains  ; and  that  the  fooner  I come  to 
Taris,  'twill  be  the  better  for  me. 

The  Governour  arriv’d  at  Monreal  three  or  four 
days  ago,  with  all  the  Miiitia  of  the  Country,  who 
lie  now  incam  p’d  along  with  our  Troops  in  that 
Ifland.  Mr.  D" Ambkmont  has  been  at  Quebec  this 
Month,  with  five  or  fix  lècond  Rate  Ships,  having 

fail’d 


tù  No/'^/>Amerlça. 


fail’d  from  Rochel  thither  in  28  days.  He  brought 
over  with  him  ten  or  twelve  Companies  of  Marines, 
who  are  to  guard  the  Colony  while  we  invade  the 
Iroquefc  Country.  ’Tisfaid,  that  laft  Year  Mr.  D?- 
mnville  fent  feveral  Canadefe,  that  were  known  and 
efteem’d  by  the  Savages,  our  Allies,  who  live  upon 
the  Banks  of  the,Lakes  and  the  adjacent  Countries, 
with  Orders  to  engage  ’em  to  favour  our  Defign  of 
extirpating  the  Iroquefe.  In  the  Winter  he  made  Ma- 
gazines of  Ammunition  and  Provifions,  and  now  he 
has  fent  feveral  Canows,  laden  with  Provifions,  to 
Fort  Frontenac,  and  given  Orders  for  the  building  of 
art  infinite  number  of  fuch  Boats  as  I defcrib’d  in  my 
fourth  Letter,  for  the  Tranfporting  of  our  twenty 
Companies  of  Marines.  The  Militia  who  are  in- 
camp’d  in  this  Ifland  along  with  our  Troops,  make 
fifteen  hundred  Men,  and  are  join’d  by  five  hundred 
of  the  converted  Savages  that  live  in  the  Neighbour- 
hood of  Quebec  and  the  Ifland  of  Monreal.  The  Che- 
; valier  Vaudreuil,  who  is  come  from  France  to  Com- 
mand our  Troops,  is  refolv’d  to  appear  in  the  Field, 

: notwithftanding  the  Fatigue  of  his  PaflTage  to  Canada  : 
and  the  Governour  of  Monreal  is  of  the  fame  mind. 
Mr.  Chamfigni,  the  Intendant  of  this  Country, 
Sweat  from  hence  to  Fort  Frontenac  two  days  ago. 
The  day  after  to  morrow,  Mr.  de  DenonvUle  means 
to  march  at  the  Head  of  his  little  Army,  being  ac- 
company’d  with  an  ancient  Ircejuefe,  that  is  very 
much  refpeâred  by  the  five  Cantons.  The  Hiflory 
and  various  Adventures  of  this  old  Gentleman,  are 
too  tedious  to  bear  a Relation  in  this  place.  Every 
body  is  apprehenfive  that  this  Expedition  will  prove 
as  fucceflefs  as  that  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre:  And  if  their 
Apprehenfions  are  not  difappointed,  the  King  lays 
out  his  Money  to  no  purpofe.  For  my  own  parr, 
when  I refleét  upon  the  Attempt  we  made  three 
Years  ago,  I can’t  but  think  it  impoffible  for  us  to 
fuccsedi  Time  will  difcover  the  Confequences  of 

P 3 • this 


70 


Some  “Hew 


< this  Expedition  ; and  perhaps  we  tnay  come  to  re- 
pent, tho’  too  late,  of  our  complying  with  the  Ad- 
vice of  fome  Difturbers  of  the  Publick  Peace,  who 
projeté  to  enlarge  their  private  Fortunes  in  a general 
Commotion.  I lay  this  down  for  an  uncontefted 
Truth,,  that  we  are  not  able  to  deftroy  the  Iroquefe  by 
our  felves  : befides,  what  occafion  have  we  to  trou- 
ble ^em,  fince  they  give  us  no  Provocation  ? How- 
ever, let  the  Event  be  what  it  will,  I mall  not  fail 
ppon  my  Return  to  tranfinit  you  a Journal  of  our 
Allions,  unlefs  it  be,  that  I embarque  lor  Rochel, 
and  deliver  it  my  felf;  In  the  mean  time,  belie vq 
me  to  be, 


SIR, 


Tours,  See. 


LETTER  XIII. 

Dated  at  Niagara,  Aug.  2.  1687, 

B.eprefentwg  the  unfa'vourahle  Iffue  of  the  Cam* 
paign  made  in  the  Iroquefe  Country  ; the  DiJ- 
covery  of  an  Amlufeade  ; and  the  ijfuing  of  Qr~ 
ders  for  the  Author  to  march  voith  a Petach* 
ment  to  the  great  Lakes. 

SIR, 

ÎT  has  been  a Maxim  in  all  Ages,  That  the  Events 
of  things  are  not  always  anfwerable  to  Mens  Ex- 
peâations  : When  Men  form  to  themfelves  a promi- 
fing  profped  of  compaffing  their  Ends,  they  fre- 
quently meet  with  the  mortification  of  feeing  them- 
felves difappointed.  This  I fpeak  by  way  of  applica- 
tion to  my  felf;  for  inftead  of  going  for  France,  pur- 
fuant  to  the  Contents  of  the  Letter  I writ  to  yon. 

two 


to  America.  7Ï 

liwo  Months  ago,  I am  now  oblig’d  to  ftraggle  to 
pne  End  of  the  World,  as  you’ll  find  by  thefollow- 
ng  Journal  of  our  Expedition. 

We  broke  up  from  St.  Helens  much  about  the  time 
[ fpoke  of  in  my  laft.  Mr.  de  Champigni  went  before 
as  with  a ftrong  Guard,  and  arriv’d  in  a Canow  at 
Fort  Frontenac,  eight  or  ten  days  before  we  carne  up. 
As  foon  as  he  arriv’d,  he  fent  two  or  three  hundred 
Zanadefe  to  furprife  the  Villages  of  Rente  And  G ane- 
mjje,  which  lie  at  the  diftance  of  feven  or  eight 
jLeagues  from  the  Fort,  and  are  inhabited  by  a fort 
3f  Irotjuefe,  that  deferv’d  no  other  Üfage  than  what 
:hey  met  with.  Our  Canadefe  had  no  great  difficulty 
lin  mattering  them  j for  they  furpris’d  ’em  when  they 
iCaft  thought  of  any  Alarm,  and  brought  ’em  Prifo- 
!iers  to  Fort  Frontenac,  where  they  were  tied  to  Potts 
with  Cords  round  their  Necks,  Hands,  and  Feet. 
We  arriv’d  at  the  Fort  on  the  firtt  of  July,  after  the 
encountering  of  feveral  Difficulties  among  the  Wa- 
:er-falls,  CataraAs,  and  Currents,  that  I formerly 
3efcrib’d  to  you  in  my  Account  of  Mr.  de  la  Barrel 
Expedition.  We  were  more  perplex’d  in  this  Voy- 
age than  the  former  j for  our  Boats  were  fo  heavy, 
matfcwe  could  not  tranfport  ’em  over  Land  as  we  did 
)he  Canows,  but  were  oblig’d  to  drag  ’em  up  through 
:he  impraticable  Pattes  with  the  force  of  Men  and 
Ropes.  Immediately  upon  our  Debarquing,  I v.'ent 
Iraight  to  the  Fort,  wiiere  I faw  the  miferable  Pri- 
'oners  in  the  abovemention’d  Potture.  The  light  of 
his  piece  of  Tyranny  fill’d  me  at  once  with  Cora- 
,)aflion  and  Horror  ; but  in  the  mean  time  the  poor 
Wretches  fung  Night  and  Day,  that  being  the  cutto- 
mary  Pratice  of  the  People  of  Canada  when  they 
all  into  the  hands  of  their  Enemies.  They  com- 
plain’d , ‘That  they  were  betray’d  without  any 
ground  ; that  in  compenfation  fqr  the  care  they 
had  took  ever  fince  the  Peace  to  furnilli  the  Garri- 
fon  with  Fitti  and  Venifon,  they  were  bound  and 

F 4 tied 


y I Some  T^ew  Voyages 

® tied  to  Pofts,  and  whip’d  in  fuch  a manner,  that 

* they  could  neither  fleep,  nor  guard  off  the  Flies  j 

* that  the  only  Requital  they  met  with  for  procuring 

* to  the  French  a Commerce  in  the  Skins  of  Beavers 
" and  other  Animals,  was,  to  be  doom’d  to  Slavery, 

‘ and  to  fee  their  Fathers,  and  the  ancient  Men  of 
^ their  Country,  murder’d  before  their  eyes.  Are 
^ thefe  the  French,  faid  they,  that  the  Jefuits  cry’d  up 

‘ lb  much  for  Men  of  Probity  and  Honour  ? Even  i 

* the  cruelleft  fort  of  Death  that  Imagination  it  felf  ji 

* can  reach,  would  be  nothing  to  us  in  coraparifon  ■ 

* with  the  odious  and  hortible  Spedacle  of  the  Blood  | 
‘ of  our  Ancettors,  that  is  Ihed  fo  inhumanely  before  | 

* our  eyes.  Alfurediy,  the  five  Villages  will  revenge  I 

* our  Quarrel,  and  entertain  an  everlafting  aqd  juft  | 
‘ Refentment  of  the  tyrannical  Ufage  we  now  meet  I 
^ with.  ’ I made  up  to  one  of  thele  Wretches  that  1|[ 
was  about  five  and  twenty  Years  oldj  and  had  fre-  jjji 
quently  regal’d  me- in  |his  Hutt,  not  far  from  thc| 
Fort,  during  my  fix  Weeks  Service  in  that  Place  in  jit 
the  Year  of  Mr.  ie  la  Barre's  Expedition.  This  poor  jit 
Man  being  Mailer  of  the  Algonkin  Language,  I gave  ;|  ft 
him  to  know,  that  I was  heartily  griev’d  to  fee  him,;i 
in  that  difmal  Pofture  ; that  I would  take  care  toil 
have  Viduals  and  Drink  convey’d  to  him  twice  ail 
day,  and  would  give  him  Letters  for  my  Friends  atjii 
Monreal,  in  order  to  his  being  us’d  more  favourably  in 
than  his  Companions.  He  reply’d.  That  he  faw  and  i f( 
was  very  well  acquainted  with  the  Horror  that  moftii» 
oTthe  French  were  affeded  with,  upon  the  view  of  .t 
the  Cruelty  they  underwent;  and,  that  hefcorn’diji 
to  be  fed,  or  us’d  more  civilly  than  his  Fellow  Pri-.li; 
foners.  He  gave  me  an  account  of  the  manner  in  i[s 
which  they  were  furpris’d,  and  how  their  Anceftorsiii 
were  malfacred  ; arjd  truly,  I do  not  believe  that  any  t 
one  can  be  touch’d  with  more  cutting  and  bitter  Re-i  e 
flexions  than  this  poor  Man  was,  when  he  recounted!  i| 
the  many  Services  he  had  done  the  French^  during!  jjj 


to  North' Amcnc3..  7| 

jhe  whole  courle  of  his  Life:  At  laft,  after  many 
sighs  and  Groans,  h^  bow’d  down  his  Head,  and 
ivrap’d  himfelf  up  in  Silence.  Quaque  pteft  ftarrat, 
\efiabmt  ultima  fle'vit.  But  this  v^as  not  the  only 
îhing  that  affeded  me,  when  I beheld  the  mifery  of 
ihefe  innocent  Creatures:  I faw  fome  young  Sava- 
•es  of  our  fide  burn  their  Fingers'with  Fire  in  their 
ighted  Pipes;  which  provok’d  me  to  threlh  ’em 
bundly  : but  I was  feverely  reprimanded  for  my 
iains,  and  confin’d  to  my  Tent  for  five  or  fix  days, 
ii/here  1 only  repented  that  I had  not  dealt  my  blows 
n a double  meafure.  Thefe  Savages  refented  the 
natter  fo  highly,  that  they  ran  prefently  to  their 
lutts,  and  flew  to  their  Fufees,  in  order  to  kill  me. 
vfay,  all  that  could  be  done  was  fcarce  fufficient  to 
ppeafe  ’em  ; for  the  Difpute  came  to  that  heighth, 
ihat  they  would  have  left  us,  if  it  had  not  been  that 
)ur  Men  affur’d  ’em  I was  ||  drunk, 
hat  all  the  French  were  prohibited  I!  ^mong  the  Savages, 
o give  me  either  Wine  or  Brandy,  Perfim  are 

nd  that  I Ihouid  certainly  be  mi-  attoneifor 

irifon’d  as  foon  as  the  Campaign  all  Crimes. 
vere  over.  However,  the  poqr 
Wretches,  the  Prifoners,  were  carried  to  Quebec  \ 
rom  whence  they  are  to  be  fent  to  the  French  Gal- 
eys.  Much  about  that  time,  the  Sieur 
me  of  the  Mr.  de  la  Salles  Officers,  arriv’d  at  the 
?ort  in  a great  Canow,  being  conduded  thither  by 
feight  or  tzn  Coureurs  de  Beü.  He  gave  Mr.  de  Denc,n~ 
mde  to  underftand,  that  a Party  of  the  Illinefe  and 
>:he  Ouman^is  waited  for  the  Flurons  and  the  Outaouas 
jit  the  Lake  of  St.  Claire,  in  order  to  joyn  ’em,  and 
:o  march  with  joint  Forces  to  the  River  of  the  7Ja~ 
nontouans,  that  being  the  place  of  their  general  Ren- 
Jezvous.  added,  that  in  the  Lake  of  the  Hurons 
hear  Miffilimakinac,  Mr.  de  la  Durant ats,  affifted  by 
she  Savages,  our  Allies,  had  taken  an  EngUJh  Com- 
pany conduded  by  fop?  Iroquefe,  who  had  fifty 
f . thoufand 


74  Some  T^ew  Voyages 

thoufatid  Growns-worth  of  Goods  in  their  Canowj^ 
to  be  difpos’d  of  in  exchange  with  the  Nations  that  ; 
dwell  upon  thefe  Lakes:  as  ^Ifo,  That  Mv.Dulhm 
had  taken  another  E»gli(h  Convoy,  being  aflifted  by 
the  Coureurs  de  Boü,  and  the  Savages,  who  had  fliar’d 
the  former  Capture  ; and  that  he  had  kept  the  Eag- 
lip  and  Iroquefe  as  Prifoners,  as  well  as  their  Com- 
mander, who  was  call’d  Major  Gregory.  In  fine,  he 
reprefented  to  Mr.  de  Denonville,  that  ’twas  high  time 
for  him  to  fet  out  from  Fort  Frontenac,  if  he  roean’d 
to  appear  at  the  general  Rendezvous,  where  the 
Auxiliary  Troops  lent  from  the  Lakes  would  arrive 
very  fpeedily.  The  next  day,  being  the  ;d  of  July, 
the  Sieur  de  la  Fcre[l  embarqued  again  for  Niagara,  ji 
and  fleer’d  to  the  North-fide  of  the  Lake.  At  the  jl 
fame  time  we  embarqued,  and  flood  to  the  oppofite  | 
fide  of  the  Lake,  being  favour’d  by  the  Calms  which  I! 
in  that  Month  are  very  common. 

By  good  luck,  our  whole  Body  arriv’d  almoft  at 
one  and  the  fame  time  in  the  River  of  çhe  Ffonontou-  |i 
ans  ; and  upon  that  occafion,  the  Savages,  our  Al-  : 
lies,  who  draw  Prédirions  from  the  moft  trifling  | 
Accidents,  fliew’d  their  wonted  Superftition  in  ta-  j| 
king  this  for  an  infailible  Prefage  of  the  utter  De-  ij 
firurion  of  the  Iroquefe  : tho’  after  all  they  prov’d  ii 
falfe  Prophets,  as  you  will  find  by  the  fequel  of  this  i; 
Letter.  The  fame  Night  that  we  Landed,  we  hawl’d  i 
our  Canows  and  Boats  out  of  the  Water,  and  feta  ii 
flrong  Guard  upon  ’em.  This  done,  we  built  a Fort 
of  Stakes  or  Pales,  where  we  left  the  Sieur  Dorvllkrs 
with  four  hundred  Men  to  guard  our  Shipping  and 
Baggage.  The  next  day,  a young  Canadefe,  call’d  Fo»>  I 
taine  Marion,  was  unjuftly  Ihot  to  death.  His  cafe  j 
flood  thus  : Having  travell’d  frequently  all  over  this 
Continent,  he  was  perferiy  well  acquainted  with 
the  Country,  and  with  the  Savages  of  Canada  j and 
after  the  doing  of  feveral  good  Services  to  the  King,  - 
dsfir’d  Leave  from  çhe  Governour  general  to  conti-  i, 

nue  :■ 


I 


to  ISlonh  America,  7f 

ii;  his  Travels,  in  order  to  carry  on  fome  little 
Bade  : but  his  RequeO:  vyas  never  granted.  Upon 
It  he  refplv’d  to  remove  to  New  England,  the  two 
lawns  being  then  in  Peace.  The  Planters  of  New 
\land  gave  him  a very  welcome  Reception  ; for 
i’was  an  aâive  Fellow,  and  one  that  underftood 
oft  all  the  Languages  of  the  Savages.  UpOn  this 
linfideration  he  was  employ’d  to  coriduél  the  two 
rli^i  Convoys  I fpoke  of  but  now,  and  had  the 
fortune  to  be  taken  along  with  them.  Now,  to 
mind,  the  Ufage  he  met  with  from  us  was  ex- 
âm  hard;  for,  we  are  in  Peace  with.  England: 
ij  befides,  that  Crown  lays  Claim  to  the  Property 
i|:he  Lalces  of  Canada. 

iThe  next  Day  we  began  our  March  towards  thé 
5|at  Village  of  the  T/owewrea^w,  without  any  other 
f jvifions  than  ten  Biskets  a Man,  which  every  one 
f ry’d  for  himfelf.  We  had  but  feven  Leagues  to 
|l  rch  in  a great  Wood  of  tall  Trees,  upon  a fmooth 
s :n  Ground.  The  Coureurs  de  Bois,  with  a Party 
» the  Savages,  led  the  Van,  and  the  reft  of  the  Sava- 
t brought  up  the  Rear,  our  Regular  Troops  and 
pi:  Militia  being  pofted  in  the  middle.  The  firft: 
ty  the  Army  march’d  four  Leagues,  and  thead- 
nc’d  Guards  made  no  Difeovery.  The  fécond  Day 
)r  advanc’d  Parties  march’d  up  to  the  very  Fields  of 
ll;  Village  without  perceiving  any  thing,  tho’  they 
p î within  a PiftoWhot  of  five  hundred  tfonontouans, 
vio  lay  flat  upon  the  Ground,  and  fufFer’d  ’em  to 
plfs  and  repafs  without  moleftation.  Upon  their  In- 
t ligence  we  march’d  up  with  equal  Precipitation 
aid  Confufion,  being  bouy’d  up  with  the  Apprehen^ 
f n that  the  Iroquefe  had  fled,  and  that  at  leaft  their 
Vomen,  Children,  and  fuperannuated  Pesfons  would 
f 1 into  our  hands.  When  we  arriv’d  at  the  bottom 
c the  Hill  upon  which  thé  Ambufeade  was  plac’d, 
2;  the  diftance  of  a quarter  of  a League  from  the  Vil- 
Ije^,  they  beg^n  to  r^ife  their  wonted  Oy,  which 
, ' ■ was 


Some  T^ew  Voyages  t 

was  follow’d  fay  the  firing  of  fome  Muskets.  Hai 
you  but  feen,  Sir,  what  Diforder  our  Troops  an< 
Militia  were  in  amidft  the  thick  Trees,  you  woul 
have  joyn’d  with  me,  in  thinking  that  feveral  thou 
fands  of  Europeans  are  no  more  than  a fufficient  num 
her  to  make  head  againft  five  hundred  Barbarians.  Ou 
Battalions  were  divided’  into  ftraggling  Parties,  wh< 
fell  in  to  the  right  and  left,  without  knowing  wher 
they  went.  Inftead  of  firing  upon  the  Iroejuefe,  wi 
fir’d  upon  one  another.  ’Twas  to  no  purpofe  to  cal 
in  the  Soldiers  of  fuch  and  fuch  a Battalion,  for  wi 
could  not  fee  thirty  Paces  off  : In  fine,  we  were  fi! 
diforder’d,  that  the  Enemy  were  going  to  clofe  in  upj 
on  us  with  their  Clubs  in  their  hands  ; when  the  Sa 
vages  of  our  fide  having  rally’d,  repuls’d  the  Enemy 
and  purfu’d  ’em  to  their  Villages  with  fo  much  fury 
that  they  brought  off  the  Heads  of  eighty,  anc 
wounded  a great  many.  In  this  Adion  we  loft  teij 
Savages,  and  a hundred  French  : We  had  twenty  oi 
two  and  twenty  wounded,  in  which  number  was 
the  good  Father  Jngeleran  the  Jefuit,  who  receiv’d  a| 
Musket- Ihot  in  thofe  Parts  which  Origen  chofe  to  lop 
off,  in  order  to  qualify  himfelf  for  inftruding  the 
Fair  Sex  without  the  difturbance  of  Paffion,  or  the- 
danger  of  Scandal.  When  the  Savages  brought  in 
the  Heads  of  their  Enemies  to  Mr.  de  Denonville,  they, 
ask’d  him  why  he  haired,  and  did  not  march  up.-'| 
He  made  Anfwer,  That  he  could  not  leave  his; 
wounded  Men  behind,  and  that  he  thought  it  pro-j 
per  to  encamp,  that  the  Surgeons  might  have  time 
to  drefs  their  Wounds.  To  obviate  this  Pretence, j 
the  Savages  offer’d  to  make  Litters  for  the  tranfport-| 
ing  of  ’em  to  the  Village  that  lay  but  a little  way  off  | 
Büt  our  General  did  not  approve  of  their  Advice 
upon  which,  notwithftanding  his  Remonftrances, 
they  drew  up  into  a Body,  and  tho’  they  confifted 
of  ten  different  Nations,  agreed  in  a joynt  Refoluti- 
pn  cf  purfuing  their  Enemy,  in  hopes  of  taking, 


to  America.  f7 

eaft  their  Women,  their  Old-men,  and  their  Chil- 
dren. Our  General  being  acquainted  with  their  Re- 
folution,  gave  ’em  to  know,  that  he  earneftly  defir’d 
they  wquld  reft  for  one  day,  and  not  depart  from 
lis  Camp,  and  that  the  next  day  he  would  .burn  their 
Villages,  and  ftarve  ’em  to  Death  by  fpoi'ing  their 
Crops.  But  they  took  this  Compliment  fo  ill,  that 
tnoft  of ’em  return’d  to  their  own  Country;  remon- 
ftrating,  ‘ That  the  French  came  out  to  fetch  a Walk, 

■ rather  than  to  wage  War,  fince  they  would  not 
' take  the  Advantage  of  the  beft  Opportunity  in  the 
' World  : That  their  Ardour,  like  a flafti  of  Fire, 
‘ was  extinguifh’d  as  foon  as  kindled  : That  ’twas  a 

■ fruitlefs  Adventure , to  draw  together  fo  many 

• Warriours,  from  all  Parts,  to  burn  fome  Hutts  of 

• Bark,  that  the  Enemy  could  rebuild  in  four  days  ; 

■ That  the  Tjomntouans  did  not  matter  the  fpoiiing  of 
their  Corn,  for  that  the  other  Iro^uefe  Nations  were 

’ able  to  fupply  ’em  : And  in  fine.  That  fince  they 

■ had  joyn’d  the  French  twice  together  to  no  purpofe, 

■ they  would  never  truft  ’em  for  the  future,  in  fpite 
of  all  the  Remonftrances  they  could  make.  Some 

ire  of  the  opinion,  that  Mr.  Denonville  ought  to 
lave  gone  farther  ; and  others  affirm,  that  ’twas  im- 
loffible  for  him  to  do  more  than  he  did.  For  my 
lart,  I fliall  not  venture  upon  any  Decifion  of  the 
natter  ; thofe  who  fit  at  the  Helm  are  moft  liable 
:o  be  perplex’d.  To  purfue  the  bare  matter  of  Fatft  ; 
a^e  march’d  next  day  to  the  great  Village,  and  car- 
•y’d  our  wounded  Men  upon  Litters  ; but  we  found 
lothing  there  but  Affies;  for  the  Ircejuefe  had  burnt 
:he  Village  themfelves,  by  way  of  Precaution.  Then 
NQ  fpent  five  or  fix  days  in  cutting  down  the  Indian 
Corn  with  our  Swords.  From  thence  we  march’d 
0 the  two  little  Villages  of  the  Ihegaronhies  and  the 
^anoncaritaoui,  which  lay  about  two  or  three  Leagues 
i)ff.  Having  done  the  like  Exploits  there,  we  re- 
urn’d  to  the  Lake  fide,  In  all  thefe  Villages  we 
1:  ' found 


?8 


Some  "Hew  Voyages 


found  plenty  of  Horfes,  black  Cattel,  Fowl,  j 
Hogs.  All  the  Country  round  afforded  us  a ver3j,5 
charming,  pleafant,  and  even  Profpeéf.  The  Fo 
refts  thro  which  we  march’d  were  replenifh’d  wit! 
Oak,  Wall-nut,  and  wild  Chefhut-Trees. 

Two  days  after  we  imbarqu’d  for  Niagara,  whiclpj’ 
lay  thirty  Leagues  off,  and  arriv’d  there  in  ifoui^f 
days.  As  foon  as  the  Troops  had  debarqu’d, 
imploy’d  ’em  in  making  a Fort  of  Pales  with  fouifj,. 
Baftions,  which  was  fipifh’d  in  three  days.  Here  wc^j 
mean  to  leave  120  Soldiers  under  the  command  olg,,; 
Mr.  des  Berger  es,  with  Ammunition  and  ProvifionSj,,, 
for  eight  Months.  The  Fort  (lands  on  the  South  fide| 
of  the  Streigbt  of  Herriè  Lzke,  upon  a Hill;  at  the 
foot  of  which,  that  Lake  falls  into  the  Lake  of  Fron^y 
tenac.  Yefterday  the  Savages  our  Allies  took  leave 
of  Mr.  de  Denenville , and  made  a Speech  after 
their  ufual  manner  ; in  which,  among  other  things^ 
they  infmuated.  That  they  were  pleas’d  to  fee  ajij 
Fort  fo  conveniently  plac’d,  which  might  favour,  f 
their  retreat  upon  any  Expedition  againft  the  Irbj 


ifuefe;  That  they  depended  upon  his  promife,  ofj 


continuing  the  War  till  the  five  Nations  fhould  be  (j, 
either  deftroy’d  or  difpolTefs’d  of  their  Country  |ç 
That  they  earneftly  defir’d  that  part  of  the  Armyi,|, 
fhould  take  the  Field  out  of  hand,  and  continue  in 
it  both  Winter  and  Summer,  for  that  they  would  | 
certainly  do  the  fame  on  their  part  ; and  in  fine,  | 
That  for  as  much  as  their  Alliance  with  was  ||j 
chiefly  grounded  upon  the  promifes  the  Frm/j  made L 
of  liftening  to  no  Propofals  of  Peace,  till  the  fiveL 
Nations  fhould  be  quite  extirpated  ; they  therefore  |j 
hop’d  they  would  be  as  good  as  their  Word;  efpe-|, 
cially  confidering  that  a Cefïation  of  Arms  wouldji 
fully  the  honour  of  the  French,  and  infallibly  dif-| 
engage  their  Allies.  Mr.  de  Denenville  gAVQ  themfrelh| 
afl'uranccs  of  his  intention  to  carry  on  the  War,| 
in  fpitc  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Iroquefe  ; and  in  at| 

wor^ii 


to  Nbrf/;-America. 

vatàf  protefted  that  he  would  prolecute  this  defign 
I'o  vigoroufly,  that  in  the  end  thefe  Barbarians  fhouid 
!j6  either  quite  cut  off,  or  oblig’d  to  ihift  their 
Seats. 

^ The  General  call’d  for  me  that  very  day,  and  ac- 
quainted me,  that  in  regard  I underftood  the  Lan- 
î’uage  of  the  Savages,  Ï was  to  go  with  a Detach- 
^nenc  to  cover  their  Country  purfuant  to  their  Re- 

!ieft.  At  the  fame  time  he  aflur’d  me,  he  would  in- 
rm  the  Court  of  the  Reafons  that  mov’d  him  to 
:tain  me  in  Canaday  notwithftanding  that  he  had 
ders  to  give  me  leave  to  g©  home.  You  may  eafily 
lefs.  Sir,  that  I was  thunderftruck  vvith  thefe 
ews,  when  I had  fed  my  felf  all  along  with  the 
)pes  of  returning  to  France,  and  promoting  my 
Lntereft,  which  is  now  fo  much  thwarted.  Howe- 
ver, I was  forc’d  to  be  contented  j for  the  greater 
*ower  bears  the  fway  all  the  World  over.  Purfii- 
nt  to  my  orders,  I made  all  fuitable  preparations 
or  my  Voyage,  without  lofs  of  time.  I took  leave 
|f  my  Friends,  who  fingled  out  the  belt  Soldiers 
or  me  ; and  made  me  Prefents  of  Cloaths,  Tobac- 
:o.  Books,  and  ananfinity  of  other  things,  that  they 
:ould  fpare  without  any  inconveniency,  becaufe 
hey  were  then  upon  their  return  to  the  Colony, 
yhich  affords  every  thing  that  one  càn  defire.  By 
;ood  luck,  I brought  my  Aftrolabe  with  me  from 
■}4onrealy  which  will  enable  me  to  take  the  Latitudes 
, "f  this  Lake,  and  to  make  feveral  other  uieful  Ob* 
'ervations  ; for  in  all  appearance,  I ffiall  be  out  two 
f ears  or  fuch  a matter.  The  Men  of  my  Detach- 
pent  are  brisk  proper  fellows,  and  my  Canows  are 
oth  new  and  large.  I am  to  go  along  with  Mr, 
'■rmlhuty  3.  Lions  Gentleman  , who  is  a Perfon  of 
reat  Merit,  and  has  done  his  King  and  his  Coun- 
7 very  confiderable  Services.  Mr.  de  Tonti  makes 
ft  notherof  our  Company  ,-  and  a Company  of  Sa- 
ï;  ages  is  to  follow  us,  Mr.  de  Denenvilk  will  let  out 

, ; ' . for 


8 O Some  iSlew  Voyàges 

for  the  Colony  by  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake  of 
Frontenac,  in  two  or  three  days.  He  defigns  to  leave 
at  Fort  Frontenac,  a number  of  Men  and  Ammuni- 
tion equal  to  what  he  leaves  here.  I herewith  tranf- 
mit  feme  Letters  for  my  Relations,  which  I beg 
you  would  convey  to  their  Hands.  If  I meet  with 
any  opportunity,  I’ll  fend  you  a Journal  of  my 
Voyage  the  next  year.  In  the  mean  time,  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


LETTER  XIV.  || 

DâtQÔ  at  Miffilimakinac  May  26.  1688.  |i 

ii 

The  Author  leaves  Niagara,  and  has  an  Imoun- 
ter  with  the  Iroquefe  at  the  end  of  the  Land-  f 
Carriage.  The  after  part  of  his  Voyage.  A |î 
Defeription  of  the  Country.  He  arrives  at  k 
Fort  St.  Jofeph  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  k 
Hurons.  A Detachment  of  the  Hurons  çirrive 
at  the  fame  place.  After  an  Ingagement,  they  |t 
fet  out  for  Miffilimakinac.  A fir  ange  Advent 
ture  of  Mr.  de  la  Salle’s  Brother.  Miffilima-  | 
kinac,  deferih’d. 


1km  at  a lofs  to  determine  whether ’tis  owing  to  , 
Stupidity,  or  greatnefs  of  Mind,  that  the  lofs  of 
my  Eftate,  which  I infallibly  forefee,  do’s  not  at  all 
affbd  me.  Your  Letter  is  but  too  fhrewd  a confir- 
mation of  my  Prophecy  : However,  I cannot  but 
purfue  your  feafonable  advice  in  writing  to  Court  ; 

in  i 


! to  North^Amencà.  8 1 

in  the  mean  time  fufFer  me  to  fatisfie  my  promile, 

: in  prefenting  you  with  a relation  of  my  Voyages. 

I imbarqued  at  Niagara  Augufi  5.  on  board  a Câ'< 
f now  mann'd  with  eight  Soldiers  of  my  Detach- 
5 ment  j and  alter  running  three  Leagues  againft  the 
^ Current  of  the  Streight,  came  that  fame  day  to  the 
place  where  the  Navigation  flops.  There  I met 
• with  the  Sieur  Grifolon  de  la  Toureue,  Brother  to  Mr. 
\Dulhut,  who  had  ventur’d  to  come  from  Miffilima-' 
\kinac  with  a fingle  Canow  to  joyn  the  Army.  The 
\/\th  we  commenc’d  our  great  Land-Carriage  to  the 

1 '.Southward,  being  oblig’d  to  tranlport  our  Canows 
from  a League  and  a half  below  the  great  Fall  of 
\Niagara,  to  half  a League  above  it.  Before  we  got 
lat  any  beaten  or  level  Path,  we  were  forc’d  to 
climb  up  three  Mountains,  upon  which  an  hundred 
Iroqaefe  might  have  knock’d  us  all  on  the  head  with 
Stones.  While  we  were  imploy’d  in  this  tranfport 
pervice,  we  were  alarm’d  twice  or  thrice;  which 
paution’d  us  to  keep  a ftriâ:  guard,  and  to  tranfport 
|)Ur  Baggage  with  all  poffible  Expedition:  Nay, 
|ifter  all  our  precautions  we  were  forc’d  to  leave  one 
! jialf  of  our  Baggage  about  half  way,  upon  the  dif- 
,:pvery  of  a thoufand  Iroquefe  that  march’d  towards 
|is.  Do  you  judge,  Sir,  if  we  had  not  fome  rea- 
|bn  to  be  alarm’d  ; and  whether  we  would  fland  to 
lacrifice  all  to  the  natural  principle  of  Selfprefer- 
f ation  ; tho’  indeed  we  were  in  danger  of  iofing 
■|  ur  Lives  as  well  as  our  Baggage  : for  we  had  not 
ÿ nbarqued  above  the  Fall  half  a quarter  of  an  hour, 
i ;hen  the  Enemy  appear’d  upon  the  Streight  fide, 
f alTure  you,  I Tcap’d  very  narrowly;  for  about  a 
1 Quarter  of  an  hour  before,  I and  three  or  four 
; avages  had  gone  five  hundred  paces  out  of  our 
> oad,  to  look  upon  that  fearful  Cataract  ; and  ’twas 
» i much  as  I could  do,  to  get  at  the  Canows  be-» 

' ’)re  they  put  off  To  be  taken  by  fueh  cruel  Ee!-» 


Sx 


1 


Some  vietP  Voyais 

lows,  was  to  me  no  trifling  thing 
* The  Prifbners  ta*  fnmr  e niente^  ma  il  vîvere  hrugi* 
ken  by  the  Irequefe  a?tâo  troppo.  To  die  is  nothingy 
are  frequently  burnt,  hut  to  live  in  the  midfi  of  Fire  * is  too 
much. 

As  for  the  Waterfall  of  Niagara  ; ^tis  feven  or 
eight  hundred  foot  high,  and  half  a League  broad. 
Towards  the  middle  of  it  we  defcry  an  Ifland  that 
leans  towards  the  Precipice,  as  if  it  were  ready  to 
fall.  All  the  Beafts  that  crofs  the  Water  within 
half  a quarter  of  a League  above  this  unfortunate 
Ifland,  are  fuck’d  in  by  force  of  the  Stream  ; And 
the  Beafls  and  Fifli  that  are  thus  kill’d  by  the  prodi- 
gious fall,  ferve  for  food  to  fifty  Jro^ae/è,  who  are 
fetled  about  two  Leagues  off,  and  take  ’em  out  of 
the  water  with  their  Canows.  Between  the  furface 
of  the  water  thatfhelves  off  prodigioufly,  and  the 
foot  of  the  Precipice,  three  Men  may  crofs  in  a 
breaft  without  any  other  dammage,  thanafprink-  f 
ling  of  fome  few  drops, of  water.  ’ 


To  return  to  the  Story  of  the  thoufand  Irequefe  ; I ^ u, 
muft  tell  you,  that  we  crofs’dtheStreight  with  all  the  ® 
vigour  we  were  mafters  of,  and  after  rowing  all 
Night,  arriv’d  next  Morning  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Lake,  which  appear’d  to  be  indifferent  rapid.  Then 
we  were  fecure  from  all  danger,  for  the  Ca- 

nows are  fo  dull  and  large,  that  they  cannot  fail 


near  fo  quick  as  thofe  made  of  Birch- bark.  The  - 
former  are  made  of  E!m-bark,  which  is  very  heavy,;, 
and  their  form  is  very  aukard  ; for  they  are  fo  long 
and  broad  that  thirty  Men  row  in  them,  two 
breaft,  whether  fitting  or  ftanding,  and  the  fides  are 
fo  low,  that  they  dare  not  venture  ’em  upon  the 
Lakes,  tho’  the  wind  be  very  flack.  We  coafted  a- 
long  the  North-Coaft  of  the  Lake  of  Erie,  being 
favour’d  by  the  Calms,which  are  in  a manner  confiant 
in  that  feafon,  efpecially  in  the  Southern  Countries. 
Upon  the  brink  of  this  Lake  we  frequently  faw 

flocks 


'ti 


to  l^ohh-Krtvtnc2L.  à | 

fiocks  of  fifty  or  fixty  Turkey’s,  which  run  incredi- 
{ bly  fall  upon  the  Sands  : And  the  Savages  of  oui 
I Company  kill’d  great  numbers  of  ’em,  which  they 
j gave  to  us  in  exchange  for  thé  Fifh  that  we  catch’d. 
I The  z^th  we  arriv’d  at  a long  point  of  Land  which 
jhoots  out  14  or  if  Leagues  into  the  Lake  ; and  the 
heat  being  exceflive,  we  choie  to  tranfport  our  Boats 
and  Baggage  two  hundred  paces  over-land,  rather 
than  coaft  about  for  thirty  five  Leagues.  Septemb.  6. 
We  enter’d  the  Streightof  the  Lake  of  H«row,  where 
,we  met  with  a flack  Current  of  half  a League  in 
breadth,  that  continued  till  we  arriv’d  in  the  Lake 
!of  St.  Claire,  which  is  twelve  Leagues  in  Circumfe- 
rence. The  8th  of  the  fame  Month  we  fleer’d  oti 
:o  the  other  end,  from  whence  we  had  but  fix 
Leagues  to  run  againfl  the  flream,  till  we  arriv’d  in 
:he  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  Hurom,  where  we  landed 
in  the  i4f^.  You  cannot  imagine  the  plealant 
irofped  of  this  Streight,  and  of  the  little  Lake  j for 
ïheir  banks  are  cover’d  with  all  forts  of  wild  Fruit- 
trees.  ’Tis  true,  the  want  of  Agriculture  finks  the 
1*  greeablenefs  of  the  Fruit  j but  their  plenty  is  very 
arprifing.  We  fpy’d  no  other  Animals  upon  the 
:ioar,  but  Herds  of  Harts,  and  Roe-bucks:  And 
'/hen  we  came  to  little  Iflands,  we  fcour’d  ’em,  in 
rder  to  oblige  thefeBeafts  to  crois  over  to  thé  Con- 
nent,  upon  which  they  offering  to  fwim  Over, 
'ere  knock’d  on  the  head  by  our  Canow-men  that 
■ere  planted  all  roUnd  the  Iflands.  Alter  our  ar- 
f val  at  the  Fort,  of  which  I was  order’d  to  take 
- ilfeflion,  Mr.  Dulhut  and  Mr.y<;  Tonii  had  a mind 
reft  themfelves  for  fome  days,  as  wellf  as  the 
Lvages  that  accompany’d  us.  This  Fort,  Which 
'as  built  by  Mr.  waS  Garrifon’d  upon  his 

<vn  charges  by  thcCourem  de  Bois  y who  hàà  taken 
We  to  fow  in  it  fome  Bülhôls  of  Turkey~^he&t^ 
'hich  afiorded  a plentiful  Cropj  that  prob’d  of  great 
<3  to  RïSi  Thi  Garrifon  furrehdrsd  théir  Poft  te- 
G * if 


/ 


84  Sonîe  ISlew  Voyages 

ry  chearfully  to  my  Detachment  j and  then  purfo- 
ed  tbeir  Commerce  with  our  Savages,  for  every  one 
had  leave  to  go  where  he  pleas’d.  This  gave  me  an  op- 
portunity of  fending  two  Canows  under  a guard  of 
Soldiers,  to  difpofe  of  a great  Roll  of  Tobacco 
of  200  weight,  that  Mr.  Ddhut  had  kindly  prefent- 
ed  me  with  ; for  that  honeft  Gentleman  inform’d 
me,  that  my  Soldiers  might  eafily  purchafe  Corn  in 
exchange  for  Tobacco,  Iboner  than  for  any  other 
Commodities.  I am  oblig’d  to  him  as  long  as  I 
live  ; but  I am  much  afFraid,  the  Treafurer  of  the 
Navy  will  make  him  no  better  compenfation  for  this  || 
piece  of  Service,  than  for  a thoufand  other  disburfe-  j| 
ments  upon  the  King’s  account.  The  Soldiers  I Ij 
fent  with  the  Tobacco,  return’d  in  the  latter  end  {; 
of  November,  and  brought  with  ’em  the  Reverend  | ■ 
Father  Avenau  the  Jefuit,  who  found  no  occafion  ' 
to  trouble  himfelf  with  preaching  up  Abftinence  [' 
from  Meat  in  the  time  of  Lent.  They  brought  ad-  ! ' 
vice,  that  a Party  of  the  Hurens  being  prepar’d  to  j ' 
march  out  of  their  Villages,  to  attack  the  IrcejaeJe  !*“ 
Beaver-hunters,  would  fpeedily  repair  to  the  Fort  to 
reft  themfelves.  In  the  mean  time  I waited  with  j 
impatience  lor  the  arrival  of  one  T’urcct,  and  four , • 
more  of  the  Coureurs  de  Bois,  who  were  to  come  to  me  ® 
in  the  beginning  of  December,  along  with  feme  other  | 
Huntfmen  that  Mr.  de  Dencnvllle  had  promis’d  to  * 
fend  me  : But  hearing  nothing  of  ’em,  and  out  | <■ 
Commons  being  at  that  time  very  fliort,  1 fiiould  j * 
have  been  very  much  pinch  d,  if  four  young  Cana-  f 
defe  who  were  expert  Huntfmen,  had  not  tarry’dj 
with  me  all  Winter.  The  above-mention’d  Party 
of  the  l-Iurons  arriv’d  Decemb.  2.  being  headed  by 
onQ  Saentjouan,  who  left  me  hisCanow  and  his  Bag- P 
gage,  to  keep  till  he  return’d  ; for  he  could  not  pi 
poffibly  continue  his  Navigation  longer,  upon  thepi 
account  that  the  ftirface  of  the  water  began  then  top 
be  cover’d  with  Ice.  Thefe  Savages  chol'e  to  marchpi 

oV5r*i 


!| 


! to  North- AmcYicz.  8s 

; over-land  to  the  Fort  of  Niagara,  where  they  ex- 
peded  to  receive  intelligence  before  they  enter’d  the 
Country  of  the  Iroqueje.  They  march’d  ten  days, 
i.  e.  fifty  Leagues,  without  feeing  one  Soul.  But  at 
Î laft  their'  Scouts  perceiv’d  the  foot-fteps  of  fome 
Huntfmen  , which  they  trac’d  at  a great  pace  for 
a whole  Night,  the  Snow  being  then  a foot  deep. 

! Towards  the  break  of  day  they  return’d,  and  gave 
( notice  to  their  Fellow- Adventurers,  that  they  had 
difcover’d  fix  Hutts,  with  ten  Men  lodg’d  in  each 
of  ’em.  Upon  this  Intelligence  the  whole  party 
i made  a halt,  in  order  to  paint  their  faces,  to  pre- 
pare their  Arms,  and  to  concert  proper  Meafures. 
The  attack  was  fo  form’d,  that  two  Men  made 
e foftly  up  to  the  two  doors  of  the  Hutts  with  their 
' Clubs  in  their  Hands,  to  knock  down  any  one  that 
i offer’d  to  come  out, while  the  reft  were  imploy’d  in  fi- 
I ring  their  pieces.  And  the  Action  was  crown’d  with 
'.wonderful  Succefs;  for  the  Iroquefe  being  furpriz’d 
• and  fhut  up  in  their  bark  Prifons,  there  was  but 
.•[two  out  of  fixty  four  that  made  their  elcape;  and 
■thefe  two  being  naked  and  deftitute  of  Fire-Arm^s, 
jcould  not  but  perilh  in  the  Woods.  Three  of  the 
\Hurom  indeed  were  kill’d  upon  the  fpot,  buttoat- 
tone  for  that  lofs,  the  AgrefTors  carry’d  off  four- 
teen Prifoners,  and  four  Women.  This  done,  they 
march’d  back  to  my  Fort  with  all  poffible  Expedi- 
' tion.  Among  the  Captive  Slaves,  there  were  three 
who  had  made  part  of  the  number  of  the  looo  Iro- 
cjuefe  that  thought  to  have  furpris’d  us  the  year  be- 
fore, when  we  were  implpy’d  in  the  great  Land- 
Carriage  at  Niagara.  They  gave  us  to  under- 
■ ftand,  that  the  Fort  of  Niagara  was  block’d  up  by 
eight  hundred  Iroquefe,  who  mean’d  to  appear  be- 
fore my  Poft  without  any  delay.  This  troubiefbin 
piece  of  news  gall’d  me  to  the  laft  degree,  for  fear 
ff  being  reduc’d  to  extremities;  and  with  that  view 
I was  a very  nicç  Husband  of  what  Corn  I had 

G I ieft. 


86  Some  Ketp  Voyages 

left.  Ï was  not  apprehenfive  of  being  attack’d  by 
’em,  for  the  Savage?  never  fight  fairly,  neither  do 
they  ever  attempt  to  pull  up  PaliflTadoes  ; but  I was 
affraid  that  they  would  ftarve  us  out  by  cramping 
our  Huntfmen  in  their  due  range.  However,  the 
Hurons  continuing  fifteen  days  in  my  Fort  to  refrelh 
themfelves,  1 us’d  the  precaution  of  ingaging  them 
to  aflift my  Huntfmen  in  providing  Meat:  Butas 
foon  as  they  took  leave  of  me  in  order  to  return 
home,  our  hunting  was  at  at  end,  and  the  Gates 
were  kept  (hut. 

At  laft,  finding  that  my  Provifions  were  almoft 
out,  I refolv’d  to  go  to  Mijftlimakinacy  to  buy  up 
torn  from  the  Hurons  and  the  Ouîmuans.  Accor- 
dingly, having  left  fome  Soldiers  to  guard  the  Fort  ! 
In  my  abfence,  I imbarqu’d  with  the  reft  of  my  ! 
petachroent  on  the  firft  of  April,  with  a gentle 
South-Eaft  Gale  ; by  the  help  of  which  we  infenfi- 
bly  crofs’d  the  Bay  of  Sagu,inan.  That  little  Gulf  is 
fix  hours  over,  and  in  the  middle  of  it  there  are 
two  little  Iflands,  which  afford  a very  feafonable 
fhelter  when  a wind  arifes  in  the  crofting  over, 
Before  you  have  crofs’d  this  Bay,  the  Coaft  is  all 
a long  full  of  Rocks  and  Shelves,  one  of  which  that 
1 faw  was  fix  Leagues  broad  ; But  above  it  the  Coaft 
is  clean  and  low,  efpecially  tovyards  the  Sand-Ri- 
ver, which  lies  half  way  between  that  Bay  and  a 
place  call’d  l*Anfe  du  Xonnere.  I*^ow  this  laft  place 
is  reckon’d  thirty  Leagues  off  the  Bay.  Having 
paft  that,  we  had  but  thirty  Leagues  more  to  fail  ’;  j! 
which  we  did  without  any  danger,  by  the  help  of  |: 
ari  Eaft-South'Eaft  Gale,  that  fwell’d  the  Wave?  j 
prodigioufly.  In  the  Moutfi  of  the  lllimfe  Lake  w*e  j 
met  the  party  of  the  Huronst\\At  I mention’d  before;  | 
andfour  or  five  hündred  0«t<3îtf«Ær,  who  vyere  boupd  I 
home,  after  having  fpent  the  Winter  in  hunting  of  { 
Beayers  upon  the  River  of  Saguinan.  Both  they  an,d  i 
we  were  forc’d  to  lye  by  in  that  place  for  three  o.r,  i 

....  . ..  ..  V.  .y-.v-  ... 


to  North  Amcnca.  87 

four  days,  by  reafon  of  the  Ice  ; After  which  the 
Lake  was  clear’d,  and  we  crofs’d  it  together.  When 
the  Hurons  came  aflioar , they  confulted  among 
themfelves  how  to  difpofe  of  their  Slaves  : After 
which  they  made  a Prefent  of  one  of  ’em  to  Mr. 
de  Jacbereau,  who  commanded  in  that  place  ; but 
the  poor  wretch  was  prefently  (hot  to  Death.  Ano- 
ther of  ’em  was  prefented  to  the  Outaouas,  who 
granted  him  his  Life,  for  fuch  reafons  asyouwould 
eafily  apprehend,  if  you  were  better  acquainted  with 
the  policy  and  cunning  of  that  fort  of  Men,  whom 
I you  now  take  for  Beafts. 

I arriv’d  in  this  place  on  the  iStb  of  and 
my  uneafinefs  and  trouble  took  date  from  the  day 
of  my  arrival  : For  I found  the  W/ü?»  Corn  fofcarce 
by  reafon  of  the  preceding  bad  Harvefts,  that  I 
i defpair’d  of  finding  half  fo  much  as  I wanted.  But 
I after  all,  I am  hopeful,  that  two  Villages  will  fur- 
; nilh  me  with  almoft  as  much  as  I have  occafion  for. 

! Mr.  Cavelier  arriv’d  here  May  6,  being  accompany’d 
I with  his  Nephew,  Father  Anaftafe  the  Recollet,  a 
j Pilot,  one  of  the  Savages,  and  fome  few  Frenchmen^ 
which  made  a fort  of  a party-colour’d  Retinue. 
Thefe  Frenchmen  were  fome  of  thofe  chat  Mr.  de  la 
i Sade  had  conduced  upon  the  difcovery  of  Mtffif.pi. 
They  give  out,  that  they  are  fen t to  Canada,  in 

• order  to  go  to  France,  with  fome  Difpatches  from 

* Mr.  de  la  Salle  to  the  King  : But  we  fufpe<îl  that  he 
j is  dead,  becaufe  he  do’s  not  return  along  with  ’em. 
j I fhall  not  fpend  time  in  taking  notice  of  their 
I great  Journey  over-land  ; which  by  the  account 
I ■ they  give  cannot  be  lefs  than  eight  hundred  Leagues. 

Mijjilmakinac,  the  place  I am  now  in,  is  certainly 
I a place  of  great  Importance.  It  lies  in  the  Latitude 
I of  forty  five  Degrees,  and  thirty  Minutes;  but  as 
^ for  its  Longitude,  I have  nothing  to  fay  of  it,  fof 
j reafons  mention’d  in  my  fécond  Letter.  ’Tis  not 
1 above  half  a Lsagye  djftent  from  the  Illm[e  Lake* 

G 4 an 


$S  Some  Voyais 

an  account  of  which, and  indeed  of  all  the  other  Lakes, 
you  may  exped  elfe- where.  Here  the  Hurons  and 
Outaouas  have,  each  of  ’em,  a Village  ; the  one  be- 
ing fever’d  from  the  other  by  a (ingle  PalilTadoe  ; 
But  the  Outaouas  are  beginning  to  build  a Fort  up- 
on a Hill,  that  (lands  but  looo  or  1200  paces  o(F. 
This  Precaution  they  were  prompted  to  by  the 
murder  of  a certain  Huron,  call’d  Sandaouires,  who 
was  alfaflinated  in  thtSaguinan  River  by  four  young 
Outaouas.  In  this  place  the  Jefuits  have  a little 
Houfe,  or  Colledge  adjoyning  to  a fort  of  a Church, 
and  inclos’d  with  Pales  that  feparate  it  from  the 
Village  of  the  Hurons.  Thefe  good  Fathers  lavi(h  a- 
way  all  their  Divinity  and  Patience  to  no  purpofe, 
in  converting  fuch  ignorant  Infidels  : For  all  the 
length  they  can  bring  ’em  to,  is,  that  oftentimes 
they’ll  defire  Baptifm  for  their  dying  Children,  and 
fome  few  fuperknnuated  Perfons  confent  to  re- 
ceive the  Sacrament  of  Baptifm,  when  they  find 
themfelves  at  the  point  of  Death.  The  Coureurs  de 
Boss  have  but  a very  fmall  fettlement  here  j though 
at  the  fame  time  ’tis  not  inconfiderable,  as  being, 
the  Staple  of  all  the  Goods  that  they  truck  with  the 
South  and  the  Weft  Savages  ; for  they  cannot  avoid 
paffing  this  way, when  they  go  to  the  Seats  of  the  Illi- 
nefoy  and  the  Oumamü,  or  to  the  Bay  desVuants,  and 
to  the  River  of  Mijjijipi.-  The  Skins  which  they  im- 
port from  thefe  different  places,  muft  lye  here  fome 
time  before  they  are  tranlported  to  the  Colony. 
M0imakinac  is  fituated  very  advantageoufly  ; for 
t\\Qlrocjuefe  dare  not  venture  with  their  forry  Ganows, 
to  crofs  the  Streight  of  the  ////wf/è  Lake,  which  is 
two  Leagues  over  ; befides  that  the  Lake  of  the  Hu- 
rcns  is  too  rough  for  fuch  ftender  Boats  : And  as 
they  cannot  come  to  it  by  Water,  fo  they  cannot 
approach  to  it  by  Land,  by  reafon  of  the  Marfties, 
Fens,  and  little  Rivers,  which  ’twould  be  very  diffi- 
cult to  crofs;  not  to  mention  that  the  Streight  of 
the  I//i»f/e  Lake  lies  ftil]  in  their  way,  Yoit 


IXINESE  LAKE 


ÎTÏIF.  3ÆOUTH 


to  Nwt/?  America.  89 

You  can  fcarce  believe,  Sir,  what  vaft  flioles  of 
white  Filhare  catch’d  about  the  middle  of  theCban- 
nel,  between  the  Continent  and  the  Ifle  of  Mrjfili- 
Tnakinac.  The  Outacuas  and  the  Hurons  could  never 
fubfift  here,  without  that  Filhery  j for  they  are  ob- 
lig’d to  travel  above  twenty  Leagues  in  the  Woods, 
before  they  can  kill  any  Harts  or  Elks,  and’twould 
be  an  infinite  fatigue  to  carry  their  Garcafes  fo 
far  over  Land.  This  fort  of  white  Fifla  in  my  o- 
pinion,  is  the  only  one  in  all  thefc  Lakes  that  can 
be  call’d  good  ; and  indeed  it  goes  beyond  all  o- 
ther  forts  of  River  Filh  Above  all,  it  has  one  fin- 
gular  property,  namely,  that  all  forts  of  Sauces 
fpoil  it,  fo  that  ’tis  always  eat  either  boil’d  or  broil'd, 
without  any  manner  of  feafoning.  în  the  Chan- 
nel I now  fpeak  of  the  Currents  are  fo  ürong,  that 
they  fometimes  fuck  in  the  Nets,  though  they  are 
two  or  three  Leagues  off.  In  fome  feafons,  it  fo 
falls  out  that  the  Currents  run  three  days  Eaftward, 
:wo  days  to  the  Weft,  one  to  the  South,  and  four 
Northward  j fometimes  more,  and  fometimes  left. 
ÎThe  çaufe  of  this  diverfity  of  Currents  could  ne- 
/er  be  fathom’d,  for  in  a calm,  they’i  run  injche 
pace  of  one  day  to  all  the  points  of  the  Com.pafs, 
. e.  fometimes  one  W'ay,  fometimes  another,  with- 
)ut  any  limitation  of  time  ; fo  that  the  decifion  of 
^ his  matter  muft  be  left  to  the  Difcip’es  of  Ccpemi- 
‘‘US.  Here  the  Savages  catch  Trouts  as  high  as  one’s 
irhigh,  with  a fort  of  FiHring  Hook  made  in  the 
|orm  of  an  Awl,  and  made  faft  to  a piece  of  Brafs 
■|vire,  which  is  joyn’d  to  the  Line  that  reaches  to 
"^,he  bottom  of  the  Lake.  This  fort  of  Fftliery  is 
■arried  on  not  only  with  Hooks,  but  with  Nets, 
■ nd  that  in  Winter,  as  well  as  in  Summer  : For  they 
lake- holes  in  the  Ice  at  a certain  d,iftance  one  from 
nother,  thro’ which  they  condud  the  Nets  with 
‘oles.  The  Outamas  and  Hurons  have  very  plea- 
mt  Fields^  in  which  they  fow  ImHap  Corn,  ,Peare, 


9 O Some  7!Ïew  Voyages 

and  Beans,  befides  a fort  of  Citruls,  and  Melons, 
which  differs  much  from  ours,  and  of  which  I fhall  ' 
take  occafion  to  fpeak  in  another  place.  Some- 
times , thefe  Savages  fell  their  Corn  very  dear , 
efpecially  when  the  Beaver-hunting  happens  not 
to  take  well  : Upon  which  occafion  they  make 
fufficient  reprifals  upon  us  for  the  extravagant  price 
of  our  Commodities.  t 

As  foon  as  1 have  bought  up  fixty  facks  of  Corn,  ' 
each  of  which  may  weigh  fifty  pound,  I am  to  if 
march  with  my  Detachment  alone  to  St.  Mary%  j, 
Fort,  in  order  to  ingage  the  Sauteurs  or  the  Inhabi-  ^ 
tânts  of  Saut  Saint  Marie,  to  joyn  the  Outaouas  j af- 
ter  which  we  mean  to  march  with  joynt  Forces  jf 
to  the  Country  of  the  Iroejuefe.  Befides  thefe,  there’s  ^ 
a party  of  a hundred  Hurons  ready  to  march,  urt-  im 
der  the  Comniand  of  the  great  Leader  Adario, 
whom  the  French  call  the  Rat  ; but  they  do  not  te 
march  our  way.I  fhall  write  to  you  with  the  firft  Op-  jii, 
porunity  after  my  return  from  this  Expedition.  Per-i-  jfj 
haps  the  Jefuits  will  fend  your  Letters  for  me  along  jjj, 
with  Mr.  Denmvilleh  to  Fort  St.  Jofefh^  where  I am  to  j|„ 
refide.  I fhall  exped  their  arrival  with  the  utmoft  |j 
impatience.  In  the  mean  time  I fend  you  a Letter  jjj, 
direded  to  Mr.  ie  Selgnelai,  the  purport  of  which  I |)j 
have  here  fubjoyn’d.  ’Twill  be  a very  fenfible  ob-ji, 
ligation  laid  upon  me,  if  you  vouchfafe  to  believe  li, 
that  I always  am,  i j 


to  North- Amener  oi 

i ' ^ 

i 


I The  Letter  dïre^ed  to  Mr,  de  Seignelay. 

j Honoured  Str^ 

T Am  the  Son  of  a Gentleman  that  fpent  three  hun- 
t"  dred  thoufand  Crowns  in  deepening  the  Water  of 
!the  two  Gaves  of  Bearn  : He  had  the  good  luck  to 
compafs  his  End  by  conveying  a great  many  Brooks 
to  thefe  two  Rivers;  and  the  Current  of  the  Jdour 
iwas  by  that  means  fo  far  ftrengthen’d  as  to  render 
the  Bar  of  Bayonne  paiTable  by  a fifty  Gun  Ship, 
Whereas  in  former  times  a Frigot  of  ten  Guns  durft 
not  venture  over  it,  ’Twas  in  confideration  of  this 
(great  and  fuccefsful  Attempt,  that  his  Majefiy  gran- 
ted to  my  Father  and  his  Heirs  for  ever,  certain  Du- 
ties and  Taxes,  amounting  to  the  Sum  of  three  thou- 
fand  Livres  a Year.  This  Grant  was  confirm  dby 
jin  KGt  of  the  Council  of  State,  dated  January  9. 
16 j8,  Sign’d  Bojfuet,  Collated,  &c.  Another  Ad- 
vantage accruing  to  the  King  and  the  Province  from 
|ny  Father’s  Services,  confifts  in  the  bringing  down 
lOf  Mafts  and  Yards  from  the  Pyrenean  Mountains, 
fivhich  could  never  have  been  efteded,  if  he  had  not 
by  his  Care,  and  by  the  disburfing  of  immenfe  Sums, 
^mlarged  the  quantity  of  Water  in  the  Gave  of  Oleron 
:o  a double  proportion.  Thefe  Duties  and  Taxes 
tA^hich  had  been  juftly  intail’d  upon  him  and  his 
vtleirs,  ceas’d  to  be  ours  when  he  dy’d  ; and  to  in- 
dame  the  Difgrace,  I loft  his  Places,  viz,,  that  of  be- 
’ ng  a Honorary  Judge  of  the  Parliament  of  Pau^  and 
ijChief  Juftice  in  Eyre  for  the  Province  of  Bearn  i 
ill  which  were  mine  by  Inheritance,  Thefe  Lofles 
tire  novy  follow’d  by  an  uniuft  Seizure  that  fome  pre- 
5 tended  Creditor?  have  mads  of  the  Barony  of  la  Hon» 


9 1 Some  New  Voyages 

tan,  of  a piece  of  Ground  that  lies  contiguous  to  it, 
and  of  a hundred  thoufand  Livres  that  lay  in  the 
hands  of  the  Chamber  of  Bayonne.  Thefe  faithlefi 
Creditors  have  no  other  reafon  to  fue  ma,  but  that  I 
am  now  in  the  fagg  end  of  the  World,  and  that  they 
are  rich,  and  fupported  by  the  Credit  and  Prote^Hon 
of  the  Parliament  of  Farû,  where  they  hope  to  make 
good  their  unjuft  Pretenfions  in  my  Abfence.  Laft 
Year  I obtain’d  Leave  to  return  to  France,  in  order  to 
take  care  of  this  matter;  but  now  Mr.  de  Denonville 
has  fent  me  with  a Detachment  to  thefe  Lakes;  from 
whence  I humbly  petition  that  your  Honour  would 
vouchfafe  me  Leave  to  come  home  the  next  Year, 
and  at  the  fame  time  honour  me  with  your  Prote- 
ction. I am,  with  all  poflible  refpeCt, 


T'eut  Honours,  &c. 


LETTER  XV. 

Dated  at  Mijfd’makinac,  Sept.  i8. 1688. 


Defcrihing  the  Fall  call'd  Saut  St.  Marie,  where 
the  Author  perfwades  the  Inhabitants  to  joyn 
the  Outaouas,  and  march  againfi  the  Iroquele. 
And  containing  an  Account  of  the  Occurrences 
of  the  Voyage  -let ween  that  Place  and  Miflili- 
makinac. 


.:!0l 


SIR, 


I Am  now  return’d  from  the  Iro<juefe  Country,  and 
have  quitted  the  Fort  of  St.  Jofeph,  againrt  my 
Will.  I cannot  allow  my  felf  to  doubt,  but  that 
you  took  care  of  the  Letter  directed  for  Mr.  de  Seîg- 
nelay,  which  I tranfmitted  to  you  three  Months  ago. 


to  Nori/?  America.  9| 

I fefc  out  from  hence  in  my  Canow,  June  2.  And 
■after  my  Arrival  at  the  Water-fall  call’d  Saut  Sainte 
Marie,  I perlWaded  forty  young  Warlike  Fellows  to 
joyn  the  Party  of  the  Outaouas  that  I mention’d  in 
my  laft.  This  Saut  Sainte  Marie  is  a Cataradt,  or 
■rather  a Water-fall  of  two  Leagues  in  lengthy  which 
jgives  vent  to  the  Waters  of  the  upper  Lake,  and  at 
the  bottom  of  which,  not  far  from  the  Jefuits  Houfe, 
there’s  a Village  of  the  Outchipoues,  alias  Sauteurs. 
This  Place  is  a great  Thoroughfare  for  the  Coureurs  de 
Boü  that  trade  with  the  Northern  People,  who  ufu- 
ially  repair 'to  the  brinks  of  that  Lake  in  the  Summer. 
The  continual  Fogg  that  rifes  from  the  upper  Lake, 
and  fpreads  over  the  adjacent  Country,  renders  the 
Ground  fo  barren,  that  it  bears  no  Corn.  The  13  th 
of  the  fame  Month  I fet  out  from  the  abovementi- 
bn’d  Village,  being  accompany’d  by  the  forty  young 
Sauteurs,  who  embark’d  in  five  Canows,  each  of 
which  held  eight  Men.  The  i6th  we  arriv’d  at  the 
Ifle  of  Detour,  where  my  Soldiers  and  the  Party  of  the 
putaouashnà  tarry’d  for  me  two  days.  The  firft  day 
was  fpent  by  the  Outaouas  and  the  Sauteurs  in  Warlike 
jFeafts,  Dancing,  and  Singing,  purfuant  to  their 
jwonted  Cuftom  : The  next  day  we  all  embark’d, 
and  traverfing  from  Ifle  to  Ifle,  made  the  Ifland  of 
Mttnitoualin  in  four  days.  This  Ifland  is  ay  Leagues 
Jong,  and  feven  or  eight  broad.  In  former  times  ’twas 
iOofl'efs’d  by  the  Outaouas  of  "Talon,  call’d  the  Otonta- 
'^ans  ; who  were  diflodg’d  by  the  Progrefs  of  the  lro~ 
que(e,  that  has  ruin’d  fo  many  Nations.  We  coali  d 

Irpon  that  Ifle  a whole  day  j and  being  favour’d  by 
i Calm,  crofs’d  from  Ifle  to  Ifle  till  we  made  the 
Eaft-fide  of  the  Lake.  In  this  Paffage  wè  crofs’d  be- 
;:ween  two  Iflands  that  were  fix  Leagues  diftant  the 
one  from  the  other;  and  upon  that  occafion  our  Wa- 
termen, who  were  not  us’d  to  venture  lb  far  out  in 
4 heir  flender  Boats,  were  fain  to  tugg  hard  at  their 
Oars.  The  Savages  flood  out  at  firft,  and  refus’d  to 


94  ISlew  f^oyages 

ventufe  fo  far  from  Land,  for  they  would  rather 
have  gone  fifty  Leagues  about  ; but  at  laft  I over- 
perfwaded  ’em,  by  reprefenting  that  I would  have 
been  very  loth  to  venture  my  own  Perfon,  if  I had 
not  been  fuffidently  provided  againft  all  danger  by 
an  exacft  knowledge  of  the  Winds  and  the  Storms. 
The  Calm  continuing,  we  made  the  River  of  Ti>eo~ 
nontath  on  the  z f th.  The  next  day  there  fprung  up 
a Gale  from  the  Weft- fouth* weft,  which  kept  us 
back  for  four  or  five  days  ; but  oUr  ftop  was  of  no 
great  advantage  to  us,  for  it  rain’d  fo  heavily,  that 
we  could  not  hunt.  This  Country  is  the  ancient 
Seat  of  the  Hurons,  as  it  appears  from  the  Name  they 
give  to  their  Nations  in  their  own  Language,  vizi. 
Theonontateronom,  i.  e.  the  Inhabitants  of  Theonontate: 
But  after  the  Iroquefe  had,  upon  divers  occafions,  ta- 
ken and  defeated  great  numbers  of ’em,  the  reft  quit- 
ted the  Country  to  avoid  the  like  Fate.  We  re- 
embark’d on  the  29th,  and  on  the  ift  of  July  arriv’d  '1 
&tVoxt  St.  Jofef to,  where  the  Soldiers  I had  left  wait-  I 
ed  for  us  with  great  Impatience.  Having  landed  1 
feme  Sacks  Corn  at  the  Fort,  we  fet  out  again  oir  | 
the  ;d  of  July,  and  purfued  our  Courfe  with  all  di- 
ligence, in  order  to  an  early  Appearance  in  the  Iro- 
quefe  Country.  We  fail’d  through  the  Streight  of 
Neck,  and  ftood  to  the  South-fide,  of  the  Lake  Erie; 
and  being  favour’d  by  the  Weather,  arriv’d  on  the 
17th  in  the  River  of  Conde,  which  Ï ftiall  have  occa- 
fion  to  take  notice  of  in  deferibing  the  Lakes  of  Ca- 
nada, Immediately,  Upon  our  Landing,  the  Savages 
fell  to  work  in  cutting  down  Trees,  and  making  a 
Redoubt  of  Stakes,  or  Pales,  for  the  Security  of  our 
Canows  and  Baggage,  and  for  a fafe  Retreat  to  our 
felves  in  cafe  of  neceffity. 

The  20th  they  march’d,  each  Man  being  provi- 
ded  with  a light  Covering,  a Bow,  and  fome  Arrows,- 
(or  elfe  a Fufee ) and  a little  Bag  containing  tern 
pound  weight  of  the  Flowr  of  the  Indian  Corn. 

They  j 

' ! 


to  North  Ammca.*  p5 

They  thought  it  moft  convenient  to  keep  to  the 
Banks  of  the  River,  upon  which  the  Gojiogoans  &ve 
wont  to  fiihfor  Sturgeon  j for  that  Fifh,  which  is 
[fix  foot  in  length,  comes  out  of  the  Lakes  in  hot 
Weather,  and  fwims  up  the  Rivers.  They  had  re- 
jfolv’d  likewife,  if  they  found  the  Country  clear,  to 
! march  up  and  furprife  the  Villages  of  the  Goyogoans  : 
[but  they  were  foon  cas’d  of  that  trouble;  for  they 
|had  not  march’d  two  days  when  their  Scouts  de- 
[fcry’d  three  hundred  Ira^uefe:  and  on  the  other  hand 
ij:he  Iroejuefe  fpy’d  them  to  fuch  purpofe,  that  the 
(jkouts  efcap’d  very  narrowly,  and  had  much  ado  to 
j eturn  to  the  body  of  the  Party,  which  immediately 
i);)etook  themfelves  to  flight.  I was  mightily  furpris’d 
|vhen  I heard  the  Centinel  of  our  Redoubt  cry  out. 
Armes  y our  Men  are  beaten  and  pur fued  ; but  I was 
'et  more  furpriz’d  when  I faw  the  Fugitives  run  at 
,ull  fpeed,  wherf  there  was  no  body  behind  them. 
jVhen  they  came  up  they  were  all  filent  for  half  an 
our,  purifiant  to  their  Ufe  and  Wont  ; after  which 
jbeir  Leader  recounted  to  me  the  Particulars  of  the 
idventure.  I thought  at  firft  that  their  advanc’d 
|îuards  had  miftook  the  number  of  the  Enemies  ; 
in  I knew  that  the  Outaouas  had  not  the  Reputation 
|f  too  much  Courage:  but  the  next  day  a Party  of 
|ie  Iroquefe  appear’d  in  fight  of  our  Redoubt,  which 
|ive  meoccafion  to  believe  that  they  were  in  the  right 
|F  it.  Nay,  this  Truth  was  afterwards  confirmed  by 
incertain  Slave  call’d  Chaouanon,  who  mads  his  elcaps 
I»  the  Redoubt,  and  aflfur’d  me,  that  the  Iroquefe  were 
|Dt  lefs  than  four  hundred;  to  which  he  added,  that 
yey  expeded  to  be  joyn’d  by  fixty  more  that  had 
March’d  fome  Months  before  to  the  Country  of  the 
Umamü.  He  inform’d  us  farther,  That  while  the 
. .arquis  de  Denonville  was  concerting  meafures  for  a 
hace  with  the  five  Nations,  an  EngUjhmany  of  the 
hmeofy^rw,  accompany’d  with  fome  others,  en- 
<avoar’d  to  diffwads  them  from  Pease,  by  Orders 

from 


ç 6 Some  'Hem  t^oyages 

from  the  Governour  of  New  Yorh  In  the  mean  tîmâ 
the  Savages  having  prefs’d  me  to  affift  at  a Council 
of  War,  they  propos’d  to  lie  by  for  a fair  Wind,  and 
then  to  embark.  They  reprefented,  that  they  de- 
lign’d  to  fail  to  the  end  of  the  Lake,  where  they 
would  infallibly  light  upon  the  fixty  Ircquefe  that  I 
mention’d  above  ; but  withal,  that  they  could  riot 
agree  to  fet  out  in  a Calm,  becaufe  that  after  their  I 
quitting  the  Redoubt,  and  launching  out,  a contra-  i 
l y Wind  might  force  ’em  afhore,  where  their  Throats 
might  be  cut  if  the  Enemy  purfu’d  ’em.  I reply’d. 
That  ’twas  then  fuch  fine  Weather,  that  we  had  no- 
thing to  expe<5t  but  Calms;  that  if  we  tarry’d  longer 
in  this  Place,  our  Enemies  would  thereby  gain  time 
to  make  Canows  in  order  to  a Purfuit  ; that  fince 
the  favourablenefs  of  the  Wind  was  fo  uncertain,  we 
ought  to  embark  without  lofs  of  time^;  that  we  might 
fail  in  the  Night,  and  fculk  in  the  l5ay-time  behind 
Rocks  and  Points  of  Land;  and,  that  by  this  means 
the  Enemy  would  be  at  a lofs  to  know  whether  we 
flood  to  the  South  or  to  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake. 
The  Savages  made  Anfwer,  That  ’twas  true  their 
tarrying  might  be  every  way  prejudicial  ; but  ’twas 
equally  true,  that  my  Expedient  was  dangerous; 
However,  they  confented  to  embark  along  with  us, 
and  for  that  end  gumm’d  their  Canows.  We  era- 
bark’d  on  the  24th  at  night,  and  the' Weather  being  , 
fair,  clear,  and  calm,  made  a great  deal  of  way  that  ' 
night,  and  the  fucceeding  day.  The  next  Evening  j ; 
we  came  to  an  Anchor,  defigning  to  fleep  for  three  j | 
or  four  hours,  but  not  to  ftir  out  of  the  Canows. 
About  Midnight  we  weigh’d  our  little  wooden  An-  1^ 
chors,  and  one  half  of  the  Men  row’d  while  the  o-  | 
ther  was  at  reft.  Thus  did  we  continue  tofteer  with  J, 
A great  deal  of  Precaution  and  Care,  rowing  all  i' 
night,  and  lying  by  all  day.  _ j 

' fuly  28.  when  we  were  lying  almoft  all  alTeep  in  j j 
a Creek  of  a little  Ifland,  the  Watch  deferying  fome  1 , 

Canows  j 


to  America. 

Canows  that  made  towards  us,  wak’d  (bme  Savages 
that  had  gone  a-Æore  to  fleep  the  more  convenient- 
ly. The  Noife  having  alarm'd  u#  all,  we  prelently 
. made  our  felves  ready  to  get  in  head  of  thefe  Canows  j 
but  at  the  fame  time,  tho’  we  were  but  half  a League 
off,  we  could  not  diftinguifli  who  they  were,  by  rea- 
fon  that  the  Sun-beams  falling  perpendicularly,  made 
the  Surface  of  the  Water  look  like  a Look ing-gl aft. 
Indeed  there  being  but  two  of  'em,  we  reckon’d  they 
were  mann’d  with  Iroquefe,  and  that  each  of  ’em 
contain’d  at  leaft  twenty  Men:  upon  which  fufpi- 
cion,  the  Leader  of  the  Sauteurs  offered  to  go  a-ftiore 
, with  his  Men,  and  poft  himfelf  at  the  Entry  of  a 
j Wood,  from  whence  he  would  foftly  follow  the  Ca- 
Î nows  without  being  difcover’d,  till  fuch  time  as  we 
(forc’d  ’em  a-lhore.  At  the  fame  time  he  propos’d 
(that  the  Outaouas  and  my  Detachment  fhould  fuffer 
i’em  to  be  within  a Musket-ftiot  of  the  Ifland  before 
jwe  difcover’d  our  felves,  or  offer’d  to  give  ’em  chafe, 
'upon  the  apprehenfion  that  if  we  follow’d  ’em  clofer, 
they  would  be  fo  far  from  getting  on  fliore,  that  they 
would  fight  as  defperate,  and  choofe  rather  to  be 
kill’d  or  drown’d  than  to  be  taken.  This  Propoial 
was  lik’d,  and  every  thing  was  manag’d  accordingly, 
,\s  foon  as  our  unknown  Enemy  perceiv’d  us,  they 
nade  the  Shore  with  all  imaginable  Precipitation  j 
ind  juft  when  they  were  going  to  knock  their  Prifo- 
lers  on  the  Head,  the  Sauteurs  fell  upon  ’em,  buÉ 
nifs’d  of  their  aim  in  taking  ’em  all  alive  ; for  they 
/ought  to  the  laft  galp,  like  Men  that  knew  no  Me- 
lium  betwixt  Conqueft  and  Death,  Una  falm  vïBà 
ullam  fperare  falutem.  This  Engagement  happen’d 
i^hile  we  landed  : however,  the  Sauteurs  came  off 
vith  Honour,  for  they  loft  only  four  Men,  and  of 
wenty  Iroqueje  they  kill’d  three,  wounded  five,  and 
ook  the  reft  Prifoners,  lb  that  not  one  of ’em  efcap’d, 
The  Iroquefe  had  along  with  them  eighteen  Slaves  of 
ae  Oumamàf  who  were  all  wounded,  and  feven  big- 

H belly’d 


^8  Some  Hew  Voyages 

belly’d  Women,  from  whom  we  had  Intell^enc* 
that  the  reft  of  their  Party  were  then  upon  their  Re- 
turn by  Land  upon  the  Banks  of  the  Lake,  having 
thirty  four  Prifbners,  of  both  Sexes  ; and  that  they 
could  not  then  be  far  off.  When  this  Intelligence 
was  laid  before  us,  the  Outaouas  were  of  the  opinion 
that  we  ihould  reft  fatisfied  with  the  Feats  we  had 
done,  upon  the  Plea  that  the  above-mention’d  four 
hundred  Iroquefe  would  certainly  get  before  us.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Sauteurs  maintain’d  that  they  had 
rather  perilh  than  fail  to  attempt  the  Refeue  of  thefe 
Prifoners,  and  the  Defeat  of  the  whole  Party  ; and 
that  if  no  body  would  fécond  ’em,  they  would  make 
the  Attempt  by  themfelves.  The  Bravery  of  this 
Refolution  oblig’d  me  to  encourage  and  egg  on  the 
Outaouas.  I remonftrated  to ’em,  that  in  regard  the 
Sauteurs  ingrofs’d  the  Glory  of  the  former  A<ftion, 
they  had  more  reafon  than  we  to  decline  the  rifque 
of  a fécond  Engagement  : that  if  we  refus’d  to  back 
’em,  our  Cowardice  would  cover  us  with  everlafting 
infamy  : and , that  in  order  to  render  the  Attack 
more  lecure,  we  ought  to  ule  a fpeedy  Precaution  in 
finding  out  fome  Point  or  Elbow  of  Land  where  our 
Canows,  our  Baggage,  and  our  Prifoners  might 
be  lodg’d  fafe.  The  Outaouas  had  a great  deal  of  Re- 
lu(ftancy  to  the  matter;  however,  after  confulting 
among  themfelves,  they  comply’d  with  the  Propofal,  i 
more  for  Shame,  than  out  of  true  Courage.  Having  ( 
laid  down  that  joint  Refolution,  we  mad^e  up  a litde  | 
fort  of  a Fence  in  feven  or  eight  hours,  and  then  fent  ^ 
out  Scouts  on  all  hands,  while  the  main  Body  was  i 
kept  in  readinefs  to  march  upon  the  firft  Alarm. 

Augufi  4.  two  of  our  Spies  return’d  upon  full  fpeed,  ( 
to  acquaint  us  that  the  Iroquefe  were  not  above  three  | 
Leagues  oft,  and  that  they  advanc’d  towards  us  ; and  ^ 
withal,  that  upon  the  Road  there  was  a little  Brook,  1 
upon  which  an  Ambufeado  might  be  conveniently  j 
laid.  This  Advice  animated  our  Savages  fo  much,  i 

f*  ! 


to  ‘Horthhm^xïc^. 

that  they  run  immediately  to  take  Pofîèflîîon  of  that 
advantageous  Poft  : but  they  knew  not  how  to  make 
the  right  ule  of  it.  The  Outaouas  were  too  hafty  in 
firing  j and  by  ihooting  at  too  great  a ^iftance,  gave 
all  the  Enemies  an  opportunity  of  making  their  Es- 
cape, abating  for  ten  or  twelve  whofe  Heads  were 
brought  into  the  little  Fort  where  I flay’d.  The 
Slaves  indeed  were  all  retaken,  and  fo  refcued  from 
the  Cruelty  of  thefe  Tygers  ^ which  encourag’d  us 
to  reft  latisfied.  When  the  Expedition  was  over,  we 
flow’d  thefe  poor  Wretches  in  our  Canows,  and 
fleer’d  with  all  Expedition  to  the  Streight  or  Neck  of 
the  Lake  of  Huron,  which  we  made  on  the  13th." 
We  enjoy’d  a great  deal  of  Pleafure  in  ftemming  the 
Current  of  that  Streight  ; the  Iflands  of  which,  that 
I mention’d  above,  were  cover'd  with  Roe- bucks. 
(This  opportunity  we  did  not  flight j nor  did  we' 

I grudge  our  flopping  upon  thefe  Iflands  for  eight 
days  ; during  which  time  we  were  bufied  in  Hunt- 
jing,  and  refrefh’d  our  felves  with  plenty  of  excellent 
pruit  that  was  fully  ripe.  Here  the  wounded  and 
Iretaken  Prifoners  had  an  opportunity  of  refting,  and 
bf  drinking  the  Broth  of  feveral  forts  of  Meat  ; and 
; jwe  had  time  to  broil  as  much  Meat  as  we  could  flow 
jin  our  Canows,  not  to  mention  the  great  numbers 
pf  Turkeys  that  we  were  oblig’d  to  eat  upon  the 
jlpot,  for  fear  that  the  heat  of  the  Sealbn  would  fpoil 
'em. 


: In  that  fpace  of  time  the  poor  wounded  Savages 
livere  carefully  purg’d  with  fueh  Roots  as  the  Aweri-> 
\am  are  well  vers’d  in;  which  I mean  to  explain  to 
- ^ou  in  its  proper  time  and  place;  and  they  wanted 
jiot  good  Reftpratives  of  Jelly-broth.  The  24th  we 
fe-embark’d,  and  arriv’d  at  Night  at  Fort  St.  Jofefb, 
ivhere  I found  a Party  of  eighty  command- 

id  by  one  Mkhimka,  who  being  lately  return'd  from 
Wiagara,  expeded  my  Arrival  with  the  utmoft  im- 
I 'atieuje.  When  I landed,  I was  furpris’d  to  lee  th# 

H * ' F®îf 


100'  Some  New  Voyages 

Fort  cramm’d  with  Savages;  but  on  the  other  hand, 
they  were  equally  aftonimd  to  find  in  our  Company 
their  Country- men,  to  whofe  hard  Fortune  they 
had  been  altogether  Strangers.  The  joyful  Meeting 
fill’d  the  Air  with  Acclamations,  and  Panegyricks 
rung  ail  about  to  an  extravagant  degree.  I wilh,  Sir, 
you  had  been  there  to  partake  of  the  Pleafure  of  fo 
fine  a Show:  had  you  been  prefent,  you  would 
have  join’d  with  me  in  owning  that  all  our  French 
Rhetorick  cannot  reach  fuch  pithy  and  fignificant  Fi- 
gures, efpecially  upon  the  fcore  of  Hyperboles,  as 
made  up  the  bulk  of  the  Harangues  and  Songs  that 
^hefe  poor  People  utter’d  with  Rapture  and  Tranf- 
port.  Mkhifcnka  acquainted  me,  that  after  he  went 
to  the  Fort  of  Niagara,  with  a Defign  to  make  fome 
Expedition  into  the  Country  of  the  Tfononteuans,  he 
found  that  the  Semuey  had  made  fuch  a terrible  ha- 
vock  in  that  Fort,  that  it  had  fweep’d  off  the  Com- 
mander, and  ail  the  Soldiers,  bating  twelve,  who 
had  the  good  luck  to  get  over  it,  as  well  as  Mr.  de 
Bergeres,  who  by  the  advantage  of  a hale  Conftituti- 
on  had  ftemm’d  the  raging  Violence  of  that  Diftem- 
per.  He  inform’d  me  farther,  That  Mr.  Bergeres  ha- 
ving refolv’d  to  fet  out  with  his  twelve  Men  for  the 
Fort  of  Frontenac,  had  defir’d  of  him  a Reinforcement 
of  fome  young  Qumanrn,  which  was  granted  him; 
that  after  Mr.  Bergeres  had  embark’d,  himfeif  march’d 
over  Land  to  the  Country  of  the  Onnontagues,  where 
he  rejoin’d  the  Reinforcement  he  had  granted  to  Mr. 
de  Bergeres,  and  underftood  from  them,  that  during 
the  Winter  the  Scurvey  had  carried  off  as  many,  Sol- 
diers at  Fort  Frontenac  as  at  Niagara  ; and,  that  Mr. 
de  Denonvîüe  was  negotiating  a Peace  with  the  Iro- 

Governour  of  Fort  Frontenac  had  requefted 
Michitonka  to  engage  in  no  Enterprife,  and  to  return 
home  with  his  Men  ; upon  which  that  Leader  being 
in  full  March  homeward,  was  attack’d  by  three  hun- 
dred 


to  America, 


loi 


dred  Qmontdgues,  whom  he  durft  not  engage  other- 
wife  than  in  a running  Fight,  by  which  he  loft  four 
Met!  Being  inform’d  of  all  thefe  Circumftances,  I 
confulted  with  the  three  different  Nations  that  were 
then  pofte^d  m my  Fort.  After  a mature  Refleiftion 
upon  the  Intelligence  that  was  laid  before  ’em  they 
came  to  this  Refolution  ; That  fince  the  Marquis  de 
Demnvdle  h^à  a mind  to  clap  up  a Peace,  and  the 
ton  o\  Niagara  was  abdicated,  the  Fort  I then  com- 
manded would  be  of  no  ufe  ; that  fince  1 had  nei- 
ther  Provifions  nor  Ammunition  for  above  two 
Months,  I Ihould  be  oblig’d  at  the  end  of  thefe  two 
Months  to  retreat  to  the  Place  from  whence  I now 
write  ; that  at  that  time  of  the  Year  our  Navigation 
would  be  uneafie  and  dangerous;  that  in  regard  I 
jay  under  an  indifpenfible  necefiity  of  making  my 

moment  whether  I march’d 
that 

fince  I had  receiv’d  no  frelh  Orders,  nor  no  Succors, 
twas  my  Bufinefs  to  go  off  along  with  them.  This 
Kelolution,  which  was  a fufficient  Argument  tofway 
me,  aftorded  matter  of  joy  to  the  Soldiers,  who  were 
fc.  being  oblig’d  to  a more  rigorous  courfe  of 
Abfimence  in  that  Poft  than  they  had  formerly  un- 
jlergone  ; for  the  meafures  of  a critical  Abftinence  do 
liot  fit  well  upon  a Soldiers  Stomach.  In  fine,purfuant 
•o  our  joint  Refolution,  we  fet  fire  to  the  fort  on 
he  27th,  and  embarked  that  fame  day,  and  keeping 
lofe  to  the  South  Ihore  of  the  Lake  that  I took  no- 
ice  of  in  my  laft,  arriv’d  here  on  the  loth  oïSeptem- 
<r.  i he  Qumamis  march’d  over  Land  to  their  own 
-ountry,  and  carry’d  with  ’em  the  Wounded,  who 
/ere  then  in  a condition  to  march. 

Upon  my  Arrival  in  this  Place,  I found  here  Mr. 

-Dur  ant  ay,  whom  Mr.  Denonviüe  has  invefted 
I'lth  the  Commiffion  of  Commander  of  iho  Coureurs 
Bois  that  trade  upon  the  Lakes,  and  in  the  Southern 
3'Ountries  oi  Canada.  TheGovernour  has  font  me 

H I Orders 


t 


To 2 Some  7^w  Voyages 

Orders  to  return  to  the  Colony  if  the  Seafon  and  o- 
ther  Circumftances  permit  ; or  to  tarry  here  till  the 
Spring  if  I forefee  unfurmountable  Difficulties  in  the 
Paffage.  In  the  mean  time  he  has  fent  me  Effects 
£0  anfwer  the  Pay  of  my  Detachment,  and  to  fubfift 
“em  in  the  Winter.  Thefe  Orders  would  be  extream 
acceptable  to  me,  if  I could  but  contrive  how  to  re- 
turn to  the  Colony  ; but  that  feems  to  be  abfolutely 
impoffible,  and  both  the  French  and  the  Savages  agree 
that  it  is  fo.  There  are  in  that  Palïàgc  fo  many  Wa- 
ter-falls, Catarads,  and  Places  where  there’s  a necef- 
(Ity  of  tedious  Land-carriages,  that  I dare  not  run 
inch  Hazards  with  my  Soldiers,  who  cannot  work 
the  Boats  but  upon  ftagnating  Water.  Upon  that 
confideration  I have  thought  it  more  proper  to  halt 
here  till  the  next  Yearj  at  which  timel  defignto 
take  the  Advantage  of  the  Company  of  fome  French- 
men and  Savages,  that  promife  to  take  into  each  of 
their  Capows  one  of  my  Men.  In  the  mean  time,  | 
Î am  upon  the  point  of  undertaking  another  Voyage,  i 
for  I cannot  mew  my  felf  up  here  all  this  Winter.  I 
defign  to  make  the  beft  ufe  of  my  time,  and  to  tra- 
vel through  the  Southern  Countries  that  I have  fo 
pften  heard  of,  haying  engag’d  four  or  five  good 
Huntfmen  of  the  Outaeuas  to  go  along  with  mg. 

The  Party  of  the  Hurom  that  I mention’d  in  the 
beginning  of  my  Letter,  return’d  hither  two  Months 
ago,  and  brought  with  ’em  an  Iro^uefe  Slave,  whom  j 
their  Leader  prefented  to  Mr.  de  luchereau,  the  late 
Colonel  of  the  Coureurs  de  Bois,  and  whom  that  Co? 
lonel  order’d  to  be  immediately  fiipt.  The  crafty 
Leader  aéted  upon  that  occafion  a very  cunning  and  ‘ 
malicious  part,  the  fatal  Confequences  of  which  I j 
eafily  fprefee  : He  intrufted  no  body  with  the  Secret  |i 
but  my  felf  ; for  he  is  my  true  Friend,  and  he  knows  J 
tltat  1 am  his.  However,  1 muft  go  no  farther  up-  | 
on  this  matter,  left  my  Letter  ftiould  be  intercepted.  ; 
Tho’  after  all,  if  the  Blow  were  pot  already  given,  i 


to  T^oyf/vAmerica.' 


JO} 


or  if  ’twere  poffible  to  remedy  it,  my  Frîeiîdfliîp 
ftould  not  hinder  me  from  acquainting  Mr.  de  De- 
tmville  with  the  Intrigue,  that  he  might  get  clear  of 
it  as  well  as  he  could.  If  it  pleafes  God  to  allow  me 
a fafe  Return  to  France,  I fliall  tell  you  the  Story  by 
word  of  mouth. 

I underftand  by  your  laft,  that  the  King  has  prc- 
ferr’d  his  Almoner,  the  Abbot  of  St.  Valters,  to  the 
Biflioprick  of  Quebec  \ and  that  this  Bifliop  was  con- 
ecrated  in  St.  Sulpice’î  Church.  This  piece  of  News 
would  be  very  welcome  to  me,  if  I thought  he  would 
36  lefs  rigid  than  Mr.  de  Laval,  his  PredecefTor,  But 
;what  likelyhood  is  there  that  the  new  Bilhop  will  be 
of  a tradable  temper?  If ’tis  true  that  he  has  refus’d 
other  good  Biihopricks,  he  muft  be  as  fcrupulous  as 
the  Monk  Dracmtm,  that  St.  Atbanafius  cenfures  for 
pot  accepting  of  a Prelentation  to  a Biflioprick  that 
was  offer’d  him.  In  fine,  if  he  is  of  that  fcrupulous 
Temper,  his  critical  Striéfnefs  will  fcarce  go  down 
n this  Country  j for  the  People  are  already  tyr’d 
»Ut  with  his  Predeceffor’s  Excommunications. 


I am, 


SIR, 


Tours, 


H 4 


LETTER 


104 


Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER  XVI. 

Dated  at  Mijfilimakînacy  May  28.  1689. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Authors  Departure 
frowty  and  Return  tOy  Miffilimakinac.  A Dé- 
fcription  of  the  Bay  t?/ Puants,  and  its  Vidages, 
An  ample  Defer ipt ion  of  the  Beavers  j follow  d 
fy  the  'journal  of  a remarkable  V y age  upon  the 
Long  River  y and  a Map  of  the  adjacent  Country. 

SIR,  ~ 

THank  God,  I am  now  return’d  from  my  Voy- 
age upon  the  Long  River,  which  falls  into  the 
River  of  Mijftfipi.  I would  willingly  have  trac’d  it 
up  to  its  Source,  if  feveral  Obftacles  had  not  flood 
in  my  way.  I fet  out  from  hence  the  24th  of  Soft. 
accompany’d  with  my  own  Detachment,  and  the 
five  Huntfmen  I mention’d  in  my  laft  j who  indeed 
did  me  a great  deal  of  Service.  All  the  Soldiers  were 
provided  with  new  Canows  loaded  with  Provifions 
and  Ammunition,  and  fuch  Commodities  as  are  pro- 
per for  the  Savages.  The  Wind,  which  flood  then 
in  the  North,  wafted  me  in  three  days  to  the  Bay  cf 
Pûuteouatamü,  that  lay  forty  Leagues  oif.  The  mouth 
of  that  Bay  is  in  a manner  choak’d  with  Ifles,  and 
the  Bay  it  felf  is  ten  Leagues  broad,  and  twenty  five 
Leagues  long. 

The  29th  we  came  to  a little  deep  fort  of  a River, 
which  difembogues  at  a place  where  the  Water  of 
the  Lake  fwells  three  foot  high  in  twelve  hours,  and 
decreafes  as  much  in  the  fame  compafs  of  time.  Our 
tarrying  there  three  or  four  days  gave  me  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  this  Remark.  The  Villages  of  the 
Sakki  the  Füuteouatamû,  and  fome  Makminis,  are 

feated 


to  Nortb-Amctka.  Ï05 

feated  on  the  fide  of  that  River,  and  the  Jefuits 
have  a Houfe  or  College  built  upon  it.  This  is  a 
place  of  great  Trade  for  Skins  and  Indian  Corn, 
which  thefe  Savages  fell  to  the  Coureurs  de  Éois,  as 
they  come  and  go,  it  being  the  neareft  and  mod 
convenient  PafTage  to  the  River  of  Mijfijtfi.  The 
Soil  of  this  Country  is  fo  fertile,  that  it  produces 
i^ina  manner  without  Agriculture)  our  European 
Corn,  Peafe,  Beans,  and  feveral  other  Fruits  that 
are  not  known  in  France.  As  foon  as  I landed,  the 
Warriours  of  thefe  three  Nations  came  by  turns  to 
imy  Apartment,  to  regale  me  with  the  Calumet-Dance  y 
and  with  the  Captains-Dance  ; the  former  being  a ligni- 
fication of  Peace  and  Friendlhip,  and  the  latter  of  Ref- 
ped  and  Efteem.  I return’d  the  Compliment^  with  a 
Prefentof  fome  Rolls  of  Brafil  Tobacco,  which  they 
jvalue  mightily,  and  fome  firings  of  Venice  Beads,  with 
which  they  imbroider  their  Coats.  Next  Morning 
I was  invited  to  a Feafi  with  one  of  the  three  Na- 
tions ; and  after  having  fent  to  ’em  fome  Dilhes 
and  Plates,  purfuant  to  the  Cuftom  of  the  Country, 
[ went  accordingly  about  Noon.  They  began  with 
pongratulating  my  Arrival;^  and  after  I had  return’d 
them  thanks,  fell  a finging  and  dancing  one  after 
another,  in  a particular  manner,  of  which  you 
inay  ex?ed  a circumfiantial  account  when  I have 
inore  leifure.  The  Singing  and  Dancing  lafted  for 
■:wo  hours,  being  feafon’d  with  Acclamations  of  Joy 
imd  Jefts,  which  make  up  part  of  their  ridiculous 
Mufick.  After  that  the  Slaves  came  to  ferve,  and 
ill  the  Company  fat  down  after  the  Eafiern  falhion, 
:very  one  being  provided  with  his  Mefs,  juft  as  our 
Monks  are  in  the  Monaftery- Halls. 

Firft  of  all  four  Platters  were  fet  down  before  me, 
n the  firft  of  which  there  were  two  white  Filh  on- 
y boil’d  in  Water;  in  the  fécond  the  Tongue 
ind  Breaftof  a Roe- buck  boil’d  ; in  the  third  two 
Woodhens,  the  hind  Feet  or  Trotters  of  a Bear,  and 

the 


1 0 6 Some  't^ew  Voyages 

the  Tail  of  a Beaver,  all  roaBed  ; and  the  fourth 
contain’d  a large  quantity  of  Broth  made  of  feve- 
rai  forts  of  Meat.  For  Drink  they  gave  me  a very 
pleafant  Liquor,  which  was  nothing  but  a Syrrup 
of  Maple  beat  up  with  Water;  but  of  this  more 
cifewhere.  The  Feaft  lafted  two  Hours  ; after  which 
I intreated  one  of  the  Grandees  to  fing  for  me  ; for 
in  all  the  Ceremonies  made  ufe  of  among  the  Sa- 
vages, ’tis  cuftomary  to  imploy  another  to  a^  for 
em.  I made  this  Grandee  a Prefent  of  fome  pie- 
ces of  Tobacco,  in  order  to  oblige  him  to  aft  my 
part  till  Night.  Next  day,  and  the  day  after,  I 
‘was  oblig’d  to  go  to  the  Feafts  of  the  other  two 
Nations,  who  obferv’d  the  fame  Formalities.  The 
moft  curious  thing  I faw  in  the  Villages,  was  ten 
or  twelve  tame  Beavers,  that  went  and  came  like 
Dogs  from  the  Rivers  to  the  Cottages,  without  ftrag-  , 
ling  out  of  the  Road.  I ask’d  the  Savages  if  thefe  \ 
Animals  could  live  out  of  the  Water;  and  receiv’d 
this  anfwer,  that  they  could  live  afhoar  as  well  as 
Dogs,  and  that  they  had  kept  fome  of  ’em  above 
a year,  without  fufrering  them  to  go  near  the  Ri- 
vers : From  whence  I conclude,  that  the  Cafut(ls  are 
out  in  not  ranging  Ducks,  Geefe,  and  Teals,  in  the 
number  of  Amphibious  Animals,astheNaturaliftsare 
wont  to  do.  I had  heard  the  fame  ftory  from  fe- 
veral  Americans  but  being  apprehenfive that 

there  were  different  Species  of  Beavers,  I had  a mind 
to  be  better  inform’d  : And  indeed  there  is  a parti- 
cuiar  kind  of  ’em,  which  the  Savages  call  the  2*er- 
rejirialy  or  L and-Beaver  ; but  at  the  fame  time  they 
tell  you,  thefe  are  of  a different  Species  from  the 
Amphibious  fort  ; for  they  make  Holes  or  Dens  in 
t!;e  Earth,  like  Rabbets  or  Foxes,  and  never  go  near 
the  Water  unlefs  it  be  to  drink.  They  are  like- 
wife  call’d  by  the  Savages,  the  lazy  or  idle  kind, 
as  being  expell’d  by  the  other  Beavers  from  the  Ken- 
nçls  iq  which  thefe  Animals  arc  lodg’d,  to  the 

number  | 


I 


to  North-  America.  1 07 


n lumber  of  80.  Thefe  Kennels  I mean  to  defcribe 
ufterwards;  in  the  mean  time  I only  take  cccafion 
:o  acquaint  you,  that  the  idle  fort  being  unwilling 
t o work,  areexpell’dby  the  others,  juft  as  Wafps 
fire  by  Bees  ; and  are  fo  teas’d  by  ’em,  that  they 
lire  forc’d  to  quit  the  Kennels,  which  the  better 
^ ind  more  induftrious  P,ace  huddles  up  to  themfelves 
the  Fens.  This  fupine  Beaver  refembles  the  o- 
her  fort  in  its  Figure,  excepting  that  the  Hair  is 
ub’d  off  the  Back  and  the  Belly,  which  is  occafi- 
>n’d  by  their  rubbing  againft  the  Earth  when  they 
eftirn  to,  or  ftir  out  from  their  Holes. 

The  Writers  of  Natural  Hiftory  are  very  much 
out,  in  fancying  that  the  Beavers  cut  off  their  own 
Fefticles,  when  purfued  by  the  Huntfmen  j for  that 
a^hich  the  Phyficians  call  Caficreum,  is  not  lodg’d  in 
beTefticles,  but  in  a certain  Bag  that  Nature  feems 
.0  have  form’d  on  purpofe  for  thefé  Animals,  and 
:his  Bag  they  make  ufe  of  to  clear  their  Teeth,  af- 
;er  the  biting  of  fome  gummy  Shrub.  But  fuppo- 
ing  the  Tefticles  to  be  the  proper  Receptacle  of 
ihe  Caftor,  we  muft  ftill  conceive  that  ’tis  impoffi- 
lole  for  a Beaver  to  pull  out  his  Tefticles,  without 
irending  the  Nerves  of  the  Groin,  in  which  they  are 
li'eated  juft  by  the  Sharebone.  ’Tis  manifeft  that  Elian 
bind  feveral  other  Naturalifts,  were  fcarce  acquaint- 
îd  with  Beaver-hunting  ; for  had  they  known  any 
f :hing  of  the  matter,  they  would  never  have  talk’d 
> of  the  purfuing  of  thefe  Animals,  whidh  never  go 
fcfrom  the  fide  of  the  Pond  where  their  Kennels  are 
:i  built  j and  which  dive  under  water  upon  the 
1 leaft  noife , and  return  to  their  Dens  when  the 
r danger  is  over.  If  thefe  Creatures  were  but  fenfi- 
ble  of  the  reafon  for  which  War  is  declar’d  againft 
I 'em,  they  would  flea  themfelves  alive  ; for  ’tis  their 
Skin  only  that  the  Huntfmen  want,  the  value  of 
|he  Caftor  being  qpthing  in  comparifon  with  that. 
4 great  Beayer  twenty  fi]|  Jflçhsf  long,  from 


î O 8 Sofàe  i^eiv  Voyages 

the  Iiind-Head,  to  the  root  of  the  Tail.  ’Tis  a- 
bout  three  Foot  and  eight  Inches  round,  its  Head 
is  (even  Inches  long,  and  fix  broad  ; its  Tail  is  four- 
teen Inches  long,  and  fix  broad,  and  about  the  mid- 
dle it  has  the  thicknefs  of  an  Inch  and  two  lines. 
The  figure  of  the  Tail  is  Oval  ; the  Scale  with  which 
’tis  cover’d,  and  which  performs  the  Office  of  what 
the  Phyficians  call  the  Eftdermü  or  Scarf-skin,  is  an 
irregular  Hexagon.  The  Beaver  carries  upon  its 
Tail  the  Clay,,  the  Earth  and  other  Materials  of 
vvhich  they  make  their  Banks  and  Kennels,  or  Hurts, 
by  a wonderful  ïnftinâ:  Its  Ears  are  fliort,  round 

and  hollow;  its  Legs  are  five  Inches  long,  its  Feet  fix 
Inches  and  eight  Lines,  and  its  Paws  are  three  Inches 
and  a half  from  the  Heel  to  the  end  of  the  great  Toe. 
Its  Paws  are  form’d  much  like  a Man’s  Hand,  and 
they  make  ufe  of  ’em  in  feeding,  as  Apes  do-  The 
five  Toes  are  joyn’d  like  thofe  of  a Duck,  with  a 
Membrane  of  a Slate-colour.  Its  Eyes  are  of  the  lef- 
fer  fize,  in  proportion  to  the  bulk  of  its  Body,  and 
bear  the  figure  of  a Rats  Eyes.  Before  its  Muzzle 
there  are  four  Fore-Teeth  or  Cutters,  "viz,,  two  in 
each  Jaw,  as  in  a Rabbet,  befides  which  it  has  fix- 
teen  Grinders,  that  is,  eight  in  the  upper,  and  as 
many  in  the  lower  Mandible.  The  Cutters  are  a- 
bove  an  Inch  long,  and  ^ of  an  Inch  broad,  being 
very  ftrong  and  (harp  like  a Cutlas  ; for  a Beaver 
affifted  by  its  Afl’ociates,  (if  I may  focall  its  fellow 
Beavers  ) cuts  down  Trees  as  big  as  a Hoglhead  ; 
which  I could  never  have  believ’d,  if  I had  not  ob- 
ferv’d  with  my  own  Eyes,  above  twenty  Trunks  of 
Trees  cut  down  in  that  fafhion  A Beaver  has  two 
lays  of  Hair  ; one  is  long,  and  of  a Ihining  black 
colour,  with  a grain  as  big  as  that  of  Mans  Hair  ; 
the  other  is  fine  and  fmooth,  and  in  Winter  fifteen 
lines  long  : In  a word,  the  laft  is  the  fineft  Down 
in  the  World.  The  Skin  of  fuch  a Beaver  as  I have 
now  defcrib’d,  will  be  two  pound  weight,  but  the 

price 


to  Norf/;- America.  î 

price  varies  according  to  the  goodnefs.  In  Winter 
and  Autumn  the  Flelli  of  a Beaver  eats  very  well, if  it 
be  roafted.  Thus,  Sir,  I havêpreiènted  you  with  an 
I exadl  Defcription  of  thefe  reputed  Amphibious  A- 
i nimals  which  make  fuch  Struélures,  that  all  the  Ait 
I of  Man  can  fcarce  equal.  Upon  another  occafion 
perhaps  I may  give  you  a circumftantial  Account 
of  their  wonderful  Structure,  which  I decline  at 
prefent,  bficaufe  the  Digreffion  would  be  too  te- 
dious. 

To  return  to  my  Voyage.  After  our  arrival  in 
the  Bay  of  Ponteouatamù,  we  bid  adieu  to  the  Na- 
vigation upon  the  Lakes  of  Canada  i and  fettingout 
September  ;o,  arriv’d  OBober  2.  at  the  foot  of  the  fall 
of  Kakalin,  after  ftemming  fome  little  Currents  in 
the  River  of  Puants.  The  next  day  we  accomplilh’d 
the  fmall  Land  carriage,  and  on  the  arriv’d  be- 
fore the  Village  of  Kikapous,  in  the  Neighbourhood 
of  which  I incamp’d  the  next  day,  in  order  to  re- 
peive  Intelligence.  That  Village  ftands  upon  the 
jrink  of  a little  Lake,  in  which  the  Savages  fiih 
'teat  quantities  of  Pikes  and  Gudgeons.  I found 
mly  thirty  or  forty  Men  fit  for  War  in  the  place, 
for  the  reft  were  gone  a Beaver-hunting  fome  days 
|>efore.'  The  'jth  I reimbarq’d,  and  rowing  hard 
hade  in  the  Evening  the  little  Lake  of  Mdominù^ 
vhere  we  kill’d  Backs  and  Buftards  enough  for  Sup- 
er. We  wentaftioar  that  Night,  and  built  Hutts 
or  our  felves  upon  a point  of  Land  that  Ihootsoutj 

1y  break  of  day  I went  in  a Canow  to  the  Village, 
nd  after  an  hours  Conference  with  fome  of  the  Sa- 
ages  prefented  ’em  with  two  Rolls  of  Tobacco, 
nd  they  by  way  of  Acknowledgment,  made  me 
prefent  of  two  or  three  Sacks  of  Oatmeal  : For 
I le  fides  of  the  Lake  are  cover’d  with  a fort  of  Oats, 
îi'hich  grows  in  tufts  with  a tall  Stalk,  and  of  which 
f ie  Savages  reap  plentiful  Crops.  The  ^th  I arriv’d 
ft:  the  foot  of  Out  agamis  Fort,  where  I found  but 
T few 

I 


110  come  2^e0  Voyages 

few  People  ; however,  they  gave  me  a very  kind 
R.ecepcion,  for  after  dancing  the  Calumet  before 
the  Door  of  ray  Hutt,  they  made  rrie  a Prefent  of 
Venifbn  and  Fift.  Next  day  they  convey’d  me  up 
the  River,  to  the  place  where  their  folks  were  hunt- 
ing the  Beavers.  The  i we  imbarq’d,  and  lan- 
ded the  i%th  upon  the  (hoar of  a little  Lake,  where 
the  Head  of  that  Nation  refided.  After  we  had 
rear’d  up  our  Hutts,  that  General  gave  me  a Vifit, 
and  inquir’d  which  way  I intended  to  move,  I 
made  anfwcr,  that  I was  fo  far  from  defigning  to 
march  toward  the  Nadoueffious  his  Enemies,  that  I 
fhould  not  come  near  ’em  by  loo  Leagues}  and  to 
confirm  the  innocence  of  my  Intentions,  I pray’d  li 
him  to  fend  fix  Warrious  to  accompany  me  to  the  ji 
long  River,  which  I defign’d  to  trace  up  to  its  Source,  iti 
He  reply’d,  that  he  was  extream  glad  to  find  that  1 1 ii 
carry’d  neither  Arms  nor  Cloathstothe  ISfaJoueffious;  u; 
that  he  faw  I had  not  the  equipage  of  a Coureur  de  il 
Bols,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  I had  fome  difcove-  |i 
ry  in  my  view.  At  the  fame  time  he  caution’d  me  ' 
not  to  venture  too  far  up  that  Noble  River,  bv  i 
reafon  of  the  multitudes  of  People  that  I would  t’ 
find  there,  though  they  have  no  ftomach  for  War  : |l 
He  mean’d,  that  fome  numerous  Party  might  fur-  ti 
prile  me  in  the  Night-time.  In  the  mean  time,  in-  É 
ftead  of  the  fix  Warriours  that  I defir’d,  he  gave  in 
me  ten,  who  underftood  the  Lingua,  and  knew  ,|ii 
the  Country  of  the  Eokorcs,  with  whom  his  Na-  it 
tion  had  maintain’d  a Peace  of  twenty  years  ftand- 1 
ing.  I flay’d  two  days  with  this  General,  during  p 
which  time  he  regal’d  me  nobly,  and  walk’d  about  ie 
with  me  to  give  me  the  Satisfaction  of  oblerving  the  É 
difpofure  of  the  Cottages  of  the  Beaver-hunters } |)d 
a defcription  of  which,  you  may  expeCHn  another  |i 
place  ; I prefented  him  with  a Fufee,  twelve  Flint- 1 n 
ftones,  two  pound  of  Powder,  four  pound  of  Ball,  ! it| 
and  a little  Axe,  and  I gave  each  of  his  two  Sons  a I ijj 

great  ! 


to  Norf/?  America.  ill 

;reat  Coat,  and  a Roll  of  Brajïl  Tobacco:  Two  of 
he  ten  Warriours  that  he  gave  me,  could  fpeak  the 
language  of  the  Outaouas^  which  I was  well  pleas’d 
vith  j not  that  I was  a ftranger  to  their  own  Lan- 
guage, for  between  that  and  the  Algmhn  there  is  no 
reat  difference,  but  in  regard  that  there  were  fe- 
eral  words  thatpuzled  me.  My  four  O«wo«<sa' were 
ranfported  with  this  little  Reinforcement,  and  were 
len  fo  incouraged,  that  they  told  me  above  four 
limes,  that  we  might  Venture  fafely  fo  far  as  the 
'lantation  of  the  Sun.  I embarqed  with  this  fmall 
luard  the  i6r/&  about  Noon,  and  arriv’d  that  Night 
c the  Land-carriage  of  Ouijconjîncy  which  we  fi- 
ifh’d  in  two  days,  that  is,  we  left  the  River  of 
uantsj  and  tranfported  our  Canows  and  Baggage 
) the  River  Outfconfinc,  which  is  not  above  three 
uarters  of  a League  diftant,  or  thereabouts.  I 
lali  fay  nothing  of  the  River  we  left,  but  that  ’twas 
luddy,  full  of  Shelves,  and  inclofed  with  a fteep 
oaft,  Marfhes,  and  frightful  Rocks. 

The  j<)th  we  embarqu’d  upon  the  River  Ouif- 
njtncy  and  being  favour’d  by  a flack  Current,  ar- 
' v’d  in  four  days  at  the  place,  where  it  empties  it 
ilf  into  the  River  Mijjtfipiy  which  is  about  half  a 
^ague  broad  in  that  part.  The  force  of  the  Cur- 
int,  and  the  breadth  of  that  River,  is  much  the 
itne  as  that  of  the  Loire.  It  lies  North-Eaft,  and 
huth-Weft  ; and  its  fides  are  adorn’d  with  Meadows, 
Ifty  Trees  and  Firs.  lobferv’d  but  two  Iflands  up- 
it,  though  there  may  be  more,  which  the  dark- 
j;fs  of  the  Night  hid  from  us  as  we  came  down, 
ïhe  z%d  we  landed  upon  an  Ifland  in  the  River 
iijfififiy  over  againft  the  River  I fpoke  of  but  now, 
■ d were  in  hopes  to  find  fome  wild  Goats  there, 
ft  had  the  ill  fortune  to  find  none.  The  day  af- 
!•  we  croft  to  t’other  fide  of  the  River,  founding  it 
tery  where,  as  we  had  done  the  day  before,  and 
l|inid  nine  foot  water  in  the  fhallowefl  place.  The 
i zdoî 


Ill  Some  ISlew  Voyages 

7.d  of  November  we  made  the  Mouth  of  the  Long 
River,  having  firft  ftem’d  feveral  rapid  Currents  of 
that  River,  though  ’twas  then  at  loweft  Ebb.  In 
khis  little  paffage  we  kill’d  feveral  wild  Beeves  whichi 
we  broil’d,  and  catch’d  feveral  large  Dabs.  On  the! 

we  enter’d  the  Mouth  of  the  Long  River,  which! 
looks  like  a Lake  full  of  Bull-ruflies  ; we  found  in 
the  middle  of  it  a narrow  Channel,  upon  which 
we  fleer’d  till  Night,  and  then  lay  by  to  fleep  in! 
our  Canows.  In  the  Morning  I enquir’d  of  my 
ten  Outagamis,  if  we  had  far  to  fail  before  we  werei 
clear  of  theRulhes,  and  receiv’d  this  anfwer,  that' 
they  had  never  been  in  the  Mouth  of  that  River 
before,  though  at  the  fame  time  they  aflur’d  me, 
that  about  twenty  Leagues  higher,  the  Banks  of  itl 
were  clad  with  Wood^s  and  Meadows.  But  after 
all  we  did  not  fail  fo  far,  for  about  ten  a Clocki 
next  Morning  the  River  came  pretty  narrow,  and 
the  Shear  was  cover’d  with  lofty  Trees  ; and  after 
continuing  our  courfe  the  reft  of  that  day,  we  had 
a profpedof  Meadows  now  and  then.  That  fame 
Night  we  landed  at  a point  of  Land,  withadefign 
to  drefs  our  broil’d  Meat,  for  at  that  time  we  had 
none  frelh.  The  next  day  we  ftop’d  at  the  firft 
Ifland  we  faw,  in  which  we  found  neither  Man 
nor  Beaft  ; and  the  Evening  drawing  near,  I was! 
unwilling  to  venture  far  into  it,  fo  we  e’en  con- 
tented our  felves  with  the  catching  of  fome  forty  Fifli.' 
The  6th  a gentle  Gale  fprung  up,  which  wafted  us 
to  another  Ifland  about  12  Leagues  higher,  where; 
we  landed.  Our  palfage  to  this  place  was  very 
quick,  notwithftanding  the  great  calm  that  alwaysj 
prevails  upon  this  River,  which  I take  to  be  the  leaft^ 
rapid  River  in  the  World.  But  thequicknefsof  thej 
palTage  was  not  the  only  furprifal,  for  I was  amaz’dj 
that  I faw  no  Harts,  nor  Bucks,  nor  Turkeys,  ha-| 
ving  met  with  ’em  all  along  in  the  other  parts  of| 
my  Difeovery.  The  "th  the  fame  Wind  drove  us| 


to  America.  1 1 1 

to  a third  Ifland,  that  lay  ten  or  twelve  Leagues 
olF  the  former,  which  we  quitted  in  the  Morning. 
In  this  third  Ifland  our  Savages  kill’d  thirty  or  forty 
: Pheafants,  which  I was  not  ill  pleas’d  with. 

The  ^th  the  Wind  proving  unferviceable  to  us, 
by  reafon  that  ’twas  intercepted  by  Hills  cover’d 
with  Firs,  we  ply’d  our  Oars;  and  about  two  in  the 
Afternoon,  defcry’d  on  the  left  Hand  large  Mea- 
dows,and  fome  Hutts  at  the  diftance  of  a quarter  of  a 
League  from  the  River.  Upon  this  Difcovery,  our 
Savages  and  ten  of  the  Soldiers  jump’d  upon  the 
flioar,  and  direéted  their  courfe  to  the  Houfes,  where 
I they  found  fifty  or  fixty  Huntfmen  prepar’d  to  re- 
’ ceive  ’em,  with  their  Bows  and  Arrows.  As  foon 
as  the  Huntfmen  heard  the  voice  of  the  Outagamisy 
they  threw  down  their  Arms,  and  prefented  the 
Company  with  fome  Deer  that  they  had  juft  kill’d, 
which  they  iikewife  help’d  to  carry  to  my  Canows. 

, The  Benefadors  were  fome  of  the  Eokoros,  who  had 
left  their  Villages,  and  come  thither  to  hunt.  I pre-« 
Tented  ’em,  more  out  of  Policy,  than  Acknowledg- 
iment,  with  Tobacco,  Knives  and  Needles,  which 
they  could  not  but  admire.  Upon  this,  they  re- 
pair’d with  expedition  to  their  Villages,  and  gave 
their  Aflbeiates  to  underftand,  what  a good  fort  of 
i.People  they  had  met  with  j which  had  fo  much  in- 
fluence,  that  the  next  day  towards  the  Evening, 

: there  appear’d  upon  the  River  fide  above  two  thou- 
I fand  Savages,  who  fell  a dancing  as  foon  as  they 
: defcry’d  us.  Thereupon,  omOiitagam^  wcntaihoiry 
S and  after  a fliort  Conference,  fome  of  the  princi- 
I pal  Savages  imbarqu’d  on  board  of  our  Canows, 
K and  fo  we  all  fteer’d  to  the  chief  Village,  which  we 
|i  did  not  reach  till  Midnight.  I order’d  our  Hutts 
^ to  be  made  up  on  a point  of  La^  near  a little  Ri- 
à vQTy  at  the  diftance  of  a quarter  of  a League  from 
f the  Village.  Though  the  Savages  prefs’d  me  ex^ 
b treamly  to  lodge  in  one  of  their  Villages,  yet  none 

I went 


IK 


I 


te 


>£( 


iw( 


ICD 


k] 


114  Some  New  Voyages 

went  with  ’em  but  the  Outagamü^  and  the  four  Oa- 
taouaSy  who  at  the  fame  time  caution’d  the  Savages 
not  to  approach  to  our  Camp  in  the  Night  time. 
Next  day  I allow’d  my  Soldiers  to  refrefli  and  reft 
themfelves  ; and  went  my  felf  to  vifit  the  Gran- 
dees of  this  Nation,  to  whom  I gave  Prefents  of 
Knives,  CilTars,  Needles,  and  Tobacco.  They  gave 
me  to  underftand,  that  they  were  infinitely  well 
pleas’d  with  our  arrival  in  their  Country,  for  that 
they  had  heard  the  Savages  of  other  Nations  fpeak 
very  honourably  of  the  French.  I took  leave  ot  ’em 
on  the  i2th,  and  fet  out  with  a Convoy  of  five  or 
fix  hundred  Savages,  who  march’d  upon  the  fhoar, 
keeping  pace  with  our  Canows.  We  pafs’d  by  a-,jj 
nother  Village  that  lay  to  the  right  Hand,  and  ftop’d 
at  a third  Village  that  was  five  Leagues  diftant  from  * 
the  firft,  but  did  not  difimbarque  : For  all  that  I 
defign’d,  was  to  make  a Prefent  to  the  leading  Men 
of  the  Village,  from  whom  I receiv’d  more  Indian 
Corn,  and  broil’d  or  dry’d  Meat,  than  I had  occafion  ^ 
for.  In  fine,  I pafs’d  from  Village  to  Village  without* 
flopping,  unlefs  it  were  to  incamp  all  Night,  or  to 
preient  the  Savages  with  fome  Trinkets  j and  fo 
fleer’d  on  to  the  laft  Village,  with  a defign  to  get 
fome  Intelligence.  As  foon  as  we  arriv’d  at  the 
end  of  this  Village,  the  Great  Governour,  who  in- 
deed was  a venerable  old  Gentleman,  fent  out  Hunt- 
ers to  bring  us  good  Cheer.  He  inform’d  me,  that 
fixty  Leagues  higher  I Ihould  meet  with  the  Nation 
of  the  Ejfanapes,  who  wag’d  War  with  him  ; that 
if  it  had  not  been  for  their  being  at  War,  he  would 
have  given  me  a Convoy  to  their  Country  ; that, 
however  he  mean’d  to  give  up  to  me  fix  Slaves  ofl" 
that  Country,  which  1 might  carry  home,  and  make  J 
ufe  of  as  I faw  occafion  ; and  that  in  failing  up  the  Ri- 
ver, I-  had  nothing  to  fear,  but  the  being  lurpriz’d  f 
in  the  Night-time.  In  fine,  after  he  had  inftruded  ^ ® 
me  in  feveral  very  ufeful  Circumftances,  I immedi- 

ately 


T 


id 


ml 


t( 


rm 

kIi 


tk 


Isr 


t 


to  J^Z'wY/;•America.  1 1 j 

itely  made  every  thirig  ready  for  my  Departure. 

The  Commanders  of  this  People  acquainted  me, 
hat  they  had  twelve  Villages  peopled  by  20000 
IVarrioursj  that  their  number  was  much  greater 
before  the  War,  which  they  wag'd  atone  time  with 
:he  t^adonejjis,  the  Tanimohay  and  the  Ejjanafes  The 
^eople  are  very  civil,  and  fo  far  from  a wild  Savage 
|emper,  that  they  have  an  Air  of  Humanity  and 
weetnefs.  Their  Hutts  are  long,  and  round  at  the  top, 
lot  unlike  thofe  of  our  Savages  ; but  they  are  made  of 
Leeds  and  Bulrufhes,  interlac’d  and  cemented  with  a 

|'»rt  of  fat  Earth.  Both  the  Men  and  the  Womoxi  go  na- 
d all  over,  excepting  tocit  Privides,  The  Women  are 
)t  fo  bandfom  as  thofe  who  live  upon  the  Lakes  of 
mada.  There  feems  to  be  fomething  of  Govern- 
ent  and  Subordination  among  this  People  ; and 
ey  have  their  Houfes  fortified  with  the  branches 
Trees,  and  Fafeines  ftrengthen’d  with  fat  Earth. 
The  21//  we  imbarqu’d  at  the  break  of  day,  and 
ided  that  Night  in  an  Ifland  cover’d  with  atones 
d Gravel,  having  pafs’d  by  another  at  which  I 
)uld  not  put  in,  becaufe  I would  not  flight  thé 
portunity  of  the  Wind,  which  then  flood  very 
r.  Next  day  the  Wind  flanding  equally  fair, 

! fet  out  and  continued  our  courfe  ali  chat  Day, 
d the  following  Night  ; for  the  fix  Ejjanapes  in- 
jlrm’d  us,  that  the  River  was  clean,  and  free  from 
lacks  and  Beds  of  Sand.  The  23  we  landed  early 
?iî  the  Morning  on  the  right  fide  of  the  River,  in 
!tder  to  careen  one  of  our  Boats  that  fprunga 
>i;ak.  While  that  was  a doing,  we  dreflfome  Ve- 
'ifon  that  had  been  prefented  meby  the  Comman- 
i^r  of  the  laft  Village  of  thé  Eokorosi  and  the  àd» 
?^;ent  Country  being  replenilh’d  with  Woods,  the 
wages  of  our  Company  went  a lliooting  in  the 
frefts  j but  they  fa w nothing  but  fmall  Fowls,  that 
t;y  did  not  think  fit  tofliootat.  As  foon  aswe 
tmbarqu’d,  the  Wind  fell  ali  of  afudden,  andfb 

I a we 


G 


1 1 6 Some  'New  Voyages 

we  were  forc’d  to  ply  the  Oars  ; but  moft  of  the 
Crew  having  flept  but  little  the  Night  before,  they 
row’d  but  very  faintly,  which  oblig’d  me  to  put  in 
at  a great  Ifland  two  Leagues  higher  ; the  fix  Ef- 
Janapes  Slaves  having  inform’d  me,  that  this  Ifland 
afforded  great  plenty  of  Hares,  which  I found  to 
be  true.  Thefe  Animals  had  a lucky  Inftinft  in 
taking  fhelter  in  this  Ifland,  for  there  the  Woods 
are  fo  thick,  that  we  were  forc’d  to  fet  fire  to  lève- 
rai places,  before  we  could  diflodge  ’em. 

Having  made  an  end  of  our  Game,  my  Soldi 
ers  fed  heartily,  and  thereupon  fell  fo  found  afleep, 
that  I could  fcarce  get  ’em  wak’d  upon  a falfe  A- 
larm,  occafion’dby  a Herd  of  Wolves  that  made 
noife  among  the  Thickets  upon  the  Continent.  We 
reimbarqued  next  day  at  ten  a Clock  in  the  Morn 
ing,  and  did  not  run  above  twelve  Leagues  in  two 
days,  by  reafon  that  the  Savages  of  our  Company 
would  needs  walk  along  the  River  fide  with  theii 
Guns,tofhootGeefe  and  Ducks;  in  which  they  had 
very  good  Succefs.  After  that  we  incampt  juft  by  the 
Mouth  of  a little  River  on  the  right  Hand,  and  the 
EJJanapes  Slaves  gave  me  notice,  that  the  firft  of  theii 
Villages  was  not  above  fixteen  or  eighteen  League.' 
off.  Upon  this  Information,  I fent,  by  the  advice 
of  the  Savages  of  our  Company,  two  of  the  Slava 
to  give  notice  of  our  arrival.  The  z6tb  we  ro'Ai’c 
briskly,  in  hopes  to  reach  the  firft  Village  that  day  ; 
but  being  retarded  by  the  huge  quantities  of  float 
ing  Wood,  that  we  met  in  feveral  places,  we  wer<i||. 
forc’d  to  continue  all  Night  in  our  Canows.  Th(|r;' 
lyth  about  ten  or  eleven  a Clock  we  approach’d  tC^ 
the  Village,  and  after  putting  up  the  great  Cahme 
of  Peace  upon  the  Prow  of  our  Canows,  lay  upor 
our  Oars.  * 

Upon  oUr  firft  appearance,  three  or  four  hun  drol!' 
Efanapet  Citno  running  to  the  flioar,  and,  after  danj  * 
cing  juft  over  againft  us,  invited  us  alhoar.  As  fooi*“ 


iw 


to  North  America..  1 1 7 

as  we  came  near  the  flioar,  they  began  to  jump  in- 
to our  Ganows  ; but  I gave  ’em  to  know  by  the 
four  Efanapes  Slaves,  that  I defir’d  they  fliould  re- 
tire, which  they  did  immediately.  Then  I landed, 
being  accompany’d  with  the  Savages  of  our  Com- 
pany, namely,  the  Outagamâ,  and  the  Outaouat,  and 
with  twenty  Soldiers.  At  the  (âme  time  I gave  or- 
ders to  my  Sergeants,  to  land  and  poll  Gentries. 
As  we  flood  upon  the  Ihoar,  all  the  Ejampes  proflra- 
ted  themfelves  three  or  four  times  before  us,  with 
their  Hands  upon  their  Foreheads  ; after  which  we 
were  convoy’d  to  the  Village  with  fuch  Acclamati- 
ions  of  Joy,  as  perfeAly  flun’d  us.  Upon  our  arri- 
val at  the  Gate,  our  Condudors  ftop’d  us,  till  the 
Governour,  a Man  of  fifty  years  of  Age,  march’d 
'out  with  five  or  fix  hundred  Men  arm’d  with  Bowi 
and  Arrows.  The  Outagamis  of  my  Company  per- 
ceiving this,  charg’d  ’em  with  Infolence  in  receiv- 
ing Strangers  with  their  Arms  about  ’em,  and  call’d 
out  in  the  Eohros  Language,  that  they  ought  to  lay 
down  their  Arms.  But  the  Ejjanapes  Slaves  that  I 
had  fent  in  the  day  before,  came  up  to  me,  and 
gave  me  to  underfland,  that  ’twas  their  cuftom  to 
ftand  to  thçir  Arms  on  fuch  occafions,  and  that 
there  was  no  danger  in  the  cafe.  However,  the  ob- 
ftinate  Outagamis  oblig’d  us  to  retire  immediately 
to  our  Ganows:  Upon  which  the  Leading  Officer, 
md  the  whole  Battalion,  flung  their  Bows  and  Ar- 
rows afide  all  on  a fudden.  Then  I return’d,  and 
5ur  whole  Company  enter’d  the  Village  with  their 
rufees  in  their  Hands,  which  the  Savages  admir’d 
|nightily.  The  Leader  of  the  Savages  conduced  us 
o a great  Hutt,  which  look’d  as  if  no  body  had 
iv’d  in  it  before.  When  I and  my  twenty  Soldiers 
lad  enter’d  the  place,  they  ftop’d  the  Outagamis^ 
iffirming,  that  they  did  not  deferve  the  priviledge 
)f  entring  within  the  Cottage  of  Peace,  fince  they 
lad  endeavour’d  to  create  a difference,  and  occafl- 

I 3 on 


i 1 8 


Some  ’Hew  Voyages 

on  a War  between  us  and  the  Ejjanafes. 


foi 


iec 


In  the 

mean  time  I order’d  my  Men  to  opg»>  the  Door, 
and  to  call  out  to  the  Outagamis,  that  they  fiiould 
offer  no  manner  of  Injury  ; But  the  Outagamis  in 
Head  of  coming  in,  prefs’d  me  to  return  with  all 
expedition  to  the  Canows,  which  accordingly  I 
did,  without  lofi  of  time,  and  carry’d  with  me  the 
four  Ejjanapej  Slaves,  in  order  to  leave  ’em  at  the  firft 
Village  we  came  to.  We  had  no  fooner  imbarqued, 
than  the  two  other  Slaves  came  to  acquaint  me  that 
the  Governor  would  flop  me  in  his  River  j but 
the  Outagamis  made  anfwer,  that  he  could  not  do 
that,  without  throwing  a Mountain  into  it.  In 
fine,  we  did  not  ftand  to  difpute  the  matter  ; and 
tho’  ’twas  then  late,  we  row’d  ftraight  to  the  next 
Village,  which  lay  about  three  Leagues  off  Du- 
ring the  time  of  this  palTage,  I us’d  the  precaution 
of  taking  from  my  fix  Slaves  an  exad  information 
of  the  Conftitution  of  their  Country,  and  particu- 
larly of  the  principal  Village.  They  having  affur’d 
me,  that  the  Capital  Canton  was  fèated  upon  a 
fort  of  a Lake,  I took  up  a Refolution  of  not 
flopping  at  the  other  Villages,  where  I Ihould  only 
lofe  time,  and  lavilli  my  Tobacco,  and  fleering  di- 
redly  to  the  Metropolitan,  in  order  to  complain  to 
their  Generaliflimo. 

We  arriv’d  at  the  Capital  Canton  on  the  %d  of 
November,  and  there  met  with  a very  honourable 
Reception.  The  Outagamis  of  our  Company  com- 
plain’d of  the  affront  they  had  receiv’d  ; but  the 
Head  General  being  already  inform’d  of  the  mat-jiii 
ter,  made  anfwer,  that  they  ought  to  have  carry'd  f imj 
off  the  Governour  or  Leading  Officer,  and  brought  jute 
him  along  with  them.  In  pafling  from  the  firfl  Vil- 
lage to  this  we  run  fifty  Leagues,  and  were  follow’d 
by  a Procefljon  of  People,  that|  were  much  more' 
fociable  than  the  Governour  that  offer’d  us  that  Af- 
front. After  our  Men  had  fitted  up  our  Hutts  at 

the 


tji 

iKr 


M 


Con 


i 


I to  Norf/?- America.  ! i 

\ the  diftance  of  a Cannon  fhot  from  the  Village  ; 
ii  we  went  in  a joynt  body  with  the  Outagamis  and 
I the  Outaouas,  to  the  Cacick  of  that  Nation  ; and  in 
Ï the  mean  time  the  Effanapes  Slaves  were  brought  be- 
ll fore  him  by  ten  of  my  Soldiers.  I vt^as  aAually  in  the 
hi  prefence  of  this  petty  King,  when  thefe  Slaves  fpent 
j.half  an  hour  in  proftrating  themfelves  feveral  times 
1 before  him.  I made  him  a Prefent  of  Tobacco, 

; Knives,  Needles,  Ciffars,  two  Firelocks  with  Flints, 
ftfomc  Hooks,  and  a very  pretty  Cutlas.  He  was 
better  fatisfied  with  thefe  trifling  things,  which  he 
i.jhad  never  fecn  before,  than  I could  have  been  with 
I a plentiful  Fortune.  He  teftified  his  Acknowledg- 
ijment  of  the  Gift,  by  a Counter-prefent  that  was 
rimore  folid,  though  not  much  more  valuable,  as 
Qtconfjfting  of  Peafe,  Beans,  Harts,  Roe  bucks,  Geefb 
ftand  Ducks,  of  which  he  fent  great  plenty  to  our 
i!|jCamp:  And  indeed,  we  were  extreamly  welllatis- 
i|fied  with  Inch  a (eafbnable  Prelent.  He  gave  me 
§to  know.  That,  llnce  I defign’d  to  vifit  the  Gnacp- 
^tares,  he  would  give  me  a Convoy  of  two  or  three 
o|hundred  Men  : That  the  Gnacfitares  were  a very  ho- 
3jneft  fort  of  People  ; and  that  both  they  and  his 
ü’People  were  link’d  by  a common  intereft  in  guard- 
;i;ing  off  the  Moz.emhky  which  were  a turbulent  and 
warlike  Nation.  He  added,  that  the  Nation  laft 
j/jmention’d  were  very  nuinerous;  that  they  never 
(itook  the  Field  without  twenty  thoufand  Men  at  leaft  : 
I’  That  to  reprefs  the  Incurfions  and  Infults  of  that 
!]  dangerous  Enemy,  the  G«^jfy&-*r«and  his  Nation  had 
iimaintain’d  a Confederacy  tor  fix  and  twenty  years  ; 
H and  that  his  Allies  ( the  Gnacfitares  ) were  forc’d  to 
^ take  up  their  Habitation  in  Iflands,  where  the  Ene- 
yimy  cannot  reach  ’em.  I was  glad  to  accept  of  his 
c-  Convoy,  and  return’d  him  many  thanks,  I ask’d 
four  Pirogues  of  him,  which  he  granted  very  frank- 
ly, allowing  me  to  pick  and  choofe  that  number  out 
of  fifty.  Having  thus  concerted  my  Meafures,  I 
' I 4 was 


120  Some  TSlew  Voyages 

was  refolv’d  to  lofe  no  time  ; and  with  that  view 
order’d  my  Carpenters  to  plane  the  Pirogues  ; by 
which  they  were  thinner  and  lighter  by  one  half.  The 
poor  innocent  People  of  this  Country,  could  not 
conceive  how  we  work’d  with  an  Axe  ; every  ftroke 
we  gave  they  cry’d  out,  as  if  they  had  feen  fome 
new  Prodigy  ; nay,  the  firing  of  Piftols  could  not 
dive*  ’em  from  that  Amazement,  though  they  were 
equally  flrangers  both  to  the  Piftol  and  the  Axe. 
As  foon  as  my  Pirogues  were  got  ready,  I left  my 
Canows  with  the  Governour  or  Prince,  and  beg’d 
of  him  that  they  might  remain  untouch’d  by  any  j 
body  ; in  which  point  he  was  very  faithful  to  me.  | 
I cannot  but  acquaint  you  in  this  place,  that  the 
higher  I went  up  the  River,  I met  with  more  dif- 
cretion  from  the  Savages.  But  in  the  mean  time  I 
rauft  not  take  leave  of  the  laft  Village,  without  giv- 
ing fome  account  of  it.  ’Tis  bigger  than  all  the  ; 
reft,  and  is  the  Refidence  of  the  Great  Commander 
or  Generaliffimo,  v.^hofe  Apartment  is  built  by  it 
felf  towards  the  fide  of  the  Lake,  and  furrounded  i 
with  fifty  other  Apartments,  in  which  all  his  Rela-  j 
tions  are  lodg’d.  When  he  walks,  his  way  is  ftrow’d 
with  the  leaves  of  Trees  : But  commonly  he  is 
carry’d  by  fix  Slaves.  His  Royal  Robes  are  of  the 
fame  Magnificence  with  thofe  of  the  Commander  i 
of  the  Okaros  : For  he  is  naked  all  over,  excepting  j 
his  lower  parts,  which  are  cover’d  with  a large  i 
Scarf  made  of  the  barks  of  Trees.  The  large  extent  | 
of  this  Village  might  juftly  intitle  it  to  the  nameofj 
a City.  The  Houfes  are  built  almpft  like  Ovens,  j 
but  they  are  large  and  high  ; and  moft  of  ’em  are  j 
of  Reeds  cemented  with  fat  Earth,  The  day  be-  j 
fore  I left  this  place,  as  I was  walking  about,  I faw  ; 
thirty  or  forty  Women  running  at  full  fpeed  j and  j 
being  furpris’d  with  the  fpc(ftacle,  fpoke  to  the  Ou-  j 
tagamis  to  order  my  four  Slaves  to  fee  what  the  matter  j 
was  J for  thefe  Slaves  were  my  only  Interpreters  in  j 

this  [ 


to  No;t/?  America.  iii 

this  unknown  Country.  Accordingly  they  brought 
me  word,  that  ’twas  fome  new  married  Women, 
who  were  running  to  receive  the  Soul  of  an  old 
Fellow  that  lay  a dying.  From  thence  I concluded, 
that  the  People  were  Pythagoreans  ; and  upon  that 
Apprehenfion,  ask’d  ’em  how  they  came  to  eat  A- 
[ nimals,  into  which  their  Souls  might  be  transfus’d  : 
But  they  made  anfwer,  that  the  Tranfmigration  of 
Souls  is  always  confin’d  to  the  refpedive  Species, 
lb  that  the  Soul  of  a Man  cannot  enter  into  a Fowl, 
as  that  of  a Fowl  cannot  be  lodg’d  in  a quadruped, 
and  fo  on.  The  Okoros,  of  both  Sexes,  are  fully  as 
handfom  and  as  clever,  as  this  People. 

December  the  a^th,  1 took  leave  of  this  Village,  ha- 
ving ten  Soldiers  on  board  of  my  Pirogue,  befides 
the  ten  Oumamis,  the  four  Oataouas,and  the  four  EJfa- 
napes  Slaves,  that  I have  mention’d  fo  often.  Here 
ended  the  Credit  and  Authority  of  the  Calumet  oi 
Peace,  for  ûxtGnacftares  are  not  acquainted  with 
that  Symbol  of  Concord.  The  firft  day  we  had 
enough  to  do  to  run  fix  or  feven  Leagues,  by  rea- 
I fon  of  the  Biilruflies  with  which  the  Lake  is  in- 
i' cumber’d.  The  two  following  days  we  fail’d  twen^ 
i ty  Leagues.  The  ^th  day  a Weft-North-Weft  wind 
:/  furpris’d  us  with  fuch  a boifterous  violence,  that  we. 
li  were  forc’d  to  put  alhoar,  and  lay  two  days  upon 
i a fandy  Ground,  where  we  were  in  danger  of  ftar- 
l^ving  for  Hunger  and  Cold  j for  the  Country  was  fa 
i I barren,  that  we  could  not  find  a chip  of  Wood 
V wherewith  to  warm  our  felves,  or  todrefs  our  Vidu- 
als  ; and  as  far  as  cur  Eye  could  reach,  there  was 
; nothing  to  be  feen  but  Fens  cover’d  with  Reeds 
t and  Clay,  and  naked  Fields.  Having  indur’d  this 
! Flardlhip  we  fet  out  again,  and  row’d  to  a little 
Ifland,  upon  which  we  incamp’d,  but  found  no- 
i thing  there  but  green  Fields;  however,  to  make  fome 
^ amends  we  filh’d  up  great  numbers  of  little  Trouts, 
f upon  which  w?  fed  very  heartily.  At  laft,  after 

failing 


i 


îiî  Some  ISlew  Voyages 

failing  fix  days  more,  we  arriv’d  at  the  Point  or 
Lands-end  of  that  Ifland  which  you  fee  mark’d  in 
my  Map  with  a Flower-de-luce.  ’Twas  then  the 
19th  day  of  December,  and  we  had  not  yet  felt  all 
the  rigorous  Hardlhips  of  the  Cold.  As  foon  as  I 
had  landed  and  fitted  up  my  Tents  or  Hutts,  I de- 
tach’d my  Ejpinapes  Slaves  to  the  firft  of  the  three 
Villages  that  lay  before  us;  for  I had  avoided  flop- 
ping at  fome  Villages  in  an  Ifland  upon  which  we 
coafted  in  the  Night-time.  The  Slaves  return’d  in 
a great  Alarm,  occafion’d  by  the  unfavourable  An- 
fwer  they  receiv’d  from  the  Gnacfi  ares,  who  took  us 
For  Spaniards,  and  were  angry  with  them  for  con- 
duffling  us  to  their  Country.  I fltall  not  be  minute 
.in  every  Particular  that  happen’d,  for  fear  of  tyring 
your  Patience.  ’Tis  fufficient  to  acquaint  you,  that 
upon  the  Report  of  my  Slaves  I immediately  em- 
bark’d, and  pofted  my  felf  in  another  Ifland  that 
lay  in  the  middle  between  the  great  Ifland  and  the 
Continent  ; but  I did  not  fuffer  the  Ejjampes  to  be 
in  ray  Camp.  In  the  mean  time  the  Gnacfitares  feut 
expeditious  Couriers  to  the  People  that  live  eighty 
Leagues  to  the  Southward  of  them,  to  define  they 
would  fend  fome  of  their  number  to  examine  us  ; for 
that  People  were  fuppos’d  to  be  well  acquainted  with 
the  Spaniards  of  New  Mexico.  The  length  of  the 
Journey  did  not  difcourage  ’em , lor  they  came  as 
chearfully  as  if  it  had  been  upon  a National  Con- 
cern : and  after  taking  a view  of  our  Cloaths,  our 
Swords,  our  Fufees,  our  Air,  Complexion,  and 
manner  of  Speech,  were  forc’d  to  own  that  we  were 
noftruQ  Spaniards?  Thefe  Confiderations,  join’d  to 
the  Account  I gave  ’em  of  the  Reafons  upon  which 
1 undertook  the  Voyage,  of  the  War  we  were  ingag’d 
in  againft  Spain,  and  of  the  Country  to  the  Eaftward 
that  we  poflTefs’d  ; thefe,  I fay,  had  fo  much  influ- 
ence, as  to  undeceive  ’em.  Then  they  invited  me 
to  encamp  in  their  Ifland,  and  brought  me  a fort  of 


fo  Nojt/> America,  12^ 

Grain  not  unlike  our  Lentils,  that  grows  plentifully 
in  that  Country.  I thank’d  ’em  for  their  Invitation, 
and  told  ’em  that  I would  not  be  oblig’d  to  diftruft 
them,  nor  give  them  any  occafion  to  diftruft  me. 
However,  I crofs’d  with  my  Savages  and  ten  Sol- 
diers well  arm’d  ; and  after  breaking  the  Ice  in  cer- 
j tain  places  ( for  it  had  freez’d  hard  for  ten  or  twelve 
I days  ) I landed  within  two  Leagues  of  one  of  their 
Villages,  to  which  I walk’d  up  by  Land.  ’Tis  need- 
1 lefs  to  mention  the  Particulars  of  the  Ceremony  with 
: which  I was  receiv’d,  it  beirig  the  fame  with  what  I 
I defcrib’d  upon  other  occafions  ; I fhall  only  take  occa- 
I tion  to  acquaint  you,  that  my  Prefents  made  a won- 
I derful  Impreffion  upon  the  Minds  of  thefe  People, 
i whom  I lhall  call  a rafcally  Rabble,  tho’  at  the  fame 
I time  they  are  the  politeh  Nation  I have  yet  feen  in 

I this  Country.  Their  Governour  bears  the  Figure  of 
a King  more  than  any  of  the  other  Commanders  of 
the  Savages.  He  has  an  abfolute  Dominion  over  all 
i the  Villages  which  are  defcrib’d  in  my  Map.  In  this 
i and  the  other  Iflands  I faw  large  Parks,  or  Inclofures, 
i flock’d  with  wild  Beeves  for  the  ufe  of  the  People.  I 
had  an  Interview  for  two  hours  together  with  the  Go- 
I vernour,or  the  and  almoft  our  whole  Confe- 

Î rence  related  to  the  Spaniard  of  Ne'!^  Mexico,  who,  as 
M he  aflured  me,  were  not  diftant  from  his  Country  a- 
Y bove  eighty  Tazous,  each  of  which  is  three  Leagues.  I 
n muft  own  indeed,  1 was  as  curious  upon  this  Head 
^ as  he  was  ; and  I wanted  an  Account  of  the  Spam- 
arJs  from  him,  as  much  as  he  did  from  me  : In  fine, 
' we  reciprocally  inform’d  one  another  of  a great  ma- 
l ny  Particulars  relating  to  that  Head.  He  requefted 
me  to  accept  of  a great  Houfe  that  was  prepar’d  for 
II  me  j and  his  firft  piece  of  Civility  confifted  in  calling 
in  a great  many  Girls,  and  preffing  me  and  my  Re- 
tinue to  ferve  our  felves.  Had  this  Temptation  been 
thrown  in  our  way  at  a more  feafonable  time,  it  had 
prov’d  ftrefiftible  j but  ’twas  not  an  agreeable  Mefs 

for 


Y 24^  Some  New  Voyages 

for  Paflengers  that  were  înfeebled  by  Labour  and 
Want.  Sine  Cerere  Baccho  friget  Venus,  After  he 
made  us  fuch  a civil  Proffer,  the  Savages,  upon  my 
inffance,  reprefented  to  him,  that  my  Detachment 
expeded  me  at  a certain  hour,  and  that  if  I ftay’d 
longer,  they  would  be  in  pain  for  me.  This  Adven- 
ture happen’d  on  the  7th  of  January. 

Two  days  after^  the  Cadck  came  to  fee  me,  and 
brought  with  him  four  hundred  of  his  own  Subjeds, 
and  four  Moz^eemlek  Savages,  whom  I took  for  Sya- 
niards.  My  Miftake  was  occafion’d  by  the  great  dif- 
ference between  thefe  two  American  Nations  ; for, 
the  Moz.eemlek  Savages  were  cloath’d,  they  had  a 
thick  bufliy  Beard,  and  their  Hair  hung  down  un- 
der their  Ears  ; their  Complexion  was  fwarthy,  their 
Addrefs  was  civil  and  fubmiflive,  their  Meen  grave, 
and  their  Carriage  engaging.  Upon  thefe  Confide- 
rations  I could  not  imagine  that  they  were  Savages, 
tho’  after  all  I found  my  felf  miftaken.  Thefe  four 
Slaves  gave  me  a Defcription  of  their  Country , which 
the  Gnacfitares  reprefented  by  way  of  a Map  upon  a 
Deer’s  Skin  ; as  you  fee  it  drawn  in  this  Map.  Their 
Villages  ftand  upon  a River  that  fprings  out  of  a ridge 
of  Mountains,  from  which  the  Long  River  likewife 
derives  its  Source,  there  being  a great  many  Brooks 
there  which  by  a joint  Confluence  form  the  River. 
When  the  Gnacjitares  have  a mind  to  hunt  wild 
Beeves,  they  fet  out  in  Pirogues,  which  they  make  ufe 
of  till  they  come  to  the  Crofs  mark'd  thus  ( -j-  ) in 
the  Map,  at  the  Confluence  of  two  little  Rive^  s.  The 
Hunting  of  the  wild  Bulls,  with  which  all  the  Val- 
leys are  cover’d  in  Summer,  is  fometimes  the  occafi- 
on  of  a cruel  War  : For  the  other  Crofs  (-]-)  which 
you  fee  in  the  Map  is  one  of  the  Boundaries  or  Li- 
mits of  Moz,eemlek'^  and  if  either  of  thefe  two  Nati- 
ons advances  but  a little  beyond  their  Limits,  it  gives 
Rife  to  a bloody  Engagement.  The  Mountains  I 
fpoke  of  but  now,  are  fix  Leagues  broad,  and  fo  high 

that 


o( 


to  North  America.  ii 5 

I that  one  muft  caft  an  infinity  of  Windings  and  Tur- 
I nings  before  he  can  crofs  ’em.  Bear?  and  wild  Bealls 
I are  their  only  Inhabitants. 

The  Mozeemleck  Nation  is  numerous  and  puiflant. 
The  four  Slaves  of  that  Country  inform’d  me,  that 
; at  the  diftance  of  i yo  Leagues  from  the  Place  where 
I I then  was,  their  principal  River  empties  it  felfinto 
! a Salt  Lake  of  three  hundred  Leagues  in  Circumfe- 
: rence,  the  mouth  of  which  is  about  two  Leagues 
! broad  ; That  the  lower  part  of  that  River  is  adorn’d 
; with  fix  noble  Cities,  furrounded  with  Stone  cemen- 
: ted  with  fat  Earth  ; That  the  Houfes  of  thefe  Cities 
I have  no  Roofs,  but  are  open  above  like  a Platform, 
as  you  fee  ’em  drawn  in  the  Map  : That  befidei  the 
abovemention’d  Cities,  there  were  above  an  hundred 
Towns,  great  and  fmall,  round  that  fort  of  Sea,  up- 
! cn  which  they  navigate  with  fuch  Boats  as  you  fee 
! drawn  in  the  Map  : That  the  People  of  that  Country 
i made  Stuffs,  Copper  Axes,  and  feveral  other  Manu- 
I fadures,  which  the  Outagamis  and  my  other  Inter- 
I preters  could  not  give  me  to  underftand,  as  being  al- 
: together  unacquainted  with  fuch  things  ; That  their 
Government  was  Defpotick,  and  lodg’d  in  the  hands 
; of  one  great  Head,  to  whom  the  reft  paid  a trem- 
bling Submiffion  : That  the  People  upon  that  Lake 
call  themfelves  Tahuglauk,  and  are  as  numerous  as 
: the  Leaves  of  Trees,  ( fuch  is  the  Expreffion  that  the 
! Savages  ufe  for  an  Hyperbole  : ) That  the  Mozeemkk 
I People  fupply  the  Cities  or  Towns  of  the  ‘lahuglauk 
\ with  great  numbers  of  little  Calves,  which  they  take 
I upon  the  abovemention’d  Mountains  : and , That 
i the  Tahuglauk  make  ufe  of  thefe  Calves  for  feveral 
i ends  ; for,  they  not  only  eat  their  Flefh,  but  bring 
: ’em  up  to  Labour,  and  make  Cloaths,  Boots,  &c. 

' of  their  Skins.  They  added,  That  ’twas  their  MiC- 
fortune  to  be  took  Prifoners  by  the  Gnacfitares  in  the 
War  which  had  lafted  for  eighteen  Years  5 bur,  that 
«'  they  hoped  a Peace  would  be  fpeediiy  concluded, 
‘ : upon 


ilé  Some  Nem  Poyages 

upon  which  the  Prifoners  would  be  exchang’d,  puf-i 
fuanc  to  the  ufual  CuPom.  They  glory’d  in  the  ^ 
poffeffion  of  a greater  meafure  of  Reafon  than  the 
Gnacfitares  could  pretend  to,  to  whom  they  allow  no 
more  than  the  Figure  of  a Man  ; for  they  look  upon 
’em  as  Beafts  otherwife  To  my  mind,  their  Notion 
upon  this  Head  is  not  fo  very  extravagant;  for  I ob- 
ferv’d  fo  much  Honour  and  Politenefs  in  the  Con- 
verfation  of  thefe  four  Slaves,  that  I thought  I had 
to  do  with  Europeans  : But,  after  all,  I muft  confefs, 
that  the  Gnacfitares  are  the  moll  traétable  Nation  I 
met  with  among  all  the  Savages.  One  of  the  four 
Motuemhk  Slaves  had  a reddiîli  fort  of  a Copper  Me-  | 
dal  hanging  upon  his  Neck,  the  Figure  of  which  is 
reprefented  in  the  Map.  I had  it  melted  by  Mr.  de 
Fontis  Gun-fmith,  who  underftood  fomething  of 
Mettais;  but  it  became  thereupon  heavier,  and  deep- 
er colour’d,  and  withal  fomewhat  tradable.  I defir’d 
the  Slaves  to  give  me  a circumftantial  Account  of 
thefe  Medals;  and  accordingly  they  gave  me  to  un-  j 
derltand,  that  they  are  made  by  the  Tahuglauk,  who  | 
are  excellent  Avtizans,  and  put  a great  value  upon 
fuch  Medals,  i could  pump  nothing  farther  out  of  i [ 
’em,  with  relation  to  the  Country,  Commerce  and 
Culionis  of  that  remote  Nation.  All  they  could  fay  ' 
was,  that  the  great  River  of  that  Nation  runs  all  a- 
long  Weftward,  and  chat  the  fait  Lake  into  which  it 
falls  is  three  hundred  Leagues  in  Circumference,  and  j 
thirty  in  breadth,  its  Mouth  ffretching  a great  way 
to  the  Southward,  I would  fain  have  fatisficd  my 
Curiofitv  in  being  an  eye-witnefs  of  the  Manners 
and  Cufloms  of  the  Tahufiauk  ; but  that  being  im- 
pradicable,  I was  fprc’d  to  be  inftruded  at  fécond 
hand  by  thefe  Mozeemkk  Slaves;  who  affur'd  me,  ' 
upon  the  Faith  of  a Savage,  that  the  Tahuglauk  wear 
tlieir  Beards  two  Fingers  breadth  long;  that  their 
Garments  reach  down  to  their  Knees;  that  they  co- 
ver their  Heads  with  a fharp-pointed  Cap  ; that  they  | 

always  ! s 


to  America.  127 

always  wear  a long  Stick  or  Cane  in  their  hands, 
which  is  tipp  d,  not  unlike  what  we  ufe  in  Eu- 
rope ; that  they  wear  a fort  of  Boots  upon  their  Legs 
which  reach  up  to  the  Knee  ; that  their  Women  ne- 
ver ihew  themfelves,  which  perhaps  proceeds  from 
the  fame  Principle  that  prevails  in  Italy  and  Spaing 
and,  in  fine,  that  this  People  are  always  at  War  with 
the  puiflant  Nations  that  are  feated  in  the  Neigh- 
jbourhood  of  the  Lake  j but  withal,  that  they  never 
idifquiet  the  ftrowling  Nations  that  fall  in  their  way, 
|by  reafon  of  their  Weaknefs  : An  admirable  Leffon 
tor  fome  Princes  in  the  Worlds  who  are  (o  rnuch  in- 
itent  upon  the  making  ufe  of  the  ftrongeft  hand. 

This  was  all  I could  gather  upoh  that  Subjeâr.  My 
Curiofity  prompted  me  to  defire  a more  particular 
Account  j but  unluckily  I wanted  a good  Interpre- 
ter : and  having  to  do  with  feveral  Pe/  fons  that  did 
not  well  underfiand  themfelves,  I could  make  no- 
thing of  their  incoherent  Fuftian.  1 prefented  the 
poor  miferable  Slaves  with  fomething  in  proportion 
.0  the  Cuftom  of  that  Country,  and  endeavour’d  to 
)erfwade  ’em  to  go  with  me  to  Canada,  by  making 
em  fuch  Offers  as  in  their  elteem  would  appear  like 
j4ountains  of  Gold  : but  the  love  they  had  for  their 
pountry  ftifled  all  Perfwafion  ; fo  true  it  is,  that  Na- 
ure  reduc  d to  its  juft  Limits  cares  but  little  for 
liches. 

In  the  mean  time  it  began  to  thaw,  and  the  Wind 
bop  d about  to  the  South- weft  j upon  which  1 gave 
great  Cadcjue  of  the  Gnacfitares,  that  I 
l ad  a mind  to  return  to  Canada.  Upon  that  occafion 
(repeated  my  Prefents  ; in  compenfation  of  which, 
>y  Pirogues  were  ftow’d  with  Beef  as  full  as  they 
ould  hold.  This  done,  l embark’d,  and  crofs’d  o- 
!|-r  from  the  little  Ifland  to  the  Continent,  where  I 
-Î  d a great  long  Pole,  with  the  Arms  of  France  done 
! pon  a Plate  of  Lead.  I fet  out  the  26th  of  Jannary, 

' 0 lafe  on  the  yth  of  February  in  the  Country 

of 


1 18  Some  New  Voydges 

of  the  Effanapes.  We  had  much  more  pleafure  in 
failing  down  the  River,  than  we  had  in  going  up  ; 
for  we  had  the  agreeable  diverfion  of  feeing  feveral 
Huntfmen  footing  the  Water-Fowl,  that  are  plen- 
tiful upon  that  River.  You  muft  know,  that  the 
Stream  of  the  Long  River  is  all  along  very  flack  and 
eafie,  abating  for  about  three  Leagues  between  the 
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Village  ; for  there  indeed  its 
Current  may  be  call’d  rapid.  The  Channel  is  fo 
ifraight,  that  it  fcarce  winds  at  all  from  the  Head  to 
the  Lake.  ’Tis  true  ’tis  not  very  pleafant  ; for  moft 
of  its  Banks  have  a difmal  Profpedt,  and  the  Water 
it  felf  has  an  ugly  Tafte:  but  then  its  Ufefulnefs  at- 
tones  for  fuch  Inconveniencies  ; for,  ’tis  navigable 
with  the  greateft  eafe,  and  will  bear  Barques  of  fifty 
Tun,  till  you  come  to  that  place  which  is  mark’d 
with  a Flower-de-luce  in  the  Map,  and  where  I put 
up  the  Poft  that  my  Soldiers  chriflen’d  U Hontaus  Li- 
mit. March  2.  I arriv’d  in  the  Miffi/ipi,  which  was 
then  much  deeper  and  more  rapid  than  before,  by 
reafon  of  the  Rains  and  Land-floods.  To  fave  the 
Labour  of  Rowing,  we  then  left  our  Boats  to  the  | 
Current,  and  arriv’d  on  the  loth  in  the  Iflandof  ' 
Rencontres,  which  took  its  Name  from  the  Defeat  ; 
of  400  Ircojuefe,  accomplilh’d  there  by  ;oo  Nadouefts.  ] 
The  Story  of  the  Encounter  is  briefly  this:  A Party 
of  400  Irocjuefe  having  a mind  to  furprile  a certain , 
People  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Otcntas  (of  whom 
more  anon  ) march’d  to  the  Country  of  û\q  îüineje,: 
where  they  built  Canows,  and  were  furnifli’d  with  ; 
Provifions.  After  that  they  embark’d  upon  the  Ri-| 
ver  Mi[jifipi,  and  were  dilcover  d by  another  little! 
Fleet  that  was  failing  down  the  other  fide  of  the  fame| 
River.  The  Iroamfe  crofs’d  over  immediately  to  thati 
Ifland,  which  is  iince  call’d  Aux  Rencontres.  Thej 
Nadouejfis,  i.  e.  the  other  little  Fleet,  being  furpici-j 
ous  of  forne  ill  Defign,  without  knowing  what  Peo-j 
pie  they  were,  ( for  they  had  no  knowledge  oi  the 


Non"/?' America.  u p 

Iroquefe  but  by  Hear-fay  ; upon  this  fufpicion,  I fay, 
they  tugg’d  hard  to  come  up  with  ’em.  The  two 
Armies  polled  themfelves  upon  the  point  of  the 
Ifland,  where  the  two  Greffes  are  put  down  in  the 
Map  ; and  as  foon  as  the  NadoueJJis  came  in  fight,  the 
Iroquefe^cry^à  out  in  the  Illinefe  Language,  Who  are  ye? 
To  which  the  Nadoueffis  anfwer’d.  Some  body  : And 
putting  the  like  Queftion  to  the  Iroquefe,  receiv’d  the 
fame  Anfwer.  Then  the  Iroquefe  put  this  Queftion 
to  ’em.  Where  are  you  a going  .?To  hunt  Beeves,  reply’d 
the  Nadouejfs.  But  pray,  fays  the  Nadouejfs,  ovhat’ s 
' your  bufinefs  ? To  hunt  Men,  reply’d  the  Iroquefe.  ^Tis 
well,  fays  the  Nardouefjis,  we  are  men,  and  fo  you  need 
'go  no  farther.  Upon  this  Challenge  the  two  Parties 
' difembark’d,  and  the  Leader  of  the  Nadoueffs  cut  his 
; Canows  to  pieces  ; and  after  reprefenting  to  his  War- 
! riours  that  they  behov’d  either  to  Conquer  or  Die, 
si  march’d  up  to  the  Iroquefe  ; who  receiv’d  ’em  at  firft 
^i.Onfet  with  a Cloud  of  Arrows:  But  the  Nadouefh 
.having  ftood  their  firft  Difcharge,  which  kill’d  ’em 
;eighty  Men,  fell  in  upon  ’em  with  their  Clubs  in 
their  hands,  before  the  others  could  charge  again  j 
and  fo  routed  ’em  entirely.  This  Engagement  lafted 
for  two  hours,  and  was  fo  hot,  that  two  hundred 
.and  fixty  Iroquefe  fell  upon  the  fpoc,  and  the  reft  were 
jail  taken  Prifoners.  Some  of  the  Iroquefe  inàcéd  at- 
tempted to  make  their  Efcape  after  the  Adion  was 
over  ; but  the  vidorious  General  fent  ten  or  twelve 
. of  his  Men  to  purfue  ’em  in  one  of  the  Canows  that 
'(le  had  taken  : and  accordingly  they  were  all  over- 
:aken  and  drown’d.  The  Nadomffs  having  obtain’d 
:his  Vidory,  cut  off  the  Nofes  and  Ears  of  two.of 
he  clivereft  Prifoners  ; and  fapplying  ’em  with  Fa- 
ces, Powder,  and  Ball,  gave  ’em  the  liberty  of  re- 
urning  to  their  own  Country,  in  order  to  give  their 
Hountry-raen  to.  underftand,  that  they  ought  not  to 
:mploy  Women  to  hunt  after  Men  any  longer. 


1^0  Some  Üeu>  Voyages 

Thé  1 2 th  we  arriv’d  at  the  Village  of  the  Otent  at, 
where  we  took  in  a plentiful  Provifion  of  Twrhy  j 
Corn,  of  which  thefe  People  have  great  (tore.  They  | 
inform’d  us,  that  their  River  was  pretty  rapid,  and  j 
took  its  Rife  from  the  neighbouring  Mountains;  and  3 
that  the  upper  part  of  it  was  adorn’d  with  feveral  Villa- 1 
ges  inhabited  by  the  People  call’d  Panimaba,  Paneajjay  \ 
and  Pmetonka.  But  confidering  that  I was  ftraitned 
for  time,  and  that  I faw  no  probability  of  learning 
what  I wanted  to  know  with  reference  to  the  Spam- 
ards , I took  leave  of  ’em  the  next  day,  which  was 
the  ijth,  and  in  four  days  time,  by  the  help  of  thej 
Current  and  our  Oars,  made  theB*iver  of  the  MiJJoura, 
This  done,  we  run  up.againft  the  Stream  of  that  Ri- 
ver, which  was  at  lead  as  rapid  as  the  Miffijipl  was  atj 
that  time;  and  arriv’d  on  the  1 8th  at  the  firft  Village 
of  the  Mijpturzs,  where  I only  Hop’d  to  make  the 
People  fome  Prefents  that  procur’d  me  a hundred 
Turkeys,  with  which  that  People  are  ^wonderfully 
well  Hock’d.  After  that,  we  row’d  hard  againH  the 
Stream,  and  landed  next  night  near  the  fécond  Vil- 
lage. As  foon  as^I  arriv’d,  I detach’d  a Sergeant  with 
ten  Soldiers  to  convoy  the  Out  agamis  to  the  Village* 
while  the  reH  of  my  Crew  were  bufied  in  fitting  up 
our  Hutts  and  unloading  our  Canows.  It  happen’d 
unluckily  that  neither  the  Soldiers  nor  the  Outagamû 
could  make  the  Savages  underHand  ’em  ; and  tht 
latter  were  juH  ready  to  fall  upon  ’em,  when  an  ole 
Fellow  cry’d  out,  that  the  Strangers  were  not  with- 
out more  company,  for  that  he  had  difeover’d  oui 
Huts  and  Canows.  Upon  this,  the  Soldiers  and  tht 
Outngamis  TQt\t  d in  a great  ConHernation,  and  ad- 
vis’d me  to  keep  a Hrong  Guard  all  night.  About 
two  a clock  in  the  Morning  two  Men  approach’d  tc 
our  little  Camp,  and  call’d  in  Illinefey  that  they  wan 
ted  an  Interview  ; upon  which  the  Outagamisy  bein[ 
extreamly  well  farisfied  that  there  was  lome  body  a-i 
mong  ’em  who  could  underHand  what  they  faid,  re|J( 

plyvS 


to  North-Americâ.  j 3 S 

ply’d  în  Illinefe,  that  they  Ihould  be  véry  welcoftie  a^ 
loon  as  the  Sun  appear’d  in  the  Horizon.  Neverthe- 
lefs,  the  Out  agamis  refented  the  former  Affront  fb 
much,  that  they  importun’d  me  all  night  long  to  fet 
fire  to  the  Village,  and  put  all  the  fcoundrel  Inhabi- 
( tants  to  the  Sword.  I made  anfwer  to  ’em,  that 
j ’twas  our  bufinefs  to  be  wifer  than  they,  and  to  bend 
our  Thoughts,  not  upon  a fruitlefs  Revenge,  but 
, upon  the  Difcovery  that  we  were  then  in  queft  of. 
At  the  break  of  Day  the  two  Adventurers  of  the 
Night  came  up  to  us,  and  after  putting  Interrogato- 
ries to  us  for  the  fpace  of  two  hours,  invited  us  to 
come  up  to  their  Village.  The  Outagamis  reply’d, 
that  the  Head  or  Governour  of  their  Nation  ought 
to  have  faluted  us  fooner  ; and  this  oblig’d  ’em  to  go 
back  to  give  hiin  notice.  After  that  we  faw  no  bo- 
dy for  three  hours  : but  at  laft,  when  our  Impatience 
was  juft  beginning  to  boil,  we  perceiv’d  the  Gover- 
nour, who  accofted  us  in  a trembling  Pofture.  He 
Was  accompany’d  with  fome  of  his  own  Men,  who 
vere  loaded  with  broil’d  or  dry’d  Meat,  Sacks  of  Tar- 
iff or  Indian  Corn,  dry’d  Raifins,  and  fome  fpeckled 
>r  particolour’d  Buck- skins.  In  confideration  of  this 
:’refent,  I made  ’em  another  of  lefs  confequence. 
Then  I brought  on  a Conference  between  the  Oaw- 
.amis  of  my  Company  and  the  two  Night  Meffen- 
: ers,  in  order  to  make  fome  difcovery  of  the  Nature 
f the  Country;  but  they  ftill  ftop’d  our  Mouths 
nth  this  Anfwer,  that  they  knew  nothing  of  the 
Tatter,  but  that  the  other  Nations  that  liv’d  higher 
p were  able  to  inform  us.  Had  I been  of  the  fame 
lind  with  the  Outagamis,  we  had  done  noble  Ex- 
'loits  in  this  Place:  but  I confider’d  that  ’twas  roy 
I ifinefs  to  purchafe  the  Knowledge  of  feveral  things, 
I hich  I could  not  obtajh  by  burning  the  Village. 
I 0 be  IhortjWe  re  embark’d  that  fame  day,about  two 
I clock  in  the  Afternoon,  and  row’d  about  four 
I sagues  up  the  River,  where  we  made  the  River  of 
"i  K » the 


131  Some  New  Voyages 

the  Ofages,  and  encamp’d  by  its  Mouth,  That  Night 
we  had  feveral  falfe  Alarms  from  the  wild  Beeves,  up- 
on which  we  made  fufficient  Reprifals  afterwards  ; 
for  the  next  day  we  kill’d  many  of ’em  notwithftand- 
ing  that  it  rain’d  fo  heavily  that  we  could  fcarce 
ftir  out  of  our  Hutts.  Towards  the  Evening,  when 
the  Rain  was  over,  and  while  we  were  tranlport- 
ing  two  or  three  of  thefe  Beeves  to  our  little 
Camp,  we  fpy’d  an  Army  of  the  Savages  upon  a full 
March  towards  us.  Upon  that,  my  Men  began  to 
intrench  themfelves,  and  to  unload  their  Pieces  with 
Worms,  in  order  to  charge. ’em  afrelh;  but  one  ofj 
the  Pieces  happening  to  go  oft^  the  whole  Body  of! 
the  Enemy  difappear’d,  fome  ftraggling  one  way, 
and  fome  another  : for  thefe  People  were  upon  the 
fame  foot  with  the  Nations  that  live  upon  the  Long 
River,  forafmuch  as  neither  of  them  had  ever  fèen 
or  handled  Fire-Arms.  However,  this  Adventure 
mov’d  the  Outagamis  fo  much,  that  to  fatisfie  them, 

I was  oblig’d  to  re- embark  that  very  night,  and  re- 
turn the  fame  way  that  f came.  Towards  Midnight 
we  came  before  a Village,  and  kept  a profound  Si- 
lence till  Day- break,  at  which  time  we  row’d  up  to 
their  Fort  ; and  upon  our  entring  there,  and  difchar-! 
ging  our  Pieces  in  the  Air,  the  Women,  Children,! 
and  fuperannuated  Men,  were  put  into  liich  a Con-! 
fternation,  that  they  run  from  place  to  place  callingj 
out  for  Mercy.  You  mufl:  know,  all  their  Warrioursi! 
were  abroad,  and  ’twas  a Body  of  them  that  oiFer’dj 
to  attack  us  the  day  before.  The  Outagamis  percei-| 
ving  the  Contternation  of  the  Women  and  Children,! 
call’d  our,  that  they  behov’d  to  depart  the  Village,! 
and  that  the  Women  Ihould  have  time  to  take  up|. 
their  Children.  Upon  that  the  whole  Crew  turn’d| 
out,  and  we  fet  fire  to  the  Village^  on  all  fides.  Thi^ 
done,  we  purfu’d  our  Courle  down  that  rapid  River,!  ! 
and  enter’d  the  River  Mijjifift  on  the  25-th,  early  ix^  * 
the  Morning  ; the  26th,  about  three  a clock  in  the! 

After-j  I 

^ L 


to  North-Amçîica.»  153 

Afternoon,  we  defcry’d  three  or  four  hundred  Sava- 
ges employ’d  in  the  Hunting  of  Beeves,  which  fwar- 
med  in  all  the  Meads  to  the  Weft  ward.  As  foon  as 
the  Hunters  Ipy’d  us,  they  made  a fign  that  we 
fhould  make  towards  ’em.  Being  ignorant  who,  or 
how  numerous  they  were,  we  made  a halt  at  firft  ; 
but  at  laft  we  put  in  about  a Musket-lhot  above  ’em, 
calling  out  to  ’em  that  they  ftiould  not  approach  to 
us  in  a Body.  Upon  that,  four  of  their  number 
came  up  to  us  with  a fmiling  Countenance,  and  gave 
us  to  know,  in  the  llinefe  Language,  that  they  were 
Jikanfas.  We  could  not  but  credit  their  Report,  for 
they  had  Knives  and  Sciffars  hanging  upon  their 
Necks,  and  little  Axes  about  ’em,  which  the  llinefe 
prefent  ’em  with  when  they  meet.  In  fine,  being 
aflur’d  that  they  were  of  that  Nation,  which  Mr.  fe 
la  Salle  and  feveral  other  French-mn  were  intimately 
acquainted  with,  we  landed  at  the  fame  place  ; and 
they  entertain’d  us  firft  with  Dancing  and  Singing, 
and  then  with  all  forts  of  Meat.  The  next  day  they 
fhew’d  us  a Crocodile  that  they  bad  knock’d  in  the 
head  two  days  before,  by  a Stratagem  that  you’ll 
înd  defcrib’d  in  another  place:  After  that  they  gave 
is  the  diverfion  of  a Hunting  Match  ; for  ’tis  cufto- 
lUary  with  them,  when  they  mean  to  divert  them- 
elves,  to  catch  the  Beeves  by  the  different  Methods 
laid  down  in  this  Cut.  I put  fome  Queftions  ^to  ’em 
relating  to  the  Spaniards,  but  they  could  not  refolve 
:m.  All  that  I learn’d  from  ’em  was,  that  the  M/- 
mrii  and  the  0[ages  are  numerous  and  mifchievous 
i .vlations,  equally  void  both  of  Courage  and  Honeily  ; 
I'bat  their  Countries  were  water’d  with  very  great 
3 livers  ; and,  in  a word,  wer^  too  good  for  them. 

É After  vve  had  fpent  two  days  with  them,  we  pur- 
led  our  Voyage  to  the  River  Oaobach,  taking  c.are 
0 watch  the  Crocodiles  very  narrowly,  of  which 

Iiey  had  told  u§  incredible  Stories.  The  next  day 
'e  enter’d  the  Mouth  of  dut  River,  and  founded  it, 

, K 5 to 


1^4  Voyages  : 

tt)  try  the  truth  of  what  the  Savages  reported  of  its  ;] 
depth.  In  effed:,  we  found  there  three  Fathom  and 
a half  Water  ; but  the  Savages  of  our  Company  al-  | 
lodg’d,  that  ’twas  more  fwell’d  than  ufually.  They  ] 
all  agreed,  that  ’twas  Navigable  an  hundred  Leagues  ; 
up,  and  I wilh’d  heartily,  that  my  time  had  allow’d  | 
me  to  run  up  to  its  Source;  but  that  being  unfeafo-l 
nable,  I fail’d  up  againft  the  Stream,  till  we  came 
to  the  River  of  the  Illimfe,  which  we  made  on  the! 
^th  of  with  fbme  difficulty,  for  the  Wind  was! 
againft  us  the  ftrft  two  days,  and  the  Currents  was| 
very  rapid. 

Ail  I can  fay  of  the  River  Mlfififi,  now  that  I; 
am  to  take  leave  of  it,  is,  that  its  narroweft  part 
is  half  a League  over,  and  the  lhalloweft  is  a Fa-i 
thorn  and  a half  deep  ; and  that  according  to  the; 
information  of  the  Savages,  its  ftreatn  is  pretty  gen-; 
tie  for  feven  or  eight  Months  of  the  year.  As  fot 
Shelves  or  Banks  of  Sand,  I met  with  none  in  it.* 
’Tis  full  of  Ifles  which  look  like  Groves,  by  reafori  j 
of  the  great  plenty  of  Trees,  and  in  the  verdant; 
feafon  of  the  year  afford  a very  agreeable  profpedj 
its  Banks  are  Woods,  Meadows  and  Hills.  1 cannot  i 
be  pofitive,  whether  it  winds  much  in  other  places  |! 
but  as  far  as  I could  fee,  its  courfe  is  very  differenij 
from  that  of  our  Rivers  in  France  ; for  1 mufi! 
tell  you  by  the  way,  that  all  the  Rivers  of  Americf  n 
run  pretty  ftraighr.  H 

The  River  of  the  Mlmfe  is  intitlod  to  Riches,  b5  [j 
vertue  of  the  benign  Climate,  and  of  the  great  quan  jj 
tides  of  Deer,  Roe-Bucks,  and  Turkeys  that  leedj 
ppon  its  brinks  ; Not  to  mention  feveral  other  Beaft  -, 
and  Fowls,  a defcription  of  which  would  requin  ^ 
an  intire  Volume.  If  you  faw  but  my  Journal,  yoj 
would  be  Tick  of  the  tedious  particulars  of  our  dar  l 
’ ly  Adventures  both  in  Hunting  and  Fiffiing  diver  |. 
Ipeciesof  Animals, and  in  Rencounters  with  the  Savai 
gçs,  In  fhort;,  the  laft  thing  Î fhall  mention  of  thr 

Rîvçji 


to  2\Vf/?-Americâ.  i j 3^ 

River,  is,  that  the  Banks  are  repleni/h’d  with  an 
infinity  of  Fruit-Trees,  which  we  faw  in  a difmal 
condition  , as  being  ftrip’d  of  their  verdure  ; and 
that  among  thefe  Fruit-Trees,  there  are  many  Vines, 
which  bear  moft  beautiful  Clufters  of  very  large 
Grapes.  I ate  fome  of  thefe  Grapes dry’d  in  theSun, 
which  had  a moft  delicious  Tafte.  The  Beavers  are 
as  unfrequent  in  this,  as  in  the  long  River,  where 

1 faw  nothing  but  Otters,  of  which  the  People 
make  Furs  for  the  Winter. 

I fet  out  from  the  iSimfe  River  on  the  lotb  of 
^prily  and  by  the  help  of  a Weft  South-Weft  Wind, 
arriv’d  in  fix  days  at  the  Fort  of  Crevecoeur,  where  I 
met  with  Mr.  âe  Ttonti,  who  receiv’d  me  with  all  ima- 
ginable Civility , and  is  juftly  refpedfed  and  ho- 
nour’d by  the  Iroqueje.  I ftay’d  three  days  in  this 
Fort,  where  there  were  thirty  Coureurs  de  Boü  that 
traded  with  the  IlUneJe.  The  xoth  I arriv’d  at  the 
Village  of  the  Illmefe  ; and  to  Icflen  the  drudgery  of 
a great  Land-carriage  of  twelve  great  Leagues,  in- 
gag’d  four  hundred  Men  to  tranfport  our  Baggage, 
which  they  did  in  the  fpace  of  four  days,  being 
incourag’d  by  a Bribe  of  a great  Roll  of  BraJUTo- 
bacco,  an  hundred  pound  weight  of  Powder,  two 
hundred  weight  of  Ball,  and  fome  Arms,  which  I 
gave  to  the  moft  confiderable  Men  of  their  number. 
The  z^th  [ arriv’d  at  Chekakou,  where  ray  Outagamü 
took  leave  of  me  in  order  to  return  to  their  own 
Country,  being  very  well  fatisfied  with  a Prefent  I 
made  ’em  of  fome  Fufees,  and  fome  Piftols.  The 

2 I reimbarqued,  and  by  rowing  hard  in  a Calm, 
made  the  River  of  the  Oumamis  on  the  z^tb  There  I 
met  four  hundred  Warriours,  upon  the  very  fame 
place  where  Mr.  de  la  Salle  had  formerly  built  a 
Fort.  Thele  Warriours  were  then  imploy’d  in  burn- 
ing three  Iroquefe^  who,  as  they  faid,  deferv’d  the 
Punillitment  ; and  invited  us  to  fhare  in  the  pleafure 

the  Show  j for  the  Savages  take  it  very  ill  if  one 
K 4 refufes 


1^6  Some  ISlew  Vosges 

refufes  the  diverfion  of  fuch  real  Tragedies.  The 
Tragical  fpeéiacle  made  me  Ihrink,  for  the  poor 
wretclies  were  put  to  inconceiveable  Torture  ; and 
upon^  that  Ï refolv’d  to  reimbarque  with  all  ex- 
pedition ; alledging  for  an  Apology,  that  my  Men 
had  great  (lore  of  Brandy  with  ’em,  and  would  cer- 
tainly make  themlelves  drunk,  in  folemnifing  their 
Viiftory,  upon  which  they  would  be  apt  to  commit 
diforders,  that  I could  not  poffibly  prevent.  Ac- 
cordingly I went  immediately  on  board,  and  after 
coafting  along  the  Lake,  crofs’d  the  Bay  de  I’Oursy 
and  landed  at  Miijilimahinac  the  zxd, 

I am  inform’d  by  the  Sieur  de  S.  Pierre  de  Repantig<- 
ni,  who  travel’d  from  Quebec  hither  upon  the  Ice, 
that  Mr.  de  Denonville  has  took  up  a refolution  of 
making  a Peace  with  the  Irc^ue/e,  in  which  he  means 
to  comprehend  the  other  Nations  that  are  his  Al- 
lies ; and  with  that  view  had  given  notice  to  his  Al- 
lies, that  they  fhouid  not  infeft  the  Iroc^uefe.  He 
acquaints  me  further,  that  Mr.  de  Demnville  has  fent 
orders  to  theGovernour  of  this  place,  toperfwade 
the  Rat,  ( one  of  the  Commanders  of  the  Httrons  ) 
to  go  down  to  the  Colony,  vvith  a defign,  to  have 
him  bang’d  ; and  that  the  Savage  General  being  a- 
ware  of  the  dtfign,  has  made  a publick  Declaration, 
that  he  will  go  thither  on  purpofe  to  dsfie  him.  Ac- 
cordingly he  defigns  to  fet  out  to  Morrow  with  a great 
body  of  Ouîaoitas,  and  fome  Coureurs  de  Bois,  under 
the  command  of  Mr.  Dulhut.  As  for  the  Soldiers  of 
my  Detachment,  I have  difpers’d  ’em  in  feveral 
Canows  among  the  Savages,  and  the  Coureurs  de  Bou  ; 
but  having  fome  bufinefs  to  adjull  in  this  place,  I 
am  obligd  to  tarry  my  felf  feven  or  eight  days 
longer 

This,  Sir,  is  the  true  account  of  my  little  Voy- 
age. I have  related  nothing  but  the  Eflential  Cir- 
cumifances;  chcofing  to  overlook  the  rdt,  which 
are  fo  trifling,  as  to  be  unworthy  of  your  Curiofi- 

ty. 


y Ho  North  Amcïka, 

ty.  As  for  the  lUmfe  Lake,  ’tis  three  hundred  Leagues 
in  Circumference,  as  you  may  fee  by  the  Scale  of 
Leagues  upon  the  Map.  'Tis  feated  in  an  admira- 
ble Climate  ji  its  Banksare  cloath’d  with  fine  and  tall 
Trees,  and  have  but  few  Meads.  The  River  of 
the  Oumamis  is  not  worth  your  regard.  The  Bay 
de  rOurs  qui  dort,  is  of  an  indifferent  large  extent, 
and  receives  the  River  upon  which  the  Outaouas  are 
I wont  to  hunt  Beavers  every  third  year.  In  fhort, 

! it  has  neither  Shelves,  Rocks,  nor  Banks  of  Sand. 
The  Land  which  bounds  it  on  the  South  fide,  is  re- 
plenifh’d  with  Roe-bucks,  Deer,  and  Turkeys.  Fare- 
wel.  Good  Sir  : And  alTure  your  felf,  that  ’twill  al- 
ways be  a fenfible  pleafure  to  me,  to  amufe  you 
with  an  account  of  the  greateft  Curiofities  I meet 
with. 

But  now.  Sir,  I hope  you  will  not  take  it  ill,  that 
the  Relation  I here  give  you,  is  only  an  Abridg- 
ment of  my  Voyage:  For,  in  earned,  to  be  mi- 
nute upon  every  particular  Curiofity,  would  require 
more  time  and  leifure  than  I can  fpare.  i have 
here  fent  you  a view  of  the  fubftantial  part  ; and 
fl\all  afterwards  hope  for  an  opportunity  of  recount- 
ing to  you  by  word  of  Mouth,  an  infinity  of  Ad- 
ventures, Rencounters,  and  Obfervations,  which 
may  call  up  the  refleding  faculty  of  thinking  Men. 
iMy  own  Thought  is  too  Superficial  to  philofophife 
jupon  the  Origin,  the  Belief,  the  Manners  and  Cu- 
ftoms  of  fo  many  Savages  j or  to  make  any  advan- 
!ces  with  reference  to  the  extent  of  this  Continent 
to  the  Weftward.  I have  Contented  my  felf  with 
offering  feme  thoughts  upon  the  caufes  of  the  bad 
fuccefs  of  the  Difeoveries,  that  feveral  experienced 
Men  have  attempted  in  America,  both  by  Sea  and 
Land:  And  I flatter  ray  felf,  that  my  thoughts  up- 
on that  head  are  juft.  The  frefli  inftancesof  Mr. 
de  la  Salle,  and  feveral  other  unlucky  Difeoverers, 
may  afford  a fufficient  and  feafonable  caution  ( to 
i ‘ thofe, 


1^8  Some  New  Foyages 

thofe,  who  for  the  future  fliall  undertake  to  difcover 
all  the  unknown  Countries  of  this  New  World. 
*Tis  not  every  one  that’s  qualify’d  for  fuch  an  En- 
terprife,  non  licet  omnibus  adiré  Corintbum.  ’T were  an 
eafie  matter  to  trace  the  utmoft  limits  of  the  Coun- 
try that  lies  to  the  Weft  of  Canada^  provided  it  be 
gone  about  in  a proper  Method.  In  the  firft  place, 
inftead  of  Canows,  I would  have  fuch  Adventurers 
to  make  ufe  of  certain  Sloops  of  a peculiar  Stru-  | 
^ure,  which  might  draw  but  little  Water,  and  be  j 
portable,  as  being  made  of  light  Wood  j and  with-  ! 
all  carry  thirteen  Men,  with  ; y or  40  hundred  weight  j 
of  Stowage,  and  be  able  to  bear  the  fliock  of  the  J 
Waves  in  the  great  Lakes.  Courage,  Health,  and  | 
Vigilance,  are  not  fufficient  of  themfelves  to  quali- 
fie a Man  for  fuch  Adventures  ; he  ought  to  be 
poflefs’d  of  other  Talents,  which  are  rarely  met 
with  in  one  and  the  fame  Perfon.  The  Condudl 
of  the  three  hundred  Men  that  accompany’d  me 
upon  this  Difcovery,  gave  me  a great  deal  of  trou- 
ble. It  requires  a large  flock  of  Induftry  and  Pati- 
ence, to  keep  fuch  a Company  up  to  their  Duty, 
Sedition,  Mutinies,  Quarrels,  and  an  infinity  of  dif- 
orders  frequently  take  place  among  thole,  who  be- 
ing in  remote  and  folitary  Places,  think  they  have 
a right  of  ufing  force  againft  their  Supérieurs.  One  I 
muft  diflemble,  and  even  Ihut  his  Eyes  upon  occa-  i 
fion,  Isaft  the  growing  Evil  Ihould  be  inflam’d  : | 
The  gentleft  Methods  are  the  fureft,  for  him  that  | 
commands  in  Chief;  and  if  any  Mutiny  or  Sediti-  | 
ous  Plot  is  in  view,  ’tis  the  bufinefs  of  the  inferior  | 
Officers  to  flifle  it,  by  perfwading  the  Mutineers,  1 
that  the  difcovery  of  fuch  things  to  the  Command-  ! 
iiig  Officer,  would  create  a great  deal  of  uneafinels.  | 
So,  the  chief  Officer  muft  ftill  make  as  if  he  were  i 
ignorant  of  what  paftfes,  unlefs  it  be,  that  the  flame  I 
breaks  out  in  his  Prelence  ; then  indeed  he  lies  un-  j 
der  an  indifpenfible  Obligation,  of  infliding  fpeedy  | 


to  North  America.  i ; 9 

and  private  punifhment,  without  his  prudence  di- 
reds  him  to  put  off  the  Execution,  upon  an  appre- 
henfion  of  fome  pernicious  confequences  that  may 
înlue  thereupon.  In  fuch  Voyages  he  muft  over- 
look a thoufand  things,  which  upon  other  occafi- 
ons  he  has  all  reafon  to  punilh.  He  muft  counter- 
feit a downright  ignorance  of  their  Intrigues  with  the 
She-Savages,  of  their  Quarrels  among  themfelves,  of 
their  negligence  in  not  mounting  the  Guard,  and 
not  obferving  the  other  points  of  Duty  ; in  a word, 
he  muft  pretend  to  know  nothing  of  an  Infinity 
of  fuch  Diforders,  as  have  no  dired  tendency  to  a 
Revolt.  He  ought  to  ufe  the  piecaution  offing- 
ling  out  a Spy  in  his  little  Army,  and  reward  him 
handfomly  for  a dexterous  Intelligence  as  to  all  that 
happens  ; to  the  end  that  he  may  remedy  the  grow- 
ing diforders  either  diredly  or  indiredly.  This 
Spie  may  by  good  management,  and  due  fecre- 
cy  find  out  the  Ringleader  of  a Club  or  Cabal  ; 
and  when  the  Commanding  Officer  has  receiv’d  fuch 
i fatisfadion  upon  the  matter,  that  there’s  no  room 
i left  to  doubt  of  the  Criminal’s  Demerit;  ’twill  then 
I be  very  convenient  to  make  away  with  him,  and 
that  with  fuch  management,  that  no  body  ffiould 
know  what  became  of  him. 

Farther  : He  ought  to  give  ’em  Tobacco  and 
Brandy  now  and  then,  to  ask  their  ad  vice  upon  fome 
occafions,  to  fatigue  ’em  as  little  as  poffibie,  to  call 
’em  up  to  dance  and  make  merry,  and  at  the  fame 
i time  to  exhort  ’em  to  live  in  a good  underftanding 
with  one  another.  The  beft  Topick  he  can  make 
I ufe  of  for  inforcing  their  Duty,  is  Religion,  and 
i the  Honour  of  their  Country,  and  this  he  ought  to 
:i  defcant  upon  himfelf  : For  though  I have  a great 
deal  of  Faith  in  the  pbwer  of  the  Clergy  ; yet  I 
fj  know  that  fort  of  Men  do’s  more  harm  than  good, 

; in  Voyages  of  this  nature;  and  for  that  reafon  I’d 
i fhoqfe  to  h?  without  their  Coropany.  The  Perfon 


140  Some  T^w  Voyages 

who  undertakes  to  go  upon  a Difcovery,  ought  to 
be  very  nice  and  cautious  in  the  choice  of  his  Men  ; 
for  every  one  is  not  fit  for  his  bufinefs.  His  Men 
ought  to  be  between  30  and  40  years  of  Age,  of  a 
dry  Conftitution,  of  a peaceable  Temper,  of  an 
aéliveand  bold  Spirit,  and  inur’d  to  the  fatigues  of 
Voyages.  The  wholeRetinue  muft  confiftof  three 
hundred  Men  3 and  of  that  number  there  ipuft  be 
fome  Ship-Carpenters,Gun-fmiths,  and  Sawyers  with 
all  their  Tools  ; befides  Huntfmen,  and  Fiftiermen 
with  their  Tackling.  You  muft  likewile  have  Sur- 
geons among  ’em,  but  their  Cheft  ought  to  contain 
nothing  but  Razours,  Lancets,  External  Medicines 
for  Wounds,  Orviétan  and  Senna.  All  the  Men 
of  the  Detachment,  ought  to  be  provided  with  Buff- 
Coats  and  Boots  to  turn  the  Arrows  ; for,  as  I inti- 
mated above,  the  Savages  of  the  unknown  Gaun- 
tries are  ftrangers  to  Fire-Arms.  They  muft  be 
arm’d  with  a double  barrel’d  Gun,  a double  barrel’d 
Piftol,  and  a good  long  Sword.  The  Commanding 
Officer  muft  take  care  to  provide  a fufficiant  quan- 
tity of  the  Skins  of  Deer,  Elks,  and  Beeves,  in  order 
to  be  few’d  together,  and  hung  round  his  Camps 
upon  certain  Stakes  fix’d  at  convenient  diftances 
from  one  another.  1 had  as  many  as  would  go 
round  a fquare  of  thirty  Foot  every  way  ; for  each 
Skin  being  five  Foot  deep,  and  almoft  four  Foot 
broad,  1 made  two  pieces  of  eight  Skins  a piece, 
which  were  rais’d  and  extended  in  a Minute.  Be- 
fides thefe,  he  ought  to  carry  with  him  fome  Pot- 
Guns  of  eight  Foot  in  length,  and  fix  in  breadth  ; 
with  two  Hand-Mills  for  grinding  the  Indian  Corn,  j 
Nai'isofall  fizes,  Pickaxes,  Spades,  Hatchets,  Hooks,  ! 
Soap,  and  Cotton  to  make  Candles  of.  Above  ail,  | 
he  muft  not  forget  to  take  in  good  ftore  of  Powder,  1 
Brandy,  Tobacco,  and  fuch  things  as  he  rnuft  i 
prefent  to  the  Savages  whofc  Country  he  difcovers. 
Add  to  this  Cargo,  an  Aftrolabç,  a Semicircle,  fe-  ! 


to  Norf/>- America.  Î41 

veral  Sea-Compafles,  fome  Simple,  and  lome  of  Va- 
riation, a Load-ftone,  two  large  Watches  of  three 
Inches  Diameter  ; Pencils,  Colours,  and  Paper,  for 
making  Journals  and  Maps,  for  the  defigning  of 
Land-Creatures,  Fowl,  Fifh,  Trees,  Plants,  Grain, 
and  in  a word,  whatever  feems  worthy  of  his  Cu- 
riofity.  I would  likewife  advife  him  to  carry  with 
him  fome  Trumpeters  and  Fidlers,  both  for  anima- 
ting his  Retinue,  and  raifing  the  admiration  of  the 
Savages.  With  this  Eqnipage,  Sir,  a Man  of  Senfe, 
Condu<ft,  and  A<5Hon,  I mean,  a Man  that’s  Vi- 
gilant, Prudent,  Cautious,  and  above  all.  Patient 
and  Modèrate,  and  qualify ’d  for  contriving  Expe- 
dients upon  ail  occafions  j a Man,  I fay,  thus  qua- 
lify’d,  and  thus  fitted  out,  may  boldly  go  to  all  the 
Countries  that  lye  to  the  Weft  of  Canada,  without 
any  apprehenfion  of  danger.  As  for  my  own  part, 
I lerioufly  declare,  that  if  I were  poffefs’d  of  all 
thefe  qualities,  I lliould  efteem  it  my  happinefs  to 
be  imploy’d  upon  fuch  an  Enterprife,  both  for  the 
Glory  of  his  Majefty,  and  my  own  Satisfaélion;  For 
the  continu’d  diverfityof  Obje<fts,  did  fo  charm  me 
in  my  Voyages,  that  I had  fcarce  time  to  reflect 
upon  the  fatigue  and  trouble  that  I underwent.  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


LETTER 


Some  ISIem  Voyages 


141 


LETTER  XVir. 

Dated  nt^Quehec  Seftmier  28.  1^89. 

7he  Author  fets  out  from  Miflilimakinac  to  the 
Colony^  and  defcrihes  the  Country^  Rivers^  and 
Paffes  that  he  faw  hy  the  way.  The  Iroque(e 
make  a fatal  incurfion  into  the  Ifland  of  Mont- 
real : Fort  Frontenac  h abandon  d.  Count 
Frontenac  if  yê«f  Canada,  and  the  Mare^uis 
of  Denonville  is  recall! d. 

SIR, 

I Writ  to  you  from  M10maUnac  on  the  of 
May.  I left  that  place  June  the  Zth,  and  fet  out 
for  Manual,  accompany ’d  with  twelve  Out  muas , 
who  were  divided  into  two  Canows,  and  row’d 
very  hard.  The  z%d,l.  overtook  the  Coureurs  de  Bois 
in  the  River  Creufe,  who  had  got  the  ftart  of  me 
for  fome  days.  Mr.  Dulhut  us’d  his  utmoft  efforts 
to  dilTwade  me  from  going  further  with  fo  weak  a 
Retinue.  He  would  have  had  me  to  go  down  along 
with  him;  and  remonftrated  to  me,  that  if  my 
twelve  Condutîers  perceiv’d  either  in  the  Land- 
carriage  or  upon  the  Rivers,  any  thing  that  might 
call  up  an  apprehenfion  of  falling  into  the  hands  of 
the  Iroquefe,  they  would  defert  me  and  the  Canows, 
and  fly  to  the  Woods  to  avoid  the  Enemy.  I re- 
jetJfed  his  Advice,  though  I had  like  to  have  repent- 
ed of  my  refolution  not  long  after  ; for  according 
to  his  Predidion,  my  Canow-Men  threatn’d  to  run 
away  to  the  Forrefts,  at  the  Fall  call’d  Ij>ng  Saut  : 
And  indeed  if  they  had  done  it,  I had  follow’d  ’em, 
upon  the  reflexion,  that  of  two  Evils  a Man  ought 

to 


to  Konh  Amcïka..  14I 

to  choofe  the  leaft  ; but  this  Storm  blew  over.  In 
the  great  River  of  the  Outaouas,  not  far  from  the 
River  of  Lievre,  I met  Mr.  de  St.  Helene  at  the  Head 
of  a Party  of  the  Coureurs  de  Bois,  who  was  bound 
for  Hudfons  Bay,  in  order  to  retake  fome  Forts  that 
the  EngUJh  had  feiz’d  upon.  He  acquainted  me  with 
the  Prince  of  Oranges  Expedition  for  England  ; and 
gave  me  to  underhand,  that  upon  his  arrival  King 
<3iw«  retir’d  to  France,  and  that  the  Prince  was  pro- 
; claim’d  King,  which  feem’d  to  prefage  a bloody 
land  lharp  War  in  Europe.  I aflure  you.  Sir,  this 
(piece  of  News  furpriz’d  me  extreamly  ; and  not- 
I withftanding  that  I had  it  from  the  Mouth  of  a Man, 
whofe  word  I rely  very  much  upon,  yet  I had  all 
the  difficulty  in  the  World  to  make  my  felf  believe, 
Ithat  a Revolution  of  fuch  Importance  could  be  ac- 
complifli’d  in  fo  ffiort  a time,  without  the  efFufion 
of  Blood  ; efpecially  confidering  what  a ftrid  Alli- 
ance there  was  between  our  Court,  and  the  Court 
QÎ  England,  and  how  much  ’twas  the  intereft  of 
iboth  thefe  Monarchs  to  give  mutual  affiftance  to  one 
another.  July  the  <^tb  I arriv’d  at  Monreal,  after  ven- 
ituring  down  feveral  fearful  Catarads  in  the  River 
lof  the  Outàouas,znà  induring  the  hardlhips  of  fifteen 
|or  twenty  Land-carriages,  (bme  of  which  are  above 
|la  League  in  length. 

The  Navigation  is  prety  fure  from  Mljfdmakinac 
^to  the  River  des  François;  for  in  coafting  along  the 
iLake  of  Hurons,  we  meet  with  an  infinity  of  Iflands, 
I, which  ferve  fora  flielter.  Butin  going  up  that  Ri- 
I'ver,  there’s  fome  difficulty,  for  it  has  five  Cacarads 
I which  oblige  us  to  turn  out  and  carry  all  over-land 
’.  for  thirty,  fifty,  and  a hundred  Paces.  Having 
I pafs’d  that  River,  we  enter’d  the  Lake  of  the  Be- 
\}picerinis,  from  whence  we  are  forc’d  to  tranfport  our 
' Caaows  and  Baggage  two  Leagues  over-land,  to  a- 
Ï!  jnother  River  which  has  fix  or  feven  Water-falls  that 
«'we  commonly  fiioot.  From  that  River  we  have  a- 
» nother 


144  Voyages 

nother  land-carriage  to  the  River  Creufe,  whîdï 
falls  with  rapid  Currents  into  the  great  River  of  the 
Outaouas,  near  a place  call’d  Mataouan.  We  conti- 
nue our  courfe  upon  this  great  River,  till  we  come 
to  the  point  of  the  Ifland  of  Monrealy  where  ’tis  loft 
in  the  great  River  of  St.  Laurence.  Thefe  two  Ri- 
vers joyn  one  another  with  very  gentle  Streams, 
and  quitting  their  fearful  Channels  form  the  little 
Lake  of  St.  toms.  I thought  to  have  loft  my  Life 
at  the  fall,  call’d  the  fall  of  St.  Louis,  about  three 
Leagues  from  Monreal,  for  our  Canow  having  over- 
fet  in  the  Eddy,  I was  carry’d  by  the  Current  to 
the  foot  of  that  Cataradt,  from  whence  the  Cheva- 
lier de  Vaudreuil  d rag’d  me  out  by  a great  chance. 
The  Canovfs  and  the  Skins  belonging  to  the  fix 
Savages  were  loft  ; and  one  of  the  Savages  was 
drown’d.  This  is  the  only  time  I was  in  danger, 
through  the  whole  courfe  of  my  Voyagfes.  Asfoon 
as  I landed  here,  I repair’d  with  diligence  to  a Ta- 
vern to  refrelh  my  felf,  and  to  make  up  the  Ioffes  I 
had  fuftain’d  by  a neceffary  Abftinence.  The  next 
day  I waited  upon  Mr.  de  Demnville,  and  Mr.  de 
Chamfigni,  to  whom  I gave  an  account  of  my  Voy- 
ages, and  withal,  gave  in  the  News  that  a great 
company  of  the  Coureurs  de.  Bois  and  Savages 
would  arrive  very  fpeedily  j which  they  did  accor- 
dingly after  fifteen  days.  The  Rat  I mention’d  a- 
bove  came  down  hither,  and  return’d  home  not* 
withftanding  the  threats  that  were  levell’d  againft 
him.  By  this  Adventure,  he  fiiew’d  that  he  laugh’d 
at  their  Intrigues.  But  now  that  I have  mention’d 
his  name,  I cannot  forbear  mentioning  a malicious 
Stratagem  that  this  cunning  Savage  made  ufe  of 
laft  year,  to  prevent  the  conclufion  of  a Peace  be- 
tween Mr.  de  Denonville  inà  the  Iroejueje. 

This  Savage  is  the  general  and  chief  Counfellour 
of  the  Hurons'^  he  is  a Man  ot  forty  years  of  Age^ 
and  brave  in  his  way.  When  he  found  himfelf 
. prefs’d 


to  North’Amcïlci. 


! 


|)refs’d  and  importun’d  by  Mr.  de  Denonville,  to  en- 
ter into  the  Alliance  concluded  in  the  year  1687, 
that  I took' notice  of  before;  heat  laft  comply’d 
with  his  defircj  with  thisreferve,  that  theWarlhould 
not  be  put  to  an  end  till  the  Irc<jueJe  were  totally 
routed.  This  elaufe  the  Governour  promis’d  to 
make  good,  and  gave  him  alTurances  to  that  pur- 
pofe  on  the  ^d  of  September,  in  the  fame  year,  which 
happen’d  about  two  days  before  I fet  out  from  Ni- 
agara, upon  my  Voyage  to  the  great  Lakes.  This 
Savage- General  relying  upon  Mr.  de  DemnviÜei  pro- 
mife,  march’d  from  Mijfilimakinac  at  the  Head  of  an 
hundred  Warriours,  as  I infinuated  in  my  tipth  Let- 
ter, in  order  to  invade  the  Iroejuefe  Country,  and 
atchieve  fome  glorious  feats  among  ’em.  In  the 
mean  time,  to  carry  on  his  defign  the  more  cauti- 
oufly,  he  thought  it  proper  to  pafs  by  the  way  of 
Fort  Frontenac,  where  he  might  receive  fome  intel- 
ligence. Upon  his  arrival  at  this  Fort,  the  Gover- 
nour told  him  that  Mr.  de  Denonville  was  negotiating 
a Peace  with  the  five  Ircquefe  Mations,  whofe  Em- 
balfadors  and  Hohages  he  expeded  in  a Ihorttime, 
in  order  to  conclude  and  ratifie  the  Peace,  he  having 
orders  to  conduct  ’em  to  Monreal  : And  that  upoii 
that  Confideration,  ’twas  moft  proper  for  him  and 
his  WarrioUrs  to  return  home,  and  to  pafs  no  fur- 
ther. The  Savage  General  was  mightily  furpris’d 
with  this  unexpected  piece  of  News  ; efpecially  con- 
lldering  that  by  the  means  of  that  Peace,'  he  and 
his  Nation  would  be  given  up  as  a Sacrifice  for  thé 
Wellfare  of  the  French.  When  the  Governor  had 
made  an  end  of  his  Remonftrance,  the  Rat  ac- 
knowledg’d, that  what  he  offer’d  was  verÿ  reafona-s 
ble,  but  withal,  that  inftead  of  following  his  Ad* 
rice,  he  would  go  and  tarry  for  the  Ifoqaefe  Ériï- 
balfadours  and  Hoftages  at  the  CataraCts,  by  Whkfr 
they  were  oblig’d  to  pafs.  He  had  not  tarry’d  fhêré 
sbov©  fiYe-  or  fis-  daysÿ  beforé  t'n®  inhappy  Heptt- 


/ 


F( 


14^  Some  Voyages 

ties  arriv’d  with  a Train  of  forty  young  Men,  who 
were  all  either  kill’d  or  taken  as  they  difembarqued. 
The  Prifoners  were  no  fooner  fetter’d,  than  this 
crafty  General  of  the  Hurons  reprefented  to  ’em, 
that  the  French  Governour  had  fent  him  notice  to 
take  up  that  Poll,  in  order  to  lie  in  wait  fora  Par- 
ty of  fifty  Warriours,  that  were  to  pafs  that  way 
at  a certain  fet  time.  The  Iro^uefe  being  much  fur- 
pris’d  with  the  apprehenfion  of  the  perfidioufnels 
that  he  charg’d  upon  Mr.  de  Denonville,  acquainted 
the  Rat  with  thedefign  upon  which  they  came.  Up-» 
on  that  the  Rat  counterfeited  a fort  of  Rage  and 
Fury  ; and  to  play  his  Cards  the  better,  flew  out 
in  inveâives  againft  Mr.  de  Denonvilkf  declaring, 
that  fome  time  or  other  he  would  be  reveng’d  uponL 
that  Governour,  for  making  him  the  Inftrumenc  ofj 
the  moft  barbarous  Treachery  that  ever  was  aâred.  |,j 
Then  he  fix’d  his  Eyes  uporr  all  the  Prifoners,  a-  jg 


fa 


mong  whom  was  the  chief  Embalfadour  call’d 


lir 


lac 

ij 


he 


|0! 


Theganejorem,  and  fpoke  to  this  purpofe  j Go  mj  5re-|j( 
thren,  though  I am  at  War  ivith  you,  yet  I releafe  you,',  jj 
and  allow  you  to  go  home.  ’Fis  the . Governour  of  the 
French  that  ' fut  me  upon  this  black  ABion,  which  I fhall 
never  be  able  to  digef,  unlejs  your  five  Nations  revenge  u 
themfelves,  and  make  their  juft  Reprifals.  This  waSi  ijj 
fufficient  to  convince  the  Iroquefe  of  the  fincerity  of 
his  words  ; and  they  alTur’d  him  upon  the  fpot,  that 
if  he  had  a mind  to  make  a feparate  Peace,  the  five 
Nations  would  agree  to  it:  However,  the  ha- 
ving loft  one  Man  in  this  Adventure,  kept  an  Iro- 
quefe  Slave  to  fupply  the  place  of  the  Man  he  had 
loft  : And  after  furnifhing  the  Prifoners  with  Guns, 
Powder,  and  Ball,  in  order  to  their  return  home- 
ward, march’d  to  Mijfilimakinac,  where  he  prefent- 
ed  the  French  Governour  with  the  Slave  that  he 
brought  off  The  poor  wretch  was  no  (boner  de- 
liver’d, than  he  was  condemn’d  to  be  (hot  ; for  at 
that  time  the  French  Garrilbn  did  not  know  that 

Mr. 


lit 


il 


ift 


kC 

r,..  “'I 


to  North- km^nca..  \ 4^ 

Mr.  JeDenonville  defign’d  to  clap  up  a Peace  with 
the  Irocjuefe.  The  condemn’d  Prifoner  gave  an  ac- 
count of  his  Adventure,  and  that  of  the  Ambaffa- 
d(!Hjrs  j but  the  French  thought  that  the  fear  of  Death 
made  the  fellow  talk  idely,  and  were  confirm’d  in 
that  thought,  by  hearing  the  Rat  and  his  Men  fay 
that  he  was  Light-headed  : Infomuch,  that  the  poor 
Fellow  was  put  to  death,  notwithftanding  all  the 
reafons  he  could  offer.  The  fame  day  that  he  was 
fhot,  the  Rat  call’d  an  old  Iroi^uefe  Slave  that  had 
ferv’d  him  a long  while,  and  told  him  he  had  re- 
folv’d  to  allow  him  the  liberty  of  returning  to  his 
own  Country,  and  fpending  the  reft  of  his  days 
among  his  Friends  and  Country-men.  At  the  lame 
time  he  gave  him  to  know,  that  fince  he  had  been  an 
Eye-witnefs  of  the  barbarous  ufage  that  his  Country- 
men had  met  with  from  the  French,  notwithftand- 
jing  what  he  offer’d  in  his  own  defence,  it  behov’d 
lim  to  acquaint  his  Countrymen  with  the  black- 
tiefs  of  that  Adion.  The  manumitted  Slave  obey’d 
jiis  orders  fo  pundually,  that  foon  after  the  Iroquefi 
^ade  an  Incurfion,  at  a time  when  the  Governour 
ilid  not  dream  of  any  luch  thing,  for  he  had  us’d 
he  Precaution  of  giving  the  Iroqmfe  to  underftand, 
lhat  he  difallow’d  of  the  Rat's  Treachery  j info- 
huch,  that  he  had  a mind  to  have  him  hang’d  j and 
fipon  this  profpect,  expe<fted  hourly  ten  or  twelve 
deputies  to  conclude  the  Peace  he  fo  much  defir’d. 

I‘  In  effetft  the  Deputies  did  come,  but  neither  their 
.'lumber  nor  their  Defign  was  fuitable  to  what  the 
iiovernour  had  promifed  to  himfelf.  Twelve  hiin- 
red  Warriours  landed  at  theLands-end  of  thè  Ifland 
f Monreal,  and  burnt  and  fack’d  all  the  Plantations 
'■{  that  Quarter;  They  maffacred  Men,  Women,- 
hd  Children  ; and  Madam  de  DenonmUe,  who  Was 
nen  at  Monreal  \V\t\\  her  Husband,  did  not  think 
;r  felf  fafe  in  that  J>laceo-'  A general  Goiifternatiotf 
as  ffread  aft  about  for  the  BarhWiam  were  not' 


t 


U 


in 


148  So?ne  Ne0  Voyages 

bove  three  Leagues  from  Monreal.  They  burnt  al 
the  adjacent  Settlements,  and  block’d  up  two  Forts, 
Mr.  de  Denonville  fent  out  a Detachment  of  a hundrec 
Soldiers  and  fifty  Savages  to  oppofe  ’em,  being  un 
willing  to  fpare  a greater  number  out  of  the  City 
but  all  the  Men  of  the  Detachment  were  either  taken 
or  cut  in  pieces,  excepting  twelve  Savages,  one  Sol 
dier,  and  Mr.  de  Longueil  who  commanded  the  Party, 
and  was  carried  off  by  the  twelve  Savages  after  hr 
Thigh  was  broke  : The  other  Officers,  namely,  th« 
Sieurs  delà  Ralserre,DenisJa  Vlante^^nà  Vilkdenè^^QXQ  a 
taken  Prifoners.  In  a word,  the  Barbarians  laid  a 
moft  the  whole  Ifland  wafte,  and  loft  only  thret 
Men,  who  having  drank  to  excefs  of  the  Wine  thej 
found  in  the  Plantations,  were  decoy’d  into  a For 
by  a Canadefe  Cow- keeper,  that  had  been  their  Slav( 
for  fome  Years.  As  foon  as  the  three  unfortunati 
Iroquefe  arriv’d  in  the  Fort,  they  were  thrown  into 
Cellar  to  fleep  themfelves  fober;  and,  queftionlefs 
as  foon  as  they  wak’d  they  repented  of  their  excel 
five  drinking.  When  they  wak’d,  they  fell  imme 
diately  a fingingj  and  when  the  Garrifon  offer’d  t 
fetter  ’em,  and  carry  ’em  to  Monreal,  they  flew  1 
fome  Clubs  that  lay  in  the  Cellar,  and  made  fuch 
vigorous  and  brave  defence,  that  the  Garrifon  w; 
forc’d  to  ihoot  ’em  upon  the  fpot.  The  Cow-keepe 
being  brought  before  Mr.  de  Demnvdle^  he  told  hitr 
That  the  Breach  made  by  the  Rat's  Connivance  Wi  ® 
irreparable;  that  the  five  Iroquefe  Nations  refente  P" 
that  Adventure  with  fo  much  warmth,  that’twas  in  ® 
poffible  to  difpofe  ’em  to  a Peace  in  a Ihort  time 
that  they  were  fo  far  from  being  angry  with  that  Hj  ^ 
ron  for  what  he  did,  that  they  were  willing  to  ent 
into  a Treaty  with  him,  owning  that  he  and  h 
Party  had  done  nothing  but  what  became  a braveMi  *' 
and  a good  Ally.  Doubtlefs  this  fatal  Incurfion  was 
great  Surprifal  to  Mr.  de  Denonville^  and  afforded  hi 
a copious’ Field  for  Rcflediion.  ’Twas  already  ir  tu'l 

poffit 


m 


to  North  America.,  1 49 

poffible  to  continue  the  PolTeffion  of  Fort  Frontenac ^ 
where  they  began  to  want  Provifions,  and  which 
could  .not  be  relieved  without  expofing  a great  many 
Men  to'  the  danger  of  the  Paffes  or  Cataradts,  which 
I have  mention’d  fo  often.  There  was  a downright 
neceility  of  calling  out  the  Garrifon,  and  blowing 
up  the  Fort;  but  the  difficulty  lay  in  finding  a Man 
to  carry  Orders  for  that  effedt  to  the  Governour,  for 
no  body  durft  undertake  it,  till  the  Sieur  Teter 
\d^ Arpentigni  offer’d  to  go  all  alone  through  the  Fo- 
refts  ; and  accordingly  he  went,  and  did  his  Bufinefs 
fuccefsfully.  The  Orders  were  extream  welcome  to 
Mr.  de  Valrenes,  the  Governour  of  the  Fort  for  the 
!time;  who,  upon  the  receiving  of ’em,  run  a Mine 
under  the  four  BafHons,  which,  with  the  Powder 
|he  put  in,  was  reckon’d  fufficient  to  blow  it  up. 
This  done,  he  embark’d,  and  came  down  the  River 
through  the  Cataradts  to  Monreal,  where  he  found 
Mr.  de  Denonville,  and  accompany ’d  him  hither. 
That  Officer  did  not  only  abdicate  the  Fort  of  Fron- 
tenac^nt  fet  fire  to  three  great  Barques  that  they  us’d 
to  ply  with  upon  the  Lake,  both  to  awe  the  IrcBjuefe 
in  time  of  War,  and  to  convey  Commodities  to  ’em 
in  time  of  Peace.  Mr.  de  Demni/ilU  adlcd  a prudent 
part  in  relinquilhing  both  this  Fort  and  that  of  Nia- 
gara  ; for,  in  earneft,  thefe  two  Polls  are  indefen- 
mble,  by  reafon  of  the  inacccffible  Cataradls,  upon 
|which  an  Ambufeado  of  ten  Iroquefe  may  i epulfe  a 
thoufand  Frenchman  by  the  throwing  of  Stones.  But 
Rafter  all  I muft  own,  that  the  Welfare  and  Preferva- 
Ition  oi  our  Colonies  had  an  abfolute  dépendance 
'upon  thefe  two  Forts,  which  feenrd  to  infure  the  ut- 
ter DeftrudHon  of  the  Iroqueje^  for  they  Cf  uld  not 
ilir  out  of  their  Villages  to  Hunt,  or  to  Filii,  with- 
out running  the  rifque  of  having  their  Throats  cut 
the  Savages  in  Alliance  with  us,  who  being  then 
;affur’d  of  a fafe  Retreat,  would  have  made  continual 
Incurfions  into  the  Country  of  thofe  Barbarians  t 
L I And 


If©  Some  "Hew  Voyages 

And  by  this  means  the  Inqmfe  being  unprovided  with 
Beaver-skins  to  be  given  in  exchange  for  Guns,  Pow- 
der, Ball,  and  Nets,  would  be  ftarv’d  to  death,  or  v 
at  leaft  be  oblig’d  to  depart  their  Country. 

In  the  end  of  September  Mr.  de  Bonaventure^  Cap- 
tain and  Owner  of  a Merchant  Ship,  arriv’d  in  this 
Port , and  brought  the  News  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac  $ 
Reinftallment  in  the  place  of  Governour-General 
of  Canada,  and  pf  the  Re- calling  of  Mr.  Demn->  . 

vide,  whom  the  Duke  de  Beauvilliers  has  recommen- 
ded  to  the  King,  for  the  place  of  Sub-Governour  to  h 
the  Princes  his  Grandfons.  Some  People  are  uneafie  : ; 
at  the  re-calling  of  this  Governour  ; and  ’tis  faid, 
that  the  Reverend  Fathers  the  Jefuits,  fall  under  the  ; 
number  of  the  Malecontents  : For  if  we  may  credit-1 
the  reports  of  the  Country,  they  contributed  in  a * 
great  rneafure,  to  the  re-calling  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac  _ 
feven  or  eight  years  agoe,  by  acting  in  concert  with 
the  Intendant  of  Chefneau,  and  the  fupreme  Coun- 
cil, and  drawing  up  Accufationsagainft  him  which 
had  the  defired  efîeéi  j though  now  the  King  fhews 
that  he  is  undeceiv’d,  by  reinftating  that  Gentleman 
once  more  in  this  Government.  In  the  mean  time  fo 
the  Statefmen  of  the  Country  that  are  moll  guilty , , 

hnow  not  how  to  drefs  this  kettle  of  Fifh;  for  they 
make  no  queftion  but  the  New  Governour  will  re- 
tain a juft  refentmentof  what’s  pad.  But  the  Gem 
tlemen.  Merchants,  and  other  Inhabitants,  are  ma-  S 
king  preparations  for  folemnifing  his  Arrival,  which  ^ 
they  expeâ:  with  as  much  impatience,  as  the  Jews  ; 1 
do  the  Mejfias.  The  very  Savages  that  live  in  the  it 
skirts  of  the  Colony,  /hew  an  uncommon  Joy  up- 
on the  hopes  of  his  return  : And  indeed,  we  need 
not  think  it  ftrange,  for  that  Governour  drew  Efteem 
and  Veneration,  not  only  from  the  French,  but  from 
all  the  Nations  of  this  vaft  Continent,  who  look’d  fct 
upon  him  as  their  Guardian  Angel.  Mr.  de  Dcnon-  e;*. 
ville  begins  to  pack  up  his  Baggage,  and  that  in  ef; 


to  Norf^-America.  i j t 

fed,  is  all  I can  fay  of  him.  ’Tis  none  of  my  bu- 
finefs  to  meddle  with  an  infinity  of  Affairs,  thatre^ 
late  to  the  Gentleman’s  private  Intereft.  As  to  the 
queftion,  whether  he  has  manag’d  well  or  ill,  du- 
ring the  courfe  of  his  Government,  or  whether  he 
was  lov’d  or  hated,  I know  nothing  of  the  matter. 
I am  at  a lofs  to  know  whether  he  kept  a good  or 
a forty  Table,  for  indeed  I was  never  at  it.  Adieu. 

I make  account  to  fet  out  for  Rocbel^  when  the 
Veffel  that  brings  our  new  Governour,  returns  for 
France.  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &C. 


LETTER  XVIII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  November  ly,  1689, 

Giving  an  Account  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac’x  Arri' 
TJal,  his  Reception,  his  Voyage  to  Monreal, 
and  the  repairing  of  Fort  Frontenac. 

SIR, 

TH  E Intelligence  you  give  me  of  the  adjudging 
of  the  Lands  oi  Labontan,  would  have  drove 
me  to  defpair  j if  you  had  not  alfur’d  me  at  the 
fame  time,  that  I might  recover  it  after  a Century 
of  years,  ( if  I had  the  misfortune  to  live  fo  long  ) 
upon  the  condition  of  reimburfing  to  the  Poffef- 
four,  the  Sum  that  he  pay’d  for  it,  and  of  proving 
that  I was,  a<ftually  in  the  Kings  Service  in  the  re- 
mote parts  of  the  World,  when  that  Eftate  was 
fold.  To  fpeak  to  the  purpofe,  M,V.de  Frontenac  has 
h 4 counter- 


1 5 î Some  T^ew  f'oyages 

countermanded  the  leave  I had  to  go  for  Fravce]  i 
and  has  offer’d  me  a free  accefs  to  his  Pocket  and  hi^  i 
Table.  All  the  Arguments  I offer’d,  have  no  In-  ( 
fluence  upon  him,  and  fo  I am  bound  to  obey.  j 
This  new  Governour  arriv’d  at  Quebec  the  i jtèof  I 
OBober.  He  came  on  fhoar  at  eight  a Clock  at  i 
Night,  and  was  receiv’d  by  the  Supreme  Council,  , 
and  all  the  Inhabitants  in  Arms,  with  Flambeau’s  ] 
both  in  the  City,  and  upon  the  Harbour,  with  a i 
triple  Difcharge  of  the  great  and  fraall  Guns,  and 
liluttiinations  in  all  the  Windows  of  the  City.  That  | 
fame  Night  he  was  complimented  by  all  the  Com-  i 
panics  of  the  Town,  and  above  all,  by  the  Jefuits,  j 
who  upon  that  occafion  made  a very  pathetick  Speech,  i 
though  the  Heart  had  lefs  hand  in  it,  than  the  1 
Mouth.  The  next  day  he  was  vifited  by  all  -the  La-  | 
dies,  whofe  inward  joy  appear’d  in  their  Counte-  j , 
nances,  as  much  as  in  their  Words.  Several  Per-  , 
fons  made  Fire- works,  while  the  Governour  and  his  { 
Retinue  fung  Te  Deum  in  the  great  Church.  Thefe  | 
folemn  Demonftrations  of  Joy,  increas’d  from  day  j 
to  day,  till  the  new  Governour  fet  out  for  Monreal\ 
and  the  Conduct  of  the  People  upon  this  Head,  af- 
forded fignal  proofs  of  the  fatisfadion  they  had  in 
his  return,  and  of  their  refting  affur’d,  that  his  wife 
Condud,  and  noble  Spirit,  would  preferve  the  Re- 
pofe  and  Tranquility  that  he  always  kept  up,  du- 
ring his  firfl:  ten  years  Government.  AH  the  World  i 
ador’d  him, and  ftyl’d  him  Redemftor  Patria  j to  which  | 
Title  he  had  a juft  claim,  for  all  the  Inhabitants  of  | 
thefe  Colonies  agree,  that  when  he  came  firft  to  I 
Canada,  he  found  all  things  in  Confufion  and  Di-  | 
ftrefs.  At  that  time  the  Iroqueje  had  burnt  all  the  | 
Plantations,  and  cut  the  Throats  of  fome  thoufands  \ 
of  the  French  ; the  Farmer  was  knock’d  on'the  Head 
in  his  field;  the  Traveller  was  murder’d  upon  the 
Road,  and  the  Merchant  ruin’d  for  want  of  Corn- 
merçe  ; All  the  Planters  vvere  pinch’d  w:ith  Famine, 


to  Nort/?- America.  15^ 

the  War  render’d  the  Country  defolate;  and  in  a 
word,  New-France  had  infallibly  perilh’d,  if  this 
Governour  had  not  made  that  Peace  with  the  Bar- 
barians, that  I fpoke  of  in  my  fifth  Letter.  The 
bringing  of  that  Peace  to  bear,was  an  adion  of  great- 
er Importance,  than  you  can  well  imagine;  forthefe 
Barbarians  grounded  all  their  Wars  upon  a perfonal 
Enmity,  whereas  the  European  Ruptures  depend  more  ' 
upon  Intereft  than  upon  pure  Revenge. 

Mr.  de  Si.  Valiers  the  Bilhop  of  Quebec,  arriv’d 
likewife  on  the  i <^th  at  the  fame  Port.  He  had 
imbarqu’d  in  the  preceding  Spring , on  board  of 
a Bark  that  he  had  hir’d  to  traniport  him  to  Acadia, 
to  Newfound-land,  and  to  the  other  Countries  of  his 
Diocefs.  Mr.  de  Frontenac  our  Governour,  fet  out 
for  Monreal  in  a Canow,  four  or  five  days  after  his 
Arrival  ; and  I had  the  honour  to  accompany  him. 

All  Indeavours  were  us’d  to  diffwade  him  from  un- 
dertaking that  Voyage,  when  the  feafon  was  fo  * 
cold,  and  fo  far  advanc’d  : For,  as  1 inform’d  you 
before,  the  Ice  is  thicker  and  ftronger  here  in  O^ob, 
than  ’tis  at  Faris  in  January  ; which,  is  very  ftrange. 

I Notwithftanding  all  the  Remonftrances  drawn  from 
' the  Hardfliips  and  Inconveniences  of  the  Voyage, 
he  flighted  the  Fatigues  of  the  Water,  and  threw  him- 
felf  into  a Canow  in  the  fixty  eighth  year  of  his 
i his  Age.  Nay,  he  took  the  abdication  of  Fort  Fron- 
i tenac  fo  much  to  Heart,  that  he  had  gone  ftraight 
i thither,  if  the  Nobility,  the  Priefts,  and  the  Inha- 
i bitants  of  Monreal,  had  not  intreated  him  with  joynt 
k Supplications,  not  to  expofe  his  Perfon  to  the  dan- 
; ger  of  the  Falls  and  Catarads  that  lie  in  that  Paf- 
• fage.  In  the  mean  time  fome  Gentlemen  of  Cana- 
■'  da,  follow’d  by  a hundred  Coureurs  de  Bois,  under 
I the  command  of  Mr.  Mantet,  ventur’d  Upon  the 
Voyage,  with  intent  to  learn  the  State  of  the  Fort, 

I acquainted  you  in  ray  laft  Letter,  that  Mr.  de  VaU 
had  blown  upthe  Wftlls  of  the  Fort,  when 

' he 

I 


* J 4 Some^  2^ew  Voyages 

he  made  his  Retreat  ; but  by  good  luck,  the  da- 
mage was  not  fo  great  as  ’twas  took  to  be  j for  the 
Party  commanded  by  Mr.  Mantet^  have  already 
rear’d  up  the  ruinous  Wall  to  the  height  of  fome 
Fathoms,  and  will  continue  to  work  upon  the  re-  ' 
pair  of  the  Fort  all  this  Winter.  This  News  Mr. 
de  Frontenac  receiv’d  lafl-  Night,  which  was  the  fixth 
after  his  return  to  this  City. 

I had  forgot  to  tell  you  that  he  brought  with  him 
out  of  France^  fome  of  thofe  Iroquefe  that  Mr.  de 
Denonvilie  had  fent  to  the  Galleys,  as  I intimated  in 
my  thirteenth  Letter  ; the  reft  having  perilh’d  in 
their  Chains.  Of  all  theie  utifottuniLte  Barbarians 
that  he  has  brought  back,  the  moft  confiderable  is 
one  that  goes  by  the  name  of  Oreouabè.  He  was 
not  us’d  as  a Galley  Slave,  in  regard  that  he  was  the  j 
Leader  of  the  Goyoguans,  and  the  Governour  has 
lodg’d  him  in  the  Caftle,  in  confideration  of  the 
efteem  he  /hews  both  for  Mr.  de  Frontenac^and  for  the 
French  Nation.  Some  flatter  themfelves  with  the 
hopes,  that  fome  Accommodation  with  the  five  Iro- 
guefe  Nations  may  be  efFecfted  by  his  Mediati- 
on ; and  for  that  end  propofals  of  Peace  are 
now  in  agitation  ; But  I have  three  good  reafons 
for  predicting,  that  fuch  a Defign  will  prove  abor- 
tive. I have  already  laid  thefe  Reafons  before  Mr. 
de  Frontenac,  who  gave  me  to  know,  that  after  the” 
departure  of  the  Ships,  he  would  difeourfe  me  upon 
that  Head.  I /hall  not  o/Fer  at  the  particulars  of  his 
Interview,  with  Monlieur  and  Madam  de  Denonville  ; 
till  fuch  time  as  you  and  I have  an  opportunity  of 
talking  under  the  Rofe.  Some  Officers  accompany 
Mr.  Denonville  and  his  Lady  to  France,  in  hopes  of  be- 
ing prefer’d.  In  all  probability  the  Ships  will  fetfail  to 
Morrow,  for  we  have  now  a fair  and  gentle  Weflerly  ; 
Gale;  befides,  that  the  feafon  for  quitting  this  Port, 
is  almoft  fpent.  I am, 

S IRf  Tours, 

LET' 


to  Nort/?- America.' 


155 


LETTER  XIX. 

Dated  at  Mowed  October  2.  1690. 

B.elating  the  Attempts  upon  Nifjp-England  and 
Nifty- York  ; a fatal  Emhajfy  fent  hy  the  French 
to  the  Iroquele;  and  an  ill-concerted  Inters 
prife  of  the  EngUfli  and  the  Iroquefe,  in 
hy  Land  to  Attack  the  French  Co~ 


SIR, 

A Bout  fifteen  days  fince  a Ship  of  Rochel  laden 
with  Wine  and  Brandy,  arriv’d  in  this  Har- 
bour ; and  the  Captain  took  care  to  convey  a Let- 
ter from  you  to  my  Hands,  As  to  your  defire  of 
having  a circumftantial  Account  of  the  Trade  of 
Canada,  I cannot  fatisfie  it  at  prefent,  for  I am  not 
as  yet  fo  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  its  Bran- 
ches. But  I affure  you,  that  fome  time  or  other 
I lhall  fend  you  fuch  Memoirs,  as  will  give  you  fa- 
tisfadion  upon  that  Head.  In  the  mean  time,  I 
hope  you’ll  be  contented  with  an  account  of  what 
pafs’d  in  this  Country  fince  the  date  of  my  laft. 

As  fbon  as  Mr.  Denonville  let  out  from  Quebec, 

1 upon  his  return  to  France,  Mr.  de  Frontenac  took  pol- 
; feffion  of  the  Fort,  which  is  the  common  Refidence 
of  our  Governour-General  ; and  order’d  one  of  our 
beft  Architeds  to  make  preparations  for  rebuilding 
, it  as  foon  as  he  could 

In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  Mr.  d’Iberville  at- 
tempted to  pillage  a fmall  Village  in,  New-2cr>^, 
i call’d  by  the  Iroe^uefe  Corlar  ; which  name  they  like- 
Wife  give  to  all  the  Qovernours  of  that  Fn^if)  Co- 
lony, 


marching 

lony. 


156  Some  T^eit^  Voyag^es 

lony.  This  Gentleman,  who  hzCamdefe,  was  at- 
tended by  five  hundred  Go«rear/  </e  £o/V,  and  the  like 
number  of  Savages  ; and  the  whole  Party  made  the 
Expedition  over  Snow  and  Ice,  notwithftanding 
they  had  three  hundred  Leagues  to  march  back- 
ward and  forward,  and  that  the  Roads  vyere  very 
rugged  and  troublefome.  Mr  d'Ibcr-ville  met  with 
wonderful  Succefi,  for  after  he  had  pillag’d,  burnt, 
and  Tack’d  that  little  Village,  with  the  adjacent 
Cantons,  he  fell  in  with  a Party  of  an  hundred 
Irccjuefe,  and  defeated  ’em  intirely.  Much  about 
the  fame  time  Mr.  de  Portneuf , another  Canada  Gqü- 
tleman,  march’d  out  at  the  Head  of  three  hundred 
Men,  one  half  Savages,,and  the  other  half  Coureurs  de 
S«V,wich  intent  to  polTefs  himfelf  of  a Fort  belonging 
to  thé  Engiijlr,  call’d  Kenebeki,  which  ftands  upon  the 
Sea-Coaft  of  Nein-Englandj  towards  the  Frontiers  of 
Acadia.  The  Garrifon  of  this  Fort  made  a brave 
defence:  But  there  being  great  quantities  of  Grana- 
do’s  and  other  Fire-works  thrown  in  upon  ’em, 
while  the  Savages  ( contrary  to  their  Cuftom)  fcal’d 
the  Palifiadoeson  all  hands,  the  Governour  was  ob- 
lig’d to  furrender  upon  Difcretion.  ’Tis  faid,  that 
in  this  Aétion  tht  Coureurs  de  Bon  did  their  duty  ve- 
ry bravely,  but  the  Enterprife  had  prov’d  fuccefslefs 
without  the  affiflance  of  the  Savages. 

As  foon  as  the  Rivers  were  navigable,  Mr.  de  Fron- 
tenac offer’d  to  fend  me  with  Propofals  of  Peace  to 
the  Irc(]uefe.  But  I made  anfwer,  that  fince  his  Pock- 
* et  and  his  Table  had  been  free  to  me  during  the 
Winter,  I could  not  imagine  that  he  bad  a mind 
to  be  rid  of  me  fofoon.  Being  oblig’d  by  this  re- 
ply to  unfold  my  meaning,  1 remonftrated  to  him, 
T hat,  the  King  of  England  having  loft  his  Crown, 
and  War  being  proclaim’d,  theGovernours  of  New- 
England  and  New-JàrÆ,  would  infallibly  ufe  their 
utrnoil  Efforts  to  excite  thefe  Bandito’s  to  redouble 
their  Incur  fions  j that  for  that  end  they  would  fur- 


to  "North  America.  157 

nifli  ’eni  with  Ammunition  gratis,  and  even  joyn 
’em  in  order  to  attack  our  Towns  ; and  above  all, 
that  the  Intrigue  of  the  Rat-  had  fo  provok’d  ’em, 
that  in  my  opinion,  ’twas  impoflible  to  appeafe  ’em. 
Upon  thefe  Confiderations,  1 humbly  befeech’d  him 
to  have  fome  other  Perfon  in  his  view,  in  cafe  he 
perfifted  in  his  defign  of  making  a Trial  of  that 
Nature.  The  Chevalier  Do  was  fingled  out  for  this 
fatal  Embaffy,  being  attended  by  one  Colin,  as  In- 
terpreter of  the  Iroqueje  Language,  and  two  young 
Canadans.  They  fet  out  in  a Canow,  and  when 
they  came  in  fight  of  the  Village  of  the  Onnont agues, 
were  receiv’d  with  the  honourable  Salvo  of  feveral 
good  blows,  and  conducted  with  the  fame  Ceremo- 
ny to  the  Village.  Such  a Retinue  could  not  but 
be  difagreeable  to  the  Gentleman  that  came  to  make 
offers  of  a Peace.  The  ancient  Meii  being  quick- 
ly affembled,  thought  it  moft  proper  to  fend  ’em 
back  with  a favourable  Anfwer,  and  in  the  mean 
time  to  ingage  fome  of  the  Agnies  and  Onnoyotes,  to 
lye  in  wait  for  ’em  at  the  Cataradfs  of  the  River, 
and  there  kill  two,  fending  the  third  back  to  Que- 
bec, and  carrying  the  fourth  to  their  Vidage,  where 
there  would  be  found  fome  English  that  would 
fhoot  ’em,  that  is,  that  would  give  ’em  the  fame 
ufage  .as  the  Rat  did  to  their  Ambaffadourst  So  true 
it  is,  that  that  Aâion  (ticks  in  their  fiomachs.  This 
Projedf  had  actually  been  put  in  execution,  if  it  had 
not  been  for  fome  of  the  Planters  of  New-Tcr^, 
who  were  then  among  the  Barbarians,  having  coma 
thither  on  purpofe  to  animate  ’em  againft  us.  Thefe 
Pia  nters  knew  fo  well  how  to  influence  the  Barba- 
rians that  were  already  bent  upon  Revenge  j that  a 
Company  of  young  Barbarians  burnt  ’em  all  alive, 
excepting  the  Chevalier  Do,  whom  they  tied  Hand 
and  Foot,  and  fent  him  bound  to  Boflon,  with  a 
delign  to  pump  out  of  him,  a view  of  the  condition 
of  our  Colonies  and  Forces.  This  piece  of  News 

ws 


158  Some  New  Voyages 

we  receiv’d  two  Months  after,  by  fome  Slaves  that 
made  their  efcape  from  the  Iro^uefe  ; and  Mr.  Je 
Frontenac^  when  furpris’d  with  fuch  difmal  News^ 
declar’d,  that  out  of  twenty  Captains  that  offer’d 
to  execute  that  Commiffion,  and  would  have  ta- 
ken the  Imployment  for  an  Honour,  I was  the  only 
one  that  had  been  capable  of  forefeeing  its  bad 
Succefs. 

June  the  z^th,  I imbarqu’d  for  this  place  in  a 
fluggilh  Brigantine,  that  the  Captain  of  the  Go- 
vernour’s  Guards  had  caus’d  to  be  built  the  forego- 
ing Winter.  This  venerable  Vefl'el  had  the  ho-^' 
nour  to  lodge  the  Intendant  and  his  Lady  ; and  all 
of  us  being  in  no  hafte,  fpent  ten  or  twelve  days 
by  the  way,  and  feafted  like  Kings  every  Night* 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  mark’d  out  a Fort  in  his  palfage  to  i 
the  City  of  Trois  Rivieres,  which  I fpoke  of  before. 
Fifteen  days  after  our  arrival  in  this  place,  a cer- 
tain Savage  whofe  name  was  Flake,  came  and  gave  I 
us  notice,  that  he  had  difcover’d  a Body  of  a thou-  ■ 
fand  Englifh,  and  five  hundred  Iroquefe  that  march’d  ' 
up  to  attack  us.  Upon  this  Intelligence,  all  our 
Troops  crofs’d  over  to  the  Meadow  of  Madelaine,  ; 
oppofite  to  this  City,  and  there  incam  p’d,  in  con-  I 
jundion  with  three  or  four  hundred  Savages  that  ! 
were  our  Allies,  in  order  to  give  the  Enemy  a warm 
Reception.  Our  Camp  was  no  fooner  form’d,  than 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  detach’d  two  or  three  fmall  Parties  : 
of  the  Savages  to  obferve  the  Enemy.  Thefe  Parties 
camefoon  back,  after  having  furpris’d  fomeftragling 
Iro^uefe  at  hunting  on  the  Confines  of  Chanrplaine 
Lake  : The  Prifoners  inform’d  us,  that  the  Englijh 
being  unable  to  encounter  the  fatigues  of  the  march, 
and  unprovided  with  a fufficient  ftock  of  Provifi- 
ons,  both  they  and  the  Irc^ueJ'e  were  return’d  to 
their  own  Country.  This  account  being  confirm’d 
by  other  Savages,  our  Troops  decamp’d,  and  march’d 
back  to  this  place,  from  whence  I was  detach’d 

fbms^ 


to  North  America.  159 

fome  days  after  to  command  a Party  that  was  to 
cover  the  Reapers  of  Fon  Roland,  which  lies  in  this 
Ifland.  When  the  Harveft  was  over  I return’d  to 
this  place,  along  with  the  Hurons  and  the  Ottîaouas, 
who  had  come  down  from  their  own  Country,  in 
purfuit  of  their  ufual  Trade  in  Skins,  an  account 
of  which  you  had  in  my  eight  Letter.  Thefe  Tra- 
ders continued  here  fifteen  days,  and  then  march’d 
home. 

This,  Sir,  is  a Summary  of  all  our  Occurrences 
; of  Moment  fince  the  laft  year.  About  fifteen  days 
I hence,  I think  to  fet  out  for  Quebec,  in  Mr.  de  Fron~ 
tenac'i  Brigantin.  I conclude  with  my  ufual  Com^ 
plement, 

' SIR, 


Tours,  See. 


LETTER  XX. 

Dated  at  Rachel  January  12.  1691. 

Being  a Relation  of  a fécond  and  very  important 
Expedition  of  the  Englilh  hy  Sea  ; in  which  is 
contain  d a Letter  written  hy  the  Englifli  Ad- 
j mirai  to  the  Count  <?/ Frontenac,  with  this 
Cover nours  Verbal  Anfwer.  As  alfo  an.  ac- 
count of  the  Authour  s departure  for  Fioxice. 

SIR, 

[am  arriv’d  at  lafl  at  Rochel,  from  whence  I now 
tranfmit  you  a Relation  of  all  that  pafs’d  in 
\':anada,  fince  the  date  of  my  laft  Letter.  In  the 
'pace  of  a few  days  aftèr  that  date,  Mr.  de  Fronte- 
nac receiv’d  advice  that  a ftrong  Fleet  of  EngUfh 
^ Ships, 


Some  TSlew  J^oyages 

Ships,  amounting  to  thirty  four  Sail,  was  feen  near 
Tadoujfac.  Immediately  he  got  on  board  of  his  Bri- 
gantine, and  order’d  all  the  Troops  to  imbarque  in 
Canows  and  Boots,  and  to  row  Night  and  Day  to 
prevent  the  Enemy  ; all  which  was  happily  püt  in 
execution.  At  the  fame  time  he  gave  orders  to  Mr. 
de  CaSieres,  to  bring  down  as  many  of  the  Inhabi- 
tants as  poffibly  he  could.  We  row’d  with  fuch 
expedition,  and  diligence,  that  we  arriv’d  the 
day  at  Quebec.  As  foon  as  Mr.  de  Frontenac  debar- 
qued,  he  view’d  the  weakeft  Pofts,  and  order’d 
’em  to  be  fortified  without  lofs  of  time  : He  rais’d 
Batteries  in  feveral  places,  and  though  in  that  ca- 
pital City  we  had  but  twelve  great  Guns,  and  but 
little  Ammunition,  yet  he  feem’d  to  be  refolutely 
bent  upon  an  obftinate  Refiftance  to  the  efforts  of 
the  Enemy’s  Fleet,  which  in  the  mean  time  ftood 
catching  of  Flies,  at  the  diftance  of  two  Leagues 
from  Quebec.  We  took  the  advantage  of  their  flow 
approaches,  and  work’d  incelfantly  to  put  our  felves 
in  a poflure  of  defence.  Our  Troops,  our  Militia, 
and  our  confederate  Savages,  came  up  to  us  on  all 
hands.  ’Tis  certain,  that  if  the  EngUjh  Admiral 
had  made  his  Defcent  before  our  arrival  at  Quebec, 
or  even  two  days  after,  he  had  earry’d  the  place 
without  ftriking  a blow  j for  at  that  time  there  was 
not  two  hundred  French  in  the  City,  which  lay 


13 


open,  and  expos’d  on  all  hands.  But  inftead  of 


doing  that,  he  cafl:  Anchor  towards  the  point  of 
the  Ifland  oi,  Orleans,  and  loft  three  days  in  con- 
fulting  with  the  Captains  of  the  Ships,  before  they 
came  to  a Refolution.  He  took  the  Sieur  Joliet 
with  his  Lady  and  his  Mother- in- Laws  in  a Bark  in 
the  River  of  St.  Laurence.  Three  Merchant-men 
from  France,  and  one  laden  with  Beaver-Skins  from 
Hudjon  Bay,  enter’d  the  River  of  Saguenay,  by  the 
way  of  Tadoujjac,  where  they  fculk’d,  and  after 
hauling  their  Guns  aflioar,  rais’d  very  good  Batte- 

riesif 


to  North- Ammca..  i<$t 

Ties.  To  be  fliorf,  the  Officers  of  the  Enemy’s 
Fleet  came  to  a Refolution  after  the  lofs  of  three  or 
four  days  in  ufelefs  Conful rations,  during  which 
time  we  were  joyn’d  on  all  hands  by  great  numbers  of 
Inhabitants  and  Soldiers.  Purfuant  to  the  refoluti- 
on of  the  Councils  of  V\bir,  the  Engliflj  Admiral, 
namely.  Sir  William  Vhips,  fent  out  his  Sloop  with  a 
French  Flag  upon  its  Prow,  which  made  up  to  the 
City  with  found  of  Trumpet.  Upon  this,  Mr.de 
Frontenac  fent  out  another  with  a French  Officer  to 
meet  it,  who  found  an  Englip  Major  in  the  Sloop, 
who  gave  him  to  underftand,  that  he  had  the  charge 
of  a Letter  from  his  General,  to  the  Governour  of 
Canada,  and  hop’d  he  might  be  allow’d  to  deliver  it 
himfelf.  Upon  that  the  French  Officer  took  him 
into  his  Sloop,  and  having  blindfolded  him,  con- 
duced him  to  the  Governour’s  Chamber;  where 
his  Face  being  uncover’d,  he  deliver’d  him  a Letter, 
the  fubftance  of  which  was  this. 

* I Sir  William  Phips,  General  of  the  Forces  of 

* New- England,  by  Sea  and  Land,  to  Count  Fronte- 

* nac,  Governour  General  of  Quebec,  by  Orders  from, 

* and  in  the  name  of  William  III  and  Mary  King 
' and  Queen  of  England',  am  come  to  make  my  felf 

* Mafter  of  this  Country.  But  in  regard  that  I 
' have  nothing  fo  much  in  view,  as  the  preventing 
‘ of  the  effufionof  Blood,  I require  youto  furren- 
‘der  at  difcretion,  your  Cities,  CalBes,  Forts, 
'Towns,  as  well  as  yourPerfons;  afluring  you  at 
; the  fame  time,  that  you  lhall  meet  with  all  man- 
'nerof  good  Ufage,  Civility  and  Humanity.  If 
■ you  do  not  accept  of  this  Propofal  without  any 

' ReftriCion,  I will  indeavour,  by  the  affiftance  of 
■Heaven,  on  which  I rely,  and  the  force  of  my 

(Arms,  to  make  a Conquelt  of  ’em.  I expeC  a po- 
litive  anfwer  in  writing  in  the  fpace  of  an  Hour, 
and  in  the  mean  time  give  you  notice,  that  after 


\6i  Some  l^ew  Voyages 

‘ the  commencement  of  Hoftilities,  I fhall  not  enter- 
‘ tain  any  thoughts  of  Accommodation. 

Sign’d,  William  Vhips. 

After  the  Interpreter  had  tranflated  the  Letter  to 
Mr.  de  Frontenac^  who  was  then  furrounded  with  Of- 
ficers ; he  order’d  the  Captain  of  his  Guards  to 
make  a Gibbet  before  the  Fort,  in  order  to  hang  the 
poor  Major,  who  in  all  appearance  underftood 
French  ; for  upon  the  pronouncing  of  this  fatal  Sen- 
tence, he  was  like  to  fwoon  away.  And  indeed  I 
muft  fay,  the  Major  had  fome  reafontobe  afïe5led,j 
for  he  had  certainly  been  bang’d,  if  the  Bilhop  and  i 
the  Intendant,  who  to  his  good  luck  were  then  pre- 
fent,  had  not  interceded  on  his  behalf.  Mr.  de  Fron- 
tenac pretended,  that  they  were  a Fleet  of  Pyrates, 
or  of  Perfons  without  Coramiffion,  for  that  the 
King  of  England  was  then  in  France.  But  atlaftthe 
Governour  being  appeas’d,  order’d  the  Major  to  re-) 
pair  forthwith  on  board  of  his  Admit'al,  againltl 
whom  he  could  defend  himfelf  the  better,  for  not| 
being  attack  d.  At  the  fame  time  he  declar’d,  thatj 
he  knew  no  other  King  of  Great  Britain,  than  Jamesi 
IÎ,  that  his  rebellious  Subjects  were  Pyrates,  and] 
that  he  dreaded  neither  their  Force  nor  their  Threats.! 
This  faid,  he  threw  Admiral  Fhips's  Letter  in  the] 
Major’s  face,  and  then  turn’d  his  Back  upon  him.) 
Upon  that  the  poor  Ambaffadour  took  frelh  cou»j 
rage,  and  looking  upon  his  Watch,  took  the  liber-, 
ty  to  ask  Mr.  de  Frontenac,  if  he  could  not  have  his 
Anfwer  in  Writing  before  the  hour  elaps’d.  But  the; 
Governour  made  anfwer  with  all  the  haughtinefs 
and  difdain  imaginable,  that  his  Admiral  deferv’d! 
no  other  anfwer,  than  what  flew  from  the  Mouth, 
of  Cannons  and  Muskets.  Thefe  words  were  no^ 
fooner  pronounc’d,  than  the  Major  was  forc’d  toj 
take  his  Letter  again,  and  being  blind-folded,  waS| 
reconduded  to  his  61oop,  in  which  he  row’d  to-j 
wards  the  Fleet  with  all  expedition.  The! 


to  2Vôn/> America.  î 

The  next  clay  about  two  in  the  Afternoon,  fixty 
Sloops  were  lent  aflioar  with  ten  or  twelve  hundred 
Men,  who  flood  upon  the  Sand  in  very  good  or- 
der. After  that  the  Sloops  went  back  to  the  Ships, 
and  brought  alhoar  the  like  Compliment  of  Men, 
which  was  afterwards  joyn'd  by  a third  Comple- 
ment of  the  fame  number.  Asfoon  as  theie  Troops 
were  landed,  they  began  to  march  towards  the  Ci- 
ty with  Drums  beating,  and  Colours  flying.  This 
Defcent  was  made  over  againft  the  ifle  of  Orleans^ 
about  a League  and  a half  below  Qj^bec  ; but  ’twas 
not  fo  expeditious,  but  that  our  Confederate  Sava- 
ges, with  two  hundred  Coureurs  de  Bois,  and  fifty 
Officers,  had  time  to  pofl  themfelves  in  a Copfe  of 
thick  Brambles,  which  lay  half  a League  off  the 
place  of  Landing.  It  being  impoffible  for  fo  finall 
a Party  to  come  to  an  open  Battle  with  a numerous 
Enemy,  they  were  forc’d  to  fight  after  the  manner 
of  the  Savages,  that  is,  to  lay  Ambufcadoes  from 
place  to  place  in  the  Copfe,  which  was  a quarter 
af  a League  broad.  This  way  of  waging  War 
prov’d  wonderfully  fuccefsful  to  us,  for  our  Man 
jeing  pofled  in  the  middle  of  the  Copfe,  we  fuffsr’d 
he  Englijh  to  enter,  and  then  fir’d  upon  ’em,  ly- 
ng  flat  upon  the  ground  till  they  fir’d  their  pieces  | 
fter  which  we  fprung  up,  and  drawing  into  knots 
tere  and  there,  repeated  our  fire  with  fuch  fuccefs, 
bat  the  Englijh  Militia  perceiving  our  Savages  fell 
ito  confufion  and  diforder,  and  their  Battalions 
tere  broke  ; infomuch,  that  they  betook  themfelves 
) flight,  crying  out,  Indians,  Indians,  and  gave  our 
avages  the  opportunity  of  making  a bloody  flaugh- 
T among  ’em,  for  we  found  three  hundred  Men 
ft  upon  the  fpot,  without  any  other  lofs  on  our 
Je,  than  that  of  ten  Coureurs  de  Boss,  four  Officers, 
id  two  Savages. 

The  next  day  the  Englijh  landed  four  pieces  of 
afs  Cannon  mounted  like  Field-pieces,  and  fought 
! M z very 


\ 64  Some  "Hew  Voyages 

very  bravely,  though  they  were  very  ill  difciplin’d. 
’Tis  certain  there  was  no  want  of  Courage  on  their 
fide,  and  their  want  of  Succefs  mud  be  imputed  to 
their  unacquaintednefi  with  Military  Difcipline,  to 
their  being  infeebled  by  the  fatigues  of  the  Sea,  and 
to  the  ill  condiK^  of  Sir  William  F hips,  who  upon 
this  Enterprife  could  not  have  done  more  than  he 
did,  if  he  had  been  ingag’d  by  us  to  (land  dill  with 
his  hands  in  his  Pockets.  This  day  pafs’d  over  more 
peaceably  than  the  next  : For  then  the  Englijhtmàs  a 
frelh  attempt  to  force  their  padage  through  the 
Copfe,  by  the  help  of  their  Artillery  j but  they  lod 
thr^e  or  four  hundred  more  in  the  attempt,  and  j 
were  forc’d  to  retire  with  all  diligence  to  the  Land- 
ing-place : On  our  fide  we  lod  Mr.  Je  St.  Helene, 
who  dy’d  of  a wound  in  his  Leg,  and  about  forty 
Frmch-men  and  Savages.  This  Vitdory  animated  us 
fo  much,  that  we  purfued  the  Englijh  to  their  Camp,  I 
and  lay  all  Night  flat  upon  the  ground  jud  by  it, 
witli  a defign  to  ^attack  it  by  the  break  of  day: 
But  they  fav’d  us  the  labour,  for  they  imbarqued  a-  j 
bout  Midnight  with  fuch  confufion,  that  we  kill’d  j | 
fifty  more  of  ’em,  rather  by  chance,  than  by  dexte- j 
rity,  while  they  were  getting  into  their  Boats.  When, 
day  came,  we  tranfported  to  Quebec  their  Tents  and 
their  Cannon,  which  they  had  left  behind  ’em-;|ij 
the  Savages  being  in  the  mean  time  imploy’d  in  drip-| 
ping  the  dead  in  the  Wood.  [ 

The  fame  day  that  the  Defcent  was  made,  Sirj 
William  P hips  weigh’d  and  came  to  an  Anchor  with 
four  great  Ships,  at  the  didance  of  a Musket-lhotr  | 
from  the  lower  City,  where  we  had  only  one  Batte-  ^ 
ry  of  fix  or  eight  Pounders.  There  he  Cannonadoed; 
for  twenty  four  hours  fo  handfomly,  that  the  fire! 
of  the  great  Guns  equal’d  that  of  the  fmall  Arms.f 
The  Jainmage  they  did  to  the  roofs  of  the  Houfes,j,  . 
amounted  to  five  or  fixPidolesj  foras  I inform’d]  | 
ÿouin  my  fird  Letter,  the  Walls  of  the  Houfes  arq 
fbhatd,  that  a Bali  cannot  pierce ’em,  Whenj 


i 


to  North- Amctlca.*  1 6^ 

When  Sir  WilUamVhips  had  made  an  end  of  thele 
glorious  Exploits,  he  fent  to  demand  of  Mr.  de  Fron- 
tenac fome  Englffh  Prifoners,  in  exchange  for  the 
Sieur  Joliet,  with  his  Wife  and  his  Mother,  and  feme 
Seamen  ; which  was  forthwith  put  in  execut'on. 
This  done,  the  Fleet  weigh’d  Anchor  and  Peer’d 
homeward.  As  foon  as  the  three  Merchantmen 
that  lay  fculking  in  the  River  of  Sagmnaj.^  faw  the 
Fleet  running  below  T’adouJJac  with  full  Sail  before 
’a  Wefterly  Gale,  they  put  their  Guns  aboard,  and 
purfuing  their  Voyage  with  great  fatisfaction,  ar- 
riv’d at  Quebec  on  the  ixtb  of  November.  They  had 
fcarce  put  their  Cargoe  on  (hoar,  when  the  bitter 
cold  cover’d  the  River  with  Ice,  which  dammag’d 
their  Ships  fo  much,  that  they  were  forc’d  to  run 
’em  alhoar.  This  troublefom  Froft  was  as  uneafie 
to  me,  as  to  Mr.  de  Frontenac;  for  I then  faw  that  I 
was  oblig’d  to  pafs  another  Winter  in  and 

Mr.  de  Frontenac  was  at  a lofs,  to  contrive  a way  of 
fending  the  King  advice  of  this  Enterpii*e.  But  by 
good  luck,  there  came  all  of  a fudden  a dovvnfal  of 
Rain,  which  was  follow’d  by  a Thaw,  and  was  e- 
qually  acceptable  to  us  both.  Immediately  theGo- 
vernour  order’d  an  unrigg’d  Frigat  to  be  rigg’d  and 
fitted  out  ; which  was  done  accordingly  with  fuch 
difpatch,  that  the  Ballad,  Sails,  Ropes,  and  Mads, 
were  all  in  order  almod  as  foon  as  the  Orders  were 
given  out.  When  the  Frigat  was  ready  to  fail,  the 
Governour  told  me,  that  the  making  of  France  as 
foon  as  ever  I could,  would  be  a piece  of  important 
Service;  and  that  I ought  rather  to  perifli.  than  to 
fuffer  my  felf  to  be  taken  by  the  Enemy, or  to  put  in  at 
any  Port  whatfoever  by  the  way.  Ac  the  fame  ttme 
he  gave  me  a particular  Letter  to  Mr.  de  Seignday, 
the  purport  of  which  was  much  to  my  advantage. 

' I put  to  Sea  the  zoth  of  November,  the  like  of 
which  was  never  feen  in  that  place  before.  At  the 
ills  of  Cmdret  we  ’fcap’d  luckily , for  there  th® 

M 3 Norths 


Norîh-Eaft  Wind  blew  fo  hard  upon  us,  that  after 
we  had  drop’d  Anchor , we  thought  to  have 
been  fplit  in  pieces  in  the  Night-time.  The 
reft  of  our  pafîage  was  good  enough,  for  we  en- 
counter’d but  one  Storm  till  we  arriv’d  at  this  place. 
Indee.d  we  met  with  contrary  Winds,  about  lyo 
Leagues  off  the  coaft  of  France,  which  oblig’d  us 
to  craverfe,  and  lye  by  for  a long  time,  and  ’twas 
for  this  reafon  that  o^r  palTage  was  fo  long. 

I hear  you  are  now  in  Provence,  and  that  Mr.  </«' 
Seignelai  is  gone  upon  a Voyage  to  the  other  World, 
which  is  of  a quire  dilFerent  nature  from  that  I have 
}uft  perform’d.  In  earneft,  Sir,  his  Death  is  the 
laft  misfortune  to  the  Navy  of  France,  to  the  Colo- 
nies of  the  two  Americas,  and  to  me  in  particular, 
fince  Mr.  ^e  Frontenacs  Recommendatory  Letter  is 
thereby  render’d  ufelefs  to  me.  I am. 


Containing  a Defcription  of  the  Courts  or  Offices 
of  the  Minijlers  of  State,  and  a view  offome 
Services  that  are  id  rewarded  at  Court. 


■'HE  Letter  you  writ  to  me  two  Months  agoe 


came  to  my  Hands  at  Paris  ; but  I could  not 
give  you  an  anfwer  there,  becaufe  I had  not  then  i, 
done  my  bufinefs.  Now  that  I am  return’d  to  R(>-  j |o, 
cbel,  I have  leifure  time  enough  to  inform  you  of  j jj’, 
all  that  befell  me  fince  my  return  to  France.  As  foon  j L 
35  I arriv’d  at  Verjailles,  I waited  upon  Mr.  de'Ponh  ||, 


S IR,  Tours,  See. 


r 


LETTER  XXI 


Dated  at  Rochel  July  z6.  j6^i. 


SIR, 


çbartrain, 


to  ISlorth-hmmcs.*  1 67 

chartrain,  who  fucceeded  Mr.  de  Selgnelai.  I repre- 
fented  to  him,  that  Mr.  de  Frontenac  had  given  me  a 
Letter  to  his  Predeceflbur,in  which  he  took  notice  of 
the  Services  I had  done.  I remonftrated  to  him, 
that  my  Eftate  being  feiz’d  upon,  and  there  being 
lèverai  Law-fuits  to  be  adjufted,  where  my  prefence 
was  neceffary,  I hop’d  his  Majefty  would  give  me 
leave  to  quit  his  Service.  He  made  anfwer,  that 
he  had  been  inform’d  of  the  ftate  of  my  Affairs , 
and  that  I was  allow’d  to  purfue  the  management  of 
’em,  till  the  departure  of  the  laft  Ships  that  are 
bound  this  year  for  Quebec,  to  which  Place  he  mean’d 
I fliould  return.  Having  receiv’d  this  anfwer,  I 
j went  from  Verfailks  to  Farts,  where  my  Relations 
drew  me  into  a conlultation  of  feveral  Counfellors, 
who  declar’d  that  my  Affairs  were  fo  perplex’d,  that 
in  their  opinion,  I could  not  have  ’em  adjufted  in  fo 
fhorta  time.  In  the  mean  time, the  Crowns  1 was  forc’d 
to  lug  out  for  this  Confultation,  turn’d  my  Stomach 
againft  the  going  to  Law  with  Perfons  that  had  fo 
muchintereft  in  the  Parliament  of  Paris  ; infomuch, 
that  I was  almoft  in  the  mind  of  lofing  my  Right, 
rather  than  to  enter  upon  the  Law-fuic-  However,  I 
did  not  fail  to  put  in  for  a provifion  upon  ray  con- 
Ï filcated  Eftate,  by  vertue  of  my  being  aiftually  in 
1 the  Service.  But  the  folliciting  of  that,  coft  me  fo 
I much  trouble  and  charges,  that  though  my  power- 
ful Adverfaries  bad  not  been  able  to  prevent  the  ob- 
taining of  my  requeft,  yet  the  Sum  adjudg’d  there- 
upon, would  not  be  fufficient  to  anfwer  the  char- 
ges I was  at.  Mejjieurs  de  Bragelone  are  very  honoura- 
ble Gentlemen,  as  you  know  very  well.  ’Tis  true, they 
: love  Piftoles  better  than  their  Relations,  and  upon 
that  Principle  contented  themfelves  in  doing  me  the 
honour  of  their  good  Advice,  for  their  Generofity 
do’s  not  go  much  further  ; and  if  I had  no  other  re- 
fuge than  theirs,  I fliould  be  but  in  a forry  conditi- 
on. The  Abbot  of  Eceuttes,  who  is  more  liberal, 

M 4 tho’ 


I. 


1 63  Some  "Hew  Vopgîs 

tho’  not  fo  rich  as  they,  made  me  a Prefent  of  a hun^ 
dred  Louis  d'ors,  which  I applied  to  the  payment  of 
the  Feesj  for  being  receiv’d  into  the  Order  of  St, 
Lazarus.  The  Ceremony  of  that  Inftallment  was 
perform’d  in  Mr.  de  Tjsuvois  his  Chamber,  and  did  not 
laft  fo  long  as  the  telling  of  the  Money.  I was  in 
hopes  that  this  generous  Abbot  would  have  bellow’d 
upon  me  fome  fimple  Benefice  that  he  might  have 
thrown  in  my  way,  without  injuring  himlelf  : But  it 
feems,  a fcruple  of  Confcience  flood  my  Enemy. 
Upon  the  whole,  Sir,  I was  e’en  forc’d  at  laft  to  go 
to  Verfailles  to  follicit  for  a Place,  which  is  the 
moft  cutting  and  vexatious  Office  in  the  World. 
Do  but  confider,  Sir,  that  in  thofe  Royal  Apart- 
ments Crowns  fly,  and  no  body  knows  where  they 
go.  One  muft  patiently  attend  five  or  fix  hours  a 
day  in  Mr.  de  Pontchartralns  Apartments,  only  to 
fliew  himfelf  every  time  that  that  Minifter  goes  out 
or  comes  in. 

He  no  fooner  appears,  than  every  one  crowds  in 
to  prefent  Memorials  clogg’d  with  fifty  Reafons, 
tvhich  commonly  fly  off  as  light  as  the  Wind.  As 
foon  as  he  receives  thefe  Petitions,  he  gives  ’em  to 
fame  Secretary  or  other  that  follows  him  ; and  this 
Secretary  carries ’em  to  Meffieurs  de  la  Touche^  de 
Began ^ and  de  Saluberri  ; whofe  Footmen  receive 
pi  doles  from  moft  of  the  Officers,  who  without 
that  Expedient,  would  be  in  danger  of  catching  cold 
at  the  Door  of  the  Office  of  thefe  Deputies.  ’Tis 
from  that  expedient  alone,  that  their  good  or  bad 
deftiny  muft  flow.  Pray  undeceive  your  felf,  as  to 
your  notion  of  the  protedion  of  great  Lords  : The 
time  is  gone  in  which  the  Minifters  granted  what- 
ever they  ask’d  for  their  Baftards,  their  Footmen, 
and  their  Vaffals.  There  is  but  two  or  three  Prin- 
ces or  Dukes,  who  being  great  Favourites,  will  med- 
dle in  protecting  thofe  that  have  no  immediate  dé- 
pendance upon  ’em  ; And  if  thefe  do  it,  ’tis  very 

feldom 


to  Norï/?  America.  1^9 

feldom  ; for  you  know  that  the  Gentry  of  France  is  in 
no  great  Circumftances^and  thefe  greatLords  have  of* 
tentinies  poor  Friends  of  their  own,  for  whom  they 
are  oblig’d  to  ask  places,  in  order  to  their  Subfiftence. 
As  the  World  goes  now,  the  Minifters  are  upon  fuch 
a foot,  that  they’ll  refufe  any  thing  to  Perfons  of 
the  higheft  Dignity  about  Court,  by  replying,  the 
King  will  have  it  fo,  or  the  King  will  have  it  ocher- 
wife.  And  as  for  the  Topick  of  Merit  j that’s  fuch 
a frightful  Monfter,  that  it  can  have  no  Reception 
in  the  Minifters  Offices,  nay,  moft  of  the  Minifters 
I areftruck  with  horrour  when  they  think  of  it.  ’Tis 
the  Minifters , in  efFed,  that  difpofe  of  all  pla- 
; ces,  though  it  appears  as  if  ’twere  the  King  They 
I do  what  they  pleafe,  without  being  accountable  to 
: him,  for  he  puts  all  upon  the  affedion  and  zeal 
they  ought  to  have  for  his  Service.  They  carry  Ex- 
traôfs  to  him,  in  which  the  merit  of  the  Officers 
they  mean  to  prefer,  is  either  fuppos’d  orextoll’d. 

: But  the  Memorials  of  thofe  they  do  not  like,  are 
i far  from  appearing. 

I’m  forry  I Ihould  be  oblig’d  to  lay  this  truth  be- 
i fore  you;  however,  I mention  no  particular  Mi- 
!'  nifter,  for  they  are  not  all  of  that  kidney.  I know 
; fome  of  ’em  that  would  fcorn  to  do  the  leaft  in- 
; juftice  to  any  Man  whatfoever;  and  would  notfuf- 
;i  fer  their  Suiues,  or  their  Lackeys,  or  even  their  De- 
' puties  or  Clerks,  to  intrigue  for  the  preferment  of 
fuch  and  fuch  Perfons  by  the  means  of  Piftoles.  Thefe 
I dexterous  Intriguers,  do  by  indired  means  make  more 
Officers,  than  you  have  hairs  on  your  Head  ; knd 
: ’tis  for  that  reafon  they  are  faluted  a League  oft', 
?nd  dignify’d  as  ferioufly  with  the  Title  of  Monfeur, 
as  their  Mafters  are  with  that  of  Monfeigneur  or 
Grandeur.  Thefe  laft  Titles  have  been  acquir’d  by 
; our  Minifters  and  Secretaries  of  State,  with  as 
r much  glory,  as  by  our  Biffiops.  We  muft  not  think 
: it  ftrange  therefore,  that  even  our  General  Officers 

have 


1/0  Some  New  Voyages 

have  the  words  Monfeîgneur  and  Grandeurio  frequent- 
ly in  their  Mouths,  provided  it  be  accompany’d 
with  that  of  your  Excellency.  I fwear.  Sir,  I could 
find  matter  for  a Book  of  three,  hundred  Pages  in 
Folio,  if  I had  a mind  to  be  particular  upon  the  in- 
trigues of  the  Officers  and  Minilters  of  State;  upon 
the  means  by  which  the  Sollicitors  compafs  their  ends, 
the  notorious  Knavery  of  a certain  fort  of  People, 
and  the  patience  with  which  the  Officers  muft  be 
fortified  ; upon  the  contempt  that  thofe  meet  with, 
who  have  no  other  Recommendation  than  Merit, 
and  in  a word,  upon  all  the  inftances  of  Injuftice, 
that  are  praéHs’d  without  the  King’s  knowledge 

Let  it  be  as  it  will,  I muft  acquaint  you  that  af- 
ter a fruitlefs  Sollicitation  for  what  I thought  I had  . 
i'orne  Title  to,  in  confideration  of  my  Services,  I 
receiv’d  this  Anfwer,  that  the  King  would  order 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  to  provide  for  me  as  handfomly  as 
he  could,  when  an  occafion  offer’d  : So  that  I was  : 
forc’d  to  reft  fatisfi’d  with  my  Anfwer,  and  re- 
folve  to  continue  a Captain  for  ever  ; for  I know  ; 
very  well  that  the  Governour  of  Canada  can  not 
prefer  me  to  a higher  Poft. 

Having  left  Verjallles,  I came  hither  with  ail  ex-  | 
pedition  , and  then  went  to  receive  the  com- 
mands of  the  Intendant  of  Rochefort.  He  acquainted 
me  that  the  Ship  call’d  Honoré  was  fitting  up,  and 
that  I might  fail  as  foon  as  ’twas  ready.  He  re- 
commended to  me  the  Chevalier  de  Meaupou,  Ma- 
dam Vontchartrains  Nephew,  who  is  to  go  along 
with  me.  This  Gentleman  having  the  curiofity  to 
fee  Canada,  is  come  hither  from  P^m,  withahand- 
fom  Retinue.  ’Tis  in  vain  to  fet  forth  to  him  the 
tedioufnefs  of  the  Paffage,  thè  inconveniencies  of 
the  Sea,  and  the  difagreeablenefs  of  the  Coun- 
try ; for  all  thele  Arguments  ferve  only  to  inflame 
his  Curiofity.  The  Count  d'  Amay  is  to  convoy 
us  to  the  Latitude  of  Cape  Finiferre,  at  which  place  | 


to  North  America.  î 7 » 

he  is  to  take  leave  of  us,  and  return  to  Rochefort. 
We  only  ftay  for  a fair  Wind  to  put  to  Sea.  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  See. 


i LETTER  XXII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Nov.  lo.  1691. 

I Which  contains  an  Account  of  the  Authors  depart 
I parture  from  Rochel  to  Quebec,  of  hisVoy- 
; age  to  the  Mouth  of  the  River  St.  Laurence, 
} of  a Ren-counter  he  had  with  an  Englifh  Ship 
Î which  he  fought-  of  the  firandingof  his  Ship- 
I of  his  failing  through  the  River  St.  Laurence  ^ 
r of  the  News  he  receiv'd,  that  a Party  of  the 
Englilh  and  Iroquele  had  defeated  a Body 
! of  theYrenchTroops. 


SIR, 

W O days  after  I wrote  to  you,  we  fet  fail 
from  the  Harbour  of  Rocbel,  upon  our  great 
) I Voyage  to  Canada.  On  the  ^th  of  Augufi  we  per- 
tjeeiv’d  a great  Ship,  which  the  Count  of  Aunay  gave 
richafe  to,  who  having  a better  Sailer,  came  up  with 
her  in  three  hours  time,  whereupon  (he  on  a fud- 
den  put  up  Genoefe  Colours.  Some  Guns  were  fir’d 
upon  the  Prow,  to  oblige  her  to  ftrike  ; but  the  Cap- 
tain was  fo  obftinate,  that  Mr.  d’ Aunay  was  forc’d  to 
give  her  a Broadfide,  which  kill’d  four  or  five  of 
the  Seamen,  whereupon  the  reft  were  oblig’d  to  put 
out  their  Long-boat,  and  carry  to  his  Ship  their 
Paffports  and  Bills  of  Lading,  Qn  the  loth,  after 

they 


1 7 i Some  ‘N.em  Voyages 

they  had  taken  the  Latitude,  the  Pilots  thinking  that 
they  were  even  with  Cape  Finifier,  Mr.  d'Aunay  fent 
out  his  Long-boat,  to  acquaint  me  that  he  was  then 
upon  his  return  home,  upon  which  I wrote  him  a 
Letter  of  thanks.  Father  a Jefuit,  who  had 

been  many  years  Superior  of  the  College  of  Quebtc^ 
whither  he  was  now  going  in  the  fame  Capacity,  was 
forc’d  to  throw  himfelf  into  this  Long-boat,  in  order 
to  his  return  into  France,  having  found  himfelf  con- 
tinually indifpos’d,  from  the  firftday  we  put  to  Sea. 
On  the  z%doi  Auguji  we  had  a great  Storm  of  Wind 
from  the  North- Weft,  which  lafted  about  twenty  four 
hours,  being  then  a hundred  Leagues  off  the  Bank  of 
Newfound- Land.  This  Bank  takes  its  Name  from  the  I- 
^iïw.r/e/’Newfound-Land,  a Map  of  which  ü here  annex  d. 

When  the  Storm  was  over,  there  fucceeded  a 
Wind  from  the  North- Eaft,  which  drove  us  in  ten  or 
twelve  hours,  to  the  Mouth  of  the  River  of  St.  Lau- 
rence. On  the  6th  of  September  we  difcover’d  a Ship  | 
failing  from  the  Coaft  of  Gafpè,  which  bore  down  | 
upon  us  with  a full  fail.  We  thought  at  firft  that 
they  were  French  coming  from  Quebec,  but  their  way 
of  working  the  Ship  difcover’d  to  us  within  an  hour 
after,  that  they  were  Enemies.  After  we  knew  ' 
them,  we  prepar’d  to  fight  them,  and  they  being  a-  i 
bout  a League  to  the  Windward  of  us,  came  quick- 
ly down  upon  us  with  full  Sail,  within  Musket-  ; 
fhot.  Prefently  they  put  up  Englijh  Colours,  and  gave 
us  a Broad-fide  ; and  we  put  up  our  own  Colours, 
and  paid  them  home  in  theirown  Coyn.  The  Fight 
lafted  two  hours,  and  both  Tides  fir’d  continually 
one  upon  another,  but  the  Sea  being  tempeftuous,  I 
we  were  oblig’d  to  /hear  off  as  Night  came  on,  j 
without  fufteringany  other  lofs,  than  the  wound-  j 
ing  of  two  Seamen,  and  the  receiving  of  twenty  | 
eight  or  thirty  llaoc  in  our  Mafts,  Sails,  and  Rig-  j 
ging.  Two  days  after  we  met  Mr.  Data,  Captain  | 
of  the  Hat^ardous,  who  was  homeward  bound  for  I 

France,^  j 


to  Nbrt/?- America. 

Prance,  being  a Convoy  to  ten  or  twelve  Merchant 
Ships.  He  gave  me  fome  Refrelhments,  and  told 
me  fome  news  of  Canada,  which  were  very  accep- 
table- We  purfu’d  our  courfe  in  fpight  of  the  South- 
Eaft  Wind,  which  oblig’d  us  to  tack  about  feveral 
ways,  till  we  came  to  Portneuf,  near  to  Tadoajjdc. 
In  this  place  we  were  ftranded  by  the  fault  of  the 
i Coafting- Pilot,  who  being  obftinate  for  calling  An- 
j chor  near  the  Land,  was  like  to  have  been  the  caufe 
of  a Ship  wrack.  At  Midnight  the  Ship  was  fo  dafh’d 
againft  the  Sand,  that  I thought  Ihe  was  fplit  in 
pieces,  but  the  Tide  ebbing  by  degrees,  Ihe  was  left 
lying  upon  the  Coaft,  without  any  apparent  Dam- 
age. I prefently  caused  a Kedger  to  be  dropt  in 
i the  deep  Water  belag’d  with  lèverai  Ropes  call’d 
i|  Grelins  EfiJJes  ( fee  the  Explication  Table,  ) and  the 
I next  Morning  the  Tide  returning  fet  the  Ship  afloat, 
;i  and  then  we  haul’d  it  in  with  the  Capeftan.  On 
ij  the  we  call  anchor  near  the  Red  IJland,  and  the 
i|  next  day  being  the  14th,  we  pafs’d  that  Channel 
'I  without  danger,  by  the  favour  of  a frelh  Gale  from 
;;  the  North- Eaft. 

' I On  the  I <;tb  we  eaft  Anchor  at  the  IJIe  of  Hares  t 
On  the  i6th  we  pafs’d  the  IfeofCoudres:  On  the 
i.  ijth  we  weather’d  the  Cape  of  Tourmente,  and  the 
f ; next  day  we  anchor’d  in  this  Port.  From  the 
i\  Mouth  of  the  River  to  this  place,  we  had  the  fineft 
Sunfhine  days  that  ever  were  feen  : During  which 
, time,  I had  both  leifure  and  opportunity  to  view 
the  Coafts  on  the  right  Hand  and  the  left,  while  we 
tack’d  about  and  about  as  the  wind  ferv’d.  When 
1 law  a great  many  Rivers  on  the  South  fide,  I ask’d 
the  Pilots  why  thé  Ships  us’d  to  fteer  their  courfs 
on  the  North  fide,  where  there  is  no  Anchorage 
: to  be  found,  hut  at  Papinachefe,  the  feven  Jjles,  and 
Portneaf.  They  anfwer’d  me,  that  the  ordinary  Bree- 
zes of  the  rough  North-Weft  Wind,  which  blows 
upon  this  River  for  three  quarters  of  a year,  were 

the 


î74  Some  “tZew  Voyages 

the  true  caufe  why  they  durft  not  go  far  from  the  ^ 
North  fide;  and  that  nobody  couldenfurea  Ship  ^ 
that  fliould  fleer  on  the  South  fide,  except  it  were 
in  the  Months  of  June,  July,  and  Augufi.  If  it  '' 
were  not  for  that,  I believe  it  would  be  more  plea- 
fant,  more  eafie,  and  lefs  dangerous  to  fail  on  the 
South,  than  on  the  North  fide,  becaufe  one  might 
caft  Anchor  every  Night  at  the  entrance  of  thofe  ' 
Rivers  which  discharge  themfelves  all  along  that  | 
Coaft,  and  would  not  be  oblig’d  to  be  veering  a-  j 
bout  continually  Night  and  Day,  as  he  is  forc’d  to 
do,  when  he  fleers  his  courfe  on  the  North  fide,  j 
This,  Sir,  is  all  I had  to  fay  at  prefent  about  our 
failing  in  this  River,  which  I fliall  have  occafion  to 
mention  to  yoa  again.  After  our  Ship  caft  Anchor  j 
before  Quebec,  I landed  with  the  Chevalier  Meaupou, 
whom  1 condudled  to  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  Frontenac,  who  t 
offer’d  to  him  as  well  as  to  me,  the  ufe  of  his  Table 
and  Houfe.  lam  inform’d  that  300  Englijh,  and  200 
Iroauefe,  approach'd  about  two  Months  agoe  to  the 
Ifle  of  Monreal'y  That  the  Governour  ot  that  Ifle  i 
tranfported  if  Companies  from  the  other  fide  of  the  j 
River,  to  watch  their  Motions  ; That  a Detach-  i 
ment  of  the  Enemy  having  furpriz’d  our  Out- 
Guards,  attack’d  the  whole  Body  of  them,  and  our 
Camp  at  the  fame  time  with  fb  much  Vigour  and  | 
Courage,  that  they  kill’d  upon  the  fpot  more  than  i 
three  hundred  Soldiers, befides  two  Captains,fix  Lieu-  | 
tenants,  and  five  Enfigns;  and  that  after  this  fatal  j 
Expedition,  Mr.  Valrenes,  a Captain  of  the  Ma- 
rines, fee  oat  from  Monreal,  with  a Detachment  of  ' 
French  and  Savages,  to  go  to  Fort  Chambli,  ( for 
fear  the  Ircquefe  Ihould  attack  that  Poft  ) who  ha-  j 
ving  met  in  their  paffage  a party  of  Englijh  and  Iroquefe,  , 
attack’d  them  vigoroully,  and  defeated  them. 

All  thefe  different  Adventures  give  me  ground 
to  conjetfturc,  that  it  will  be  much  more  difficult 

than 


to  Norf/?  America. 

than  ’tis  imagin’d,  to  make  a good  Peace  with  the 
five  Nations  of  the  Iroejuefe.  Mr.  Frontenac  has  given 
the  neceflary  Orders  to  all  the  neighbouring  Habi- 
tations, that  they  ihould  tranfport  a great  quantity 
of  Stakes  and  Lime  in  the  Winter  time  to  the  Neigh- 
bourhood of  this  City.  Farcvvel  Sir,  the  laft  Ships 
which  are  to  depart  hence  for  France,  will  fail  in 
three  6r  four  days.  I am, 

SIR,  Tours,  ô'c. 


LETTER  XXIII. 

Dated  at  Flants  OBob>  zy.  1692. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  taking  of  fame 
' EngUfti  F'ejfels,  of  defeating  a Party  of  the 
. Iroquefe,  of  an  Iroquefe  burnt  alive  at  Que- 
i bec;  of  another  Party  of  thefe  Barbarians^  who 
i having  furprizd  fome  Coureurs  de  Bois,  were 
I afterwards  furprizd  themfelves.  Of  the  Pro- 
I fell  of  an  Enterprize  propos'd  by  Mr.  Fronte- 
nac to  the  Author.  Of  the  Authors  departure 
\ in  a Frigat  for  France,  and  his  (lopping  at  Pla- 
centia, which  was  attack’d  by  an  Englifli  Fleet 
that  came  to  take  that  Pcjl  from  us.  Mow  the 
. Englilh  faifd  in  their  Defign,  and  the  Author 
I purfudhis  Voyage. 

SIR, 

This  Letter  comes  from  Britanj,  and  not  from 
Canada,  from  whence  I parted  fuddenly  to  re- 
turn  into  France,  about  two  Months  after  I re-* 
cciv  d your  Letter,  w'hich  I could  not  then  anfwer 
: for  want  of  an  opportunity.  You  tell  me,  that  you 
ire  fatisfi’d  with  the  Defcription  1 have  fent  you  of 


Some  ISlew  Voyages 

the  River  St.  Laurence,  and  that  you  would  be  very 
glad  to  have  as  exaél  an  account  of  the  whole  Coun- 
try of  Canada.  I can  fcarce  fatisfie  your  defire  at 
prefent,  becaufe  I have  not  yet  had  time  to  fort.all 
my  Memoiis,  and  therefore  you  muft  not  take  it 
amifs,  that  I pray  you  to  fufpend  your  curiofity  for 
feme  time.  In  the  mean  time,  here  follows  the 
Relation  of  feme  things  that  happen'd  in  Canada^ 
which  may  be  acceptable  to  you.  | 

Immediately  after  the  Ships  parted  from  Quehe 
the  laft  year,  Mr.  Frontenac  order’d  a Plan  to  be 
drawn  of  a Wall  to  encompafs  the  City,  and  ha-  j 
ving  tranfported  thither  all  the  Materials  neceffary 
for  building  fome  Redoubts  of  Stone,  he  took  care 
to  fortifie  it  during  the  Summer.  Some  days  agoe 
a Gentleman  of  New-England  call’d  Nelfon , was 
brought  prifoner  to  Quebec,  who  was  taken  in  the 
River  of  Renebekl,\x^on  the  Coaft  of  Acadia,  together 
with  three  Ships  belonging  to  him,  and  becaufe  he  | 
was  a very  gallant  Man,  Mr.  Frontenac  gave  him  a 
Lodging  at  his  own  Houfe,  and  treated  him  with  ;j 
all  manner  of  Civility.  About  the  beginning  ofj 
this  year,  this  Governour  gave  the  command  of  a I 
Party  confiding  of  ijo  Soldiers,  to  Chevalier 
cour,  with  whom  fifty  of  the  Savages  that  were  our 
Friends  were,  joyn’d,  in  order  to  march  on  the 
Ice  towards  Fort  Frontenac.  About  thirty  or  forty  : 
Leagues  from  Monreal,  they  me  ta  Company  of  fix- 
ty  Iroquefe,  who  were  difeover’d  by  the  Foot-fteps  I 
of  fome  of  their  Hunters,  that  had  ftragled  out  of  j 
their  Cottages,  and  the  next  day  they  were  a.i  fur- 
priz’d,  and  either  had  their  Throats  cut,  or  vvere 
made  Prifoners.  The  Sieur  de  la  Liante  who  liv’d 
in  Slavery  with  thefe  Wretches,  had  the  good  for- 
tune to  be  prefent  in  their  Company  when  they 
were  defeated,  and  he  had  certainly  been  kill’d  with 
Ins  Mailers,  if  he  had  not  cry’d  out  with  all  his 
Might,  Spare  tne,  I am  a Frenchman  : He  was  one  oft 


to  North  Amenai,  177 

the  four  Officers,  who  had  the  misfortùne  to  be  ta- 
ken in  that  fatal  Incurfion,  which  thefeTygers made 
into  Moureal,  as  I told  you  in  my  lyh  Letter.  The 
Chevalier  return’d  again  to  the  Colony  with 

his  Party,  and  brought  along  with  him  twelve  Pri- 
foners  of  the  Irccfue/e,  who  were  immediately  con- 
duced to  Quebec  ; After  they  arriv'd,  Mr.  Frontenac 
did  very  judicioufiy  condemn  two  of  the  wicked- 
eft  of  the  Company,  to  be  burnt  alive  with  a flow 
Fire.  This  Sentence  extreamly  terrified  the  Gover- 
nour’s  Lady,  and  the  Jefuits;  the  Lady  us’d  all 
manner  of  fupplication  to  procure  a moderation  of 
the  terrible  Sentence,  but  the  Judge  was  inexorable, 
and  the  Jefuits  employ’d  all  their  Eloquence  in  vain 
upon  this  occafion.  The  Governour  anfwercd 
them,  That  it  was  abfolutely  necelTary  to  make 
“ fome  terrible  examples  of  Severity  to  frighten  the 
Iroquefe  ; That  fince  thefe  Barbarians  burnt  almoft 
all  the  French,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  in- 
to  their  Hands,  they  muft  be  treated  after  the 
fame  manner,  becaufe  the  Indulgence  which  had 
hitherto  been  fliown  them,  feem’d  to  authorize 
them  to  invade  our  Plantations,  and  fo  much  the 
rather  to  do  it,  becaufe  they  run  no  other  hazard, 
“ than  that  of  being  taken,  and  well  kept  at  their 
\‘  Mailer’s  Houfes ; but  when  they  ftiould  under- 
Hand  that  the  French  caus’d  them  to  be  burnt,  they 
would  have  a care  for  the  future,  how  they  ad- 
“ vanc’d  with  fo  much  boldnefs  to  the  very  Gates 
of  our  Cities  ; and  in  fine,  That  the  Sentence  of 
Death  being  paft,  thefe  two  wretches  muft  pre- 
i"  pare  to  take  a Journey  into  the  other  World. 
This  obftinacy  appear’d  furprizing  in  Mr.  Frontemc, 
who  but  a little  before  had  favour’d  the  efcape  of 
three  or  four  Perfons  liable  to  the  Sentence  of  Death, 
upon  the  importunate  prayer  of  Madam  the  Gover- 
nefs  ; but  though  Ihe  redoubled  her  earneft  Suppli- 
! cations,  Ihe  could  not  alter  his  firm  Refolution  as 

N to 


178  Some  New  Voyages 

to  thefe  two  Wretches.  The  Jefuits  were  thereup- 
on fent  to  Baptize  them,  and  oblige  them  to  ac- 
knowledge the  Trinity,  and  the  Incarnation,  and 
to  reprefent  to  them  the  Joys  of  Paradife,  and  the 
Torments  of  Hell,  within  the  fpace  of  eight  or  ten 
hours.  You  will  readily  confefs.  Sir,  that  this  was 
a very  bold  way  of  treating  thefe  great  Myfteries, 
and  that  to  endeavour  to  make  the  Iroquefe  under- 
ftand  them  fo  quickly,  was  to  expofethem  to  their 
Laughter  Whether  they  took  thefe  Truths  for  Songs, 

I do  not  know  ; but  this  I can  alTure  you,  that  from 
the  Minute  they  were  acquainted  with  this  fatal 
News,  they  fent  back  thefe  good  Fathers  without  e- 
ver  hearing  them  ; and  then  they  began  to  ling  the 
fong  of  Death,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  Sa- 
vages. Some  charitable  Perfon  having  thrown  a ! 
Knife  to  them  in  Prifon,  he  who  had  the  leaft  Cou- 
rage of  the  two,  thruft  it  into  his  Breaft,  and  died 
of  the  Wound  immediately.  Some  young  of 
Lorettey  aged  between  fourteen  and  fifteen  years,  |; 
came  to  feize  the  ocher,  and  carry  him  away  to  the  : 
t>iamant  Cafe,  where  notice  was  given  to  prepare  a 
great  pile  of  Wood.  He  ran  to  death  with  a great- 
er unconcernednefs,  than  Socrates  would  have  done, 
if  he  had  been  in  his  cafe.  During  the  time  of  Ex- 
ecution he  fung  continually  ; “ That  he  was  a War- 1 ,i, 
“ riour,  brave  and  undaunted  ; that  the  moft  cruel  f ^ 
“ kind  of  Death  could  not  fiiock  his  Courage,  that  j f 
no  Torments  could  extort  from  him  any  Cries,  j | 
“ that  his  Companion  was  a Coward  for  having  j j 
kill’d  himfelf  through  the  fear  of  Torment  ; and  j | 
laftly,  that  if  he  was  burnt,  he  had  this  Comfort,  | 
that  he  had  treated  many  French  and  Hurons  after  | 
" the  fame  manner.  All  that  he  faid  was  very  true,  j 
and  chiefly  as  to  his  own  courage  and  firmnefs  of 
Soul  ; for  I can  truly  fwear  to  you,  that  he  nei- 
ther filed  Tears,  nor  was  ever  perceiv’d  to  Sigh  ; j| 
but  oil  the  contrary,  during  all  the  time  that  hefuf-  j ( 

fet'd  I 


to  Nor^^- America.  17^ 

fer’d  the  moft  horrible  Torments  that  could  be  in- 
vented, and  which  lafted  about  the  fpace  of  three 
hours,  he  never  ceas’d  one  Minute  from  linging. 
i The  foies  of  his  Feet  were  roafted  before  two  great 
I Stones  red  hot,  for  more  than  a quarter  of  an  hour  ; 
i the  tops  of  his  Fingers  were  fcorch’d  in  a Stove  of 
i lighted  Pipes  j during  which  Torture  he  did  not 
: d raw  back  his  Hand,  After  this  the  feveral  joynts 
; of'  his  Body  were  cut  off,  one  after  another  ; The 
'I  Nerves  of  his  Limbs  aiad  Arms  were  diftorted  with 
;i  a little  Iron  Wand,  after  fucha  manner,  as  cannot 
<:  poffibly  be  exprefs’d.  In  fine,  after  many  other 
: Tortures,  the  hair  of  his  Head  was  taken  off  after 
3 fuch  a mianner,  that  ri'.ere  remain’d  nothing  but  the 
j Skull,  upon  which  thefe  young  Executioners  were 

Ij  going  to  throw  fome  burning  Sand,  when  a certain 
I Slave  of  the  Hurom  of  Lorette,  by  the  order  of  Ma- 
il dam  the  Governefs,  knock’d  him  on  the  head  with 
j a . Club,  which  put  an  end  to  his  Martyrdom,  As 
f to  my  felf,  I vow  and  fwear,  that  the  Prologue  of 
this  Tragedy,  created  in  me  fo  great  a Horror,  that 
I I had  not  the  curiofity  to  fee  the  end  of  it,  nor  to 
tihear  this  poor  Wretch  fing  to  the  laft  moment 
" of  his  Life.  I have  feen  fo  many  burnt  againft  my 
'I  Will,  amongft  thofe  People  where  I fojourn’d,  du- 
f ring  the  courfe  of  my  Voyages,  that  I cannot  think 
' of  it  without  trouble.  ’Tis  a fad  Spedacle,  at  which 
) every  one  is  obliged  to  be  prefent,  when  he  happens 
to  Sojourn  among  thefe  Savage  Nations,  who  inflidt 
ithis  cruel  kind  of  Death  upon  their  Prifoners  of 
'War  Î for  as  I have  told  you  in  one  of  my  Letters, 
all  the  Savages  pradife  this  barbarous  Cruelty.  No- 
thing is  more  grating  to  a civil  Man,  than  that  he 
is  oblig’d  to  be  a Witnefs  of  the  Torments  which 
ihis  kind  of  Martyrs  fuffer  ; for  if  any  one  Ihould 
• pretend  to  fhun  this  Sight,  orexprefs  any  CompafR- 
onfor  them,  he  would  be  efteem’d  by  them  a Man 
of  no  Courage. 

N 3 After 


1 8o  Some  New  Voyages 

After  the  Navigation  was  open  and  free,  the  i 
Sieur  ÎX..  Michel  a Canadan,  fet  out  from  Monrealfot  | ' 
the  Beaver  Lakes,  at  the  Head  of  a Party  of  the  I 
Coreurs  de  Bois,  with  feveral  Canowsladen  with  fuch  i 
Goods  as  are  proper  for  the  Savages.  In  their  paf-  i 
fage  from  Long-Saut,  to  the  River  of  the  Outaouas,  j 
they  met  fixty  Iro^uefe,  who  furpriz’d  them, and  cut  all  t 
their  Throats  except  four,  that  had  the  good  for- 
tune to  efcape,  and  carry  the  news  to  Monreal.  As 
foon  as  this  fatal  accident  was  known,  the  Cheva- 
lier Vaudreuil,  put  himfelf  in  a Canow  with  a De- 
tachment, and  purfu’d  this  party  of  IrocjueJe,  being 
follow’d  by  a hundred  Canadans,  and  fome  confe- 
derate Savages.  I know  not  by  what  chance  he  had 
the  good  fortune  to  overtake  them,  but  fo  it  was, 
he  furpriz’d  them,  and  attack’d  them  with  Vigour,! 
upon  which  they  fought  defperately,  but  at  laft  they 
were  defeated.  This  Vidory  coft  us  the  lives  of  many  j 
of  our  Savages,  and  of  three  or  four  of  our  Officers. 
The  Iroqueje  that  were  taken,  were  carried  to  the  Ci- 
ty of  Monreal,  near  which  place  they  were  regal’d! 
with  a Salvo  of  Baftinadoes. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  Month  of  July,  Mr.! 
Frontenac  having  receiv’d  fome  News  from  the! 
Commander  pf  the  Lakes,  fpoke  to  me  of  a cer- 
tain Project,  which  I had  formerly  ffiown  him  to! 
be  of  great  Importance:  But  becaufe  he  did  not  fuf-; 
ficiently  confider  all  the  advantages  that  might  be: 
reap’d  from  it,  and  on  the  contrary,  apprehended] 
a great  many  difficulties  would  attend  the  putting  it 
in  execution,  he  had  altogether  negleded  this  Af-j 
fair,  of  which  I ffiall  give  you  ihe  following  ac- 
count. I 

I obferv’d  to  you  in  my  ijth  Letter,  the  great  Im-| 
portance  and  Advantage  of  the  Forts  of  Frontenacl 
and  Niagara,  and  that  in  the  conjundlure  of  Cir<j 
cumftances  wherein  Mr.  Denonville  then  found  them,! 
it  was  impoffible  to  preferve  them.  You  have  alfoi 

remarqu’di 


to  ISiorthAmQncSi,  1 8 1 

Kmarqu’d  the  advantages  which  the  Savages  have 
over  the  Europeans,  by  their  way  of  fighting  in  the 
Forrefts  of  this  vaft  Continent.  Since  we  cannot 
deftroy  the  irc^«e/e  with  our  own  fingle  Forces,  we 
I are  neceflarily  oblig’d  to  have  recourib  to  the  Sava- 
ges that  are  our  Allies  : And  ’tis  certain,  as  they 
themfeives  foreiee,  that  if  thefe  Barbarians  could 
compafs  the  Deftruâion  of  our  Colonies,  they  would 
■be  fubdaed  by  them  fooner  or  later,  as  it  has  hap- 
pen d to  many  other  Nations,  fo  they  know  it  to 
be  their  Intereft  to  joyn  with  us  to  deftroy  thefeS<*«- 
diti\  Now  fince  they  are  well  afFe^ed  to  this  de- 
fign,  we  muft  endeavour  to  facilitate  to  them  the 
means  of  putting  it  in  execution,  for  you  may  ea- 
fily  believe  that  thefe  People,  as  (avage  as  they  are, 
are  not  fo  void  of  Senfe,  as  to  travel  two  or  three 
hundred  Leagues  from  their  own  Country,  to  fight 
againft  their  Enemies , without  being  fure  of  a 
I place  of  retreat,  where  they  may  repole  them- 
lelves,  and  find  Provifions.  There  is  no  queftion 
therefore,  but  we  fnould  build  Forts  upon  the  Lands 
i©f  the  Iroijuefe,  and  maintain  them  infpiteof  their 
Teeth.  This,  Sir,  is  what  I propos’d  above  a year 
iagoe  to  Mr.  Frontenac,  and  it  is  what  he  would  have 
me  ftill_  to  undertake.  I projet  therefore, to  build  and 
imaintain  three  Forts  upon  the  courfe  of  the  Lakes, 
with  fomeVeftfels  that  lhali  go  with  Oars,  which 
|I  will  build  according  to  my  Fancy  ; but  they  be- 
iing  light,  and  of  great  carriage,  may  be  manag’d 
‘either  with  Oars  or  a Sail,  and  will  alfo  be  able  to 
jbear  the  Ihocks  of  the  Waves.  I demand  fifty  Seamen 
■of  the  French  Bifcay,  for  they  are  known  to  be  the 
tnoft  dexterous  and  able  Mariners  that  are  in  the 
World.  I muft  alfo  have  two  hundred  Soldiers, 
;hofen  out  of  the  Troops  of  Canada.  I will  build 
ïhree  little  Caftles  in  feveral  places,  one  at  the  mouth 
i of  the  Lake  Errk,  which  you  fee  in  my  Map  of 
Î tanaâaf  under  the  name  of  Fort  Suppoje,  befides  two 

N?  others. 


Some  ISLew  Voyages 

Others.  The  fécond  I will  build  in  the  fame  plape 
where  it  was  when  I maintain’d  it,  in  the  years 
1687,  and  1688.  whereof  I have  wrote  to  you  in 
my  i4f/&and  i <ith  Letter  : and  the  third  at  the  Mouth 
of  the  Bay  of  Toronto,  upon  the  fame  Lake.  Nineity 
Men  will  be  fufficient  to  Garrifon  thefe  three  Re- 
doubts, and  perhaps  a fmaller  number  ; for  the  h o- 
(jaefe  who  never  faw  a Canon,  but  in  a Pidure,  and 
to  whom  an  ounce  of  Powdei  is  more  precious  thîin 
a Lewis- D or,  can  never  be  perfwaded  to  attack  any 
kind  of  Fortification.  I defire  of  the  King  for  puit- 
ting  tliis  Projeiîi:  in  execution,  i f 000  Crowns  a yenr, 
for  the  Maintenance,  Entertainment,  Subfiftancfi, 
and  pay  of  thefe  25-0  Men.  It  will  be  very  eafie 
for  roe  to  tranfport  with  the  abovemention’d  Vef- 
fels  400  Savages,  into  the  Country  of  the  Iroquefe, 
whenever  I have  a mind.  I can  carry  Provifionsfor 
2000,  and  tranfport  as  many  Sacks  of  Indian  Corn, 
as  are  neceflTary  for  maintaining  thefe  Forts  both  in 
Winter  and  Summer.  ’Tis  eafie  to  have  plenty  of 
Hunting  and  Shooting  in  all  the  Ifles,  and  to  con- 
trive ways  for  croffing  the  Lakes  ; and  it  will  be  fo 
much  the  more  eafie  to  purfue  the  Iroquefe  in  their 
Canows,  and  fink  them,  tjiat  my  Veflels  are  light, 
and  my  Men  fight  under  a Cover.  In  fine,  if  you 
faw  the  Memorial  which  I am  to  prefent  to  Mr. 
Tontchartrain,  you  would  find  that  this  Enterprize 
is  the  fineft  and  mod  ufeful  that  can  be  invented, 
to  diftrefs  the  Iroquefe  in  time  of  War,  and  confine 
them  within  bounds  in  time  of  Peace.  Mr.  Fronte- 
nac has  joyn’d  to  it  a private  Letter  to  Mr.  Tontcbar- 
train,  wherein  he  obferves  to  him,  that  if  this  Pro- 
jet were  well  put  in  execution,  thefe  terrible  Ene- 
mies would  be  oblig’d  in  two  years  time,  to  aban-i 
don  their  Country.  After  this  he  adds,  that  he  judg-iip, 
es  me  fufficiently  qualified  to  go  upon  fuch  an  In-iii. 
terpiife;  and  believes  I will  make  my  point  good.jiiioi 
Perhaps  he  might  have  light  on  others  that  kctow 
the  Country  and  Cuftoms  of  the  Savages  better  tl'ian 

I do 


:l 


to  North’ Amçvics.]  , i 83 

I do  : But  by  an  accident  which  do’s  not  tend  much 
to  my  advantage,  I have  purchas’d  the  Efteem  and 
Friendfiiip  of  thefe  Savages,  which  in  my  opinion 
was  the  only  reafon  that  mov’d  Mr.  de  Frontenac  to 
fingle  out  me  for  this  Service. 

July  the  z'yth  the  Governoar  having  given  me  his 
Packet  for  the  Court,  and  the  St.  Ann  Frigat  being 
rigg’d  and  fitted  out  according  to  his  Orders,  I im- 
barqu’d  in  the  Port  of  Quebec,  and  after  five  days 
failing,  we  met  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  over 
againft  Monts  notre  dame,  twelve  Merchantmen  bound 
from  France  for  Quebec,  under  the  Convoy  of  Mr,  ^ 

I Iberville,  Captain  of  the  Poli.  Augufl  the  Ztb,  we 
got  clear  of  the  Bay  of  St.  Laurence,  by  the  help  of 
: a Wefterly  Gale,  and  that  in  fuch  fair  and  clear  Wea- 
ther, that  wedefcry’d  the  iflandsof  Cape  Breton  and 
I Newfound-Land,  as  diftindly,  as  if  we  had  been  with- 
in a Musket-ihot  of  ’em.  The  nine  or  ten  follow- 
ing days  were  fo  far  of  a different  ftamp,  that  we 
could  fcarce  fee  from  the  Prow  to  the  Poop  of  the 
Ship,  for  all  of  a Hidden  there  fell  the  thickeft  and 
darkeft  Fog  that  ever  I faw.  At  the  end  of  thefe 
days  the  Horifon  clearing  up,  we  flood  in  for  New- 
found-Land, defcrying  Cape  St.  Mary  ; and  by  ma- 
king all  the  fail  we  could,  arriv’d  that  very  day  in 
the  Port  of  Placentia. 

In  that  Port  I found  fifty  Fifherrnen,  mofl  of 
1 which  were  of  French  Bifcay,  and  thought  to  have 
'fct  out  for  France  along  with  them  in  a few  days  : 
But  they  were  longer  in  getting  ready  than  I thought 
For,and  when  we  were  juft  ready  to  break  ground,we 
were  inform’d  by  fbme  Fifherrnen,  that  five  large 
Englijh  Ships  were  come  to  an  Anchor  near  Cape  St. 
Mary.  This  Intelligence  prov’d  very  true,  for  on  the 
\xpb  of  September  they  eatt  Anchor  in  fight  of  Placen- 
ta. The  x6th  they  weigh’d,  and  came  to  an  An- 
chor in  the  Road,  out  of  the  reach  of  our  Guns. 
lUpon  this  the  Governour  was  not  a little  perplex’d, for 
lae  had  but  fifty  Soldiers  in  his  Fort,  and  a very 

N 4 fmall 


184  Some  TSLe\p  Voyages 

finall  moiety  of  Ammunition.  Befides,  the  Fort  , 
was  commanded  by  a Mountain,  from  whence  he  j 
might  be  gall’d  with  Stones  flung  out  of  Slings;  and  j 
’twas  to  be  fear’d, the  Englijh  would  poffefs  themfelves 
of  that  highGround.  I march’d  with  fixty  of  the  j 
Seamen  belonging  to  the  Fiftiermen,  to  prevent  their 
Landing,  in  cafe  they  attempted  to  make  a Defcent 
at  a certain  place  call’d  la  fontaine  ; and  I compafs’d 
my  end  without  firing  a Gun.  In  effedr,  fix  or  fe- 
ven  hundred  Englijh  put  in  to  the  Land  in  twenty 
Sloops,  with  a defign  to  have  landed  at  that  place  ; 
upon  which  my  vigorous  Cantabrians  being  full  or 
fire  and  forwardness,  appear’d  too  foon  upon  the 
fiioar,  in  fpite  of  my  Teeth,  and  by  that  means  ob- 
lig’d the  Englifi  to  take  another  courfe,and  row  with 
all  their  might  to  the  back  of  a little  Cape,  where 
they  threw  in  a Barrel  of  Pitch  and  Tar  that  burnt 
two  arpents  of  Thickets.  The  18/^  about  Noon,  per- 
ceiving that  a little  Sloop  put  off  from  the  Admiral 
with  a white  Flag  on  its  Prow,  and  made  towards 
the  Fort,  I run  in  thither  immediately.  The  Go- 
vernour  had  took  care  to  fend  out  one  of  his  own 
Sloops  with  the  fame  Flag,  to  meet  the  other,  and 
was  furpris’d  when  fhe  return’d  with  two  Englijh  Of- 
ficers on  board.  Thefe  Officers  gave  the  Governour 
to  underftand,  that  the  Admiral  defir’d  he  would 
fend  an  Officer  on  board  of  him,  which  was  done 
accordingly  ; for  Mr.  de  Cofte-belle  and  I,  went  on 
board  of  the  Admiral,  who  receiv’d  us  with  all  Ref- 
peâ:  and  Civility,  and  regal’d  us  with  Sweet-meats, 
and  feveral  forts  of  Wines,  with  which  we  drank 
the  Healths  of  the  Admirals  of  France,  and  England, 
He  (hew’d  us  his  whole  Ship,  to  the  very  Carriages 
of  the  Guns,  and  then  gave  the  Sieur  de  Coftebeüe  to 
know,  that  ’twould  be  a great  trouble  to  him  to  be 
oblig’d  to  take  Placentia  by  the  force  of  Arms,  in  re- 
gard that  heforefaw,  fuch  an  Enterprife  would  prove 
fatal  to  the  Governour,  to  the  Garrifon,  and  all  the 

Inhabi- 


to  North  America.  1 8 f 

Inhabitants,  upon  the  account  that  he  would  find  a 
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  preventing  the  Pillagingand 
other  Diforders  ; That  in  order  to  avoid  this  Misfor- 
tune, ’twould  be  a prudential  part  in  the  Gover- 
nour,  to  come  to  a Gompofition.  Our  Officer  be- 
ing fully  acquainted  with  the  Governour’s  Mind, 
made  anfwer  in  his  name,  that  he  was  refolv’d  up- 
on a vigorous  defence,  and  would  rather  fpring  the 
; place  in  the  Air,  than  furrender  it  to  the  Enemies  of 
; the  King  his  Mafter.  After  a mutual  exchange  of 
[ Compliments,  we  took  leave  of  him,  and  being  rea- 
r dy  to  get  into  our  Sloop,  he  told  us  with  embraces, 
I that  he  was  infinitely  forry  he  could  not  falute  us 
<i'.  with  his  Guns,  in  the  room  of  which  be  order’d  five 
or  fix  Huzza’s,  with  a Long  live  the  King.  When 
( we  went  into  the  Boat,  we  return’d  him  the  fame 
I number  of  ffiouts,  to  which  he  return’d  a feventh 
that  finiffi’d  the  Ceremony.  Upon  cur  return  to 
the  Fort,  Mr.  de  CofieheUe  gave  the  Govei  noùr  an  ac- 
count of  the  force  of  the  Admiral’s  Ship,  The  St. 
1;  Albans  ffo  the  Ship  was  call’d)  carried  fixty  fix  Guns 
mounted,  and  fix  hundred  Men  Complement,  but 
the  other  Ships  appear’d  to  be  of  lefs  force. 

The  next  day,  which,wasthe  i9ri&,  they  advanc’d 
within  Canon- fhot  of  the  Fort,  where  they  lay  bye, 
while  a Sloop  row’d  up  to  the  Batteries.  The  Go- 
vernour  fent  out  another  Sloop  to  know  what  the 
matter  was,  and  was  anfwer’d,  that  if  he  had  a 
mind  for  a Parley  in  the  time  of  the  Ingagement, 
he  fhonld  put  up  a red  Flag  for  a Signal.  1 was  then 
pofted  at  la  Fontaine,  to  oppofe  a Defcent  ; for  that 
was  the  only  place  that  could  be  ferviceable  to  the 
Englijh,  in  order  to  mafter  Vlacentia.  The  English 
ought  to  have  confider’d,  that  their  Cannon  would 
do  no  fervice  againft  an  impenetrable  Rampart,  and 
that  they  would  lofe  their  labour  in  Ibootingagainft 
plints  and  Earth.  But  it  feems,  they  were  oblig’d 
by  exprefs  Orders  from  the  Prince  of  Orange,  to  do 


B 86  Some  "Mem  Voyages 

it,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  expofe  themfelves  to  the 
danger  of  being  funk,  which  had  certainly  been 
effeded,  if  we  had  had  Powder  and  Ball  enough  , 
for  the  Canonading  lafted  almoft  five  hours. 

The  zoth  a French  Pilot  who  was  Prilbner  on 
board  of  the  Admiral,  made  his  efcape  by  throw- 
ing himfelf  into  the  Sea  in  the  Night-time.  He 
landed  at  the  place  where  I lay  in  Ambufcade  ; and 
after  he  had  given  me  an  account  of  what  pafs’d 
in  the  Fleet,  I fent  him  to  the  Governour’s  Houle. 
He  inform’d  me,  that  they  had  defign’d  a Defcent 
with  feven  or  eight  hundred  Men,  but  alter’d  their 
Refolution,  upon  the  apprehenfion,  that  there  were 
fourteen  or  fifteen  hundred  Seamen  ready  to  oppofe 
them  ; that  they  were  of  the  opinion,  that  my  fixty 
Bifcayans  who  difcover’d  themfelves  upon  the  fhoar 
at  la  Fontaine,  in  fpite  of  all  I could  do,  had  no  o- 
ther  view  but  to  draw  ’em  into  an  Ambufcade,  by 
tempting ’em  to  come  up.  The  21/theyfet  fail 
with  a North- Eaft  Gale,  after  having  burnt  all  the 
Houfes  at  Tointe  Verte,  where  the  Governour  had 
fent  a Detachment  by  way  of  Precaution  that  fame 
very  day  ; but  the  ways  were  fo  impradicablc,  that 
the  Detachment  could  not  get  there  in  time  to  op- 
pofe the  Enemy.  This  one  may  juftly  fay,  that 
if  it  had  not  been  for  the  Captains  of  the  Bifcaj 
Ships  that  were  then  at  Placentia,  that  place  had  un- 
doubtedly fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  English  : And 
this  I can  convince  you  of,  when  you  and  I meet, 
în  this  bloody  Expedition,  the  loft  fix  Men,; 

and  on  our  fide  the  Sieur  Boat,  Lieutenant  of  a 
Veffel,  had  his  Arm  fhot  off.  In  fine,  the 
Englifii  did  all  that  Men  could  do,  fo  that  nothing 
can  be  faid  againft  their  Condu(ft. 

OEiober  the  6th,  I took  Ihipping  in  purfuit  of  my 
Voyage  to  France,  being  accompany’d  with  feveral 
other  Velfels.  The  Wefterly  Winds  were  fo  favou- 
rable to  us  in  our  paifage,  that  we  came  to  an  An- 
chor 


to  North- Amcïicsi.  187 

chor  on  the  2 5^  at  St.  Naz,ere,  which  lies  but  eight 
or  nine  Leagues  for  this  place.  I am  to  fet  out 
immediately  kt  Verjailles'^  in  the  mean  time,  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  8cc. 


LETTER  XXIV, 

Dated  at  liantes  May  ro.  1695. 

Containing  an  Account  of  Mr.  FrontenacV  Pro^ 
jeü:,  which  was  rejeâed  at  Court,  and  the  rea- 
fon  why  it  was  rejected.  The  King  gives  the 
Author  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  I fie  of  New- 
found-Land,  ©c.  together  with  a.  free  Inde-^ 
pendant  Company. 

I 5 I R, 

T Am  now  once  more  at  Nantes,  from  whence  I 
y JL  wrote  to  you  in  Ociober  lafi.  I am  now  return’d 
I from  Court,  where  1 prefented  to  Mr  ?ontchar~ 
train  Mr.  Frontenacs  Letters,  and  the  Memorial  I 
I i mention’d  in  my  laft.  I was  anfwer’d,  that  it  would 
tj  not  be  proper  to  execute  the  Project  I propos’d,  be- 
1 caufe  the  forty  Seamen  which  were  neceffary  for 
my  purpofe,  could  not  now  be  allow’d  me,  and 

I befides  the  King  had  given  Orders  to  Mr.  Frontenac, 
: to  make  Peace  with  the  Iro^uefe  upon  any  terms 

whatfoever.  This  Inconveniency  alfo  was  found 
to  attend  the  Projedt,  that  after  the  Forts  which  Ï 
j intended  to  build  upon  the  Lakes  were  intireiy  fi- 
ll nilh’d,  the  Savages  that  are  our  Friends  and  Con- 
t federates,  would  rather  feek  after  Glory,  by  making 

War 

I I 

l\ 


I s 8 Some  “Kew  Foya^es 

War  upon  the  Iroquefe,  than  take  pleafure  in  Hunt- 
ing the  Beavers,  which  would  be  a confiderable  da- 
mage to  the  Colonies  of  Canada,  that  fublift  only  as 
one  may  fay,  by  the  trade  of  Skins,  as  I lhall  fliew 
you  more  particularly  in  a proper  place.  The  En- 
glljh  will  by  no  means  take  it  ill,  that  we  do  not 
build  thefe  Forts,  for  befides  that,  they  are  too 
much  concern’d  for  the  prefervation  of  the  Iroquefe, 
diey  will  always  be  ready  to  furnifh  with  Merchan- 
dize the  Savage  Nations,  that  are  our  Allies,  as 
they  have  done  hitherto.  I muft  own  my  felf  migh- 
tily oblig’d  to  the  English,  who  attack’d  us  at  Placen- 
tia the  laft  year;  they  declar’d  publickly,  though 
without  any  juft  ground,  after  they  arriv’d  in  Eng- 
land, that  they  would  infallibly  have  taken  that 
place,  if  I had  not  oppos’d  their  Defcent.  I have 
already  inform’d  you,  that  I did  not  at  all  hinder 
them  from  Landing  at  the  place  where  I was  poll- 
ed with  fixty  Bifcayan  Seamen  : So  that  they  attri- 
bute to  me  a glorious  Adion,  in  which  I had  no 
lhare,  and  by  that  means  have  done  me  fo  much 
Honour,  that  his  Ma  jelly  hath  bellow’d  upon  me  the 
Lieutenancy  of  the  Ifle  of  Newfound-Land  and  Acadia, 
which  I never  deferv’d  upon  that  fcore.  Thus  you 
fee.  Sir,  that  many  times  fuch  Perfons  are  preferr’d, 
who  have  no  other  Patrons  in  the  World,  but  pure 
Chance.  However,  I Ihould  have  been  better  pleas’d, 
if  I could  have  put  the  abovemen tion’d  Projed  in 
execution,  for  a Iblitary  Life  is  moll  grateful  to  me, 
and  the  manners  of  the  Savages  are  perfe<5lly  agree- 
able to  my  Palate.  The  corruption  of  our  Age  is 
fo  great,  that  it  feems  the  Europeans  have  made  a 
Law,  to  tear  one  another  in  pieces  by  cruel  Ufage 
and  Reproaches,  and  therefore  you  mull  not  think 
it  llrangc,  if  I have  a kindnefs  for  the  poor  Ameri- 
cans, who  have  done  me  fo  many  favours.  I am 
to  fet  out  the  next  day  after  to  Morrow,  from  this 

place, 


tô  Nort/?  AiHerica. 

place,  in  order  to  embark  at  St.  Naz,ere.  The  Mef- 
. pewi  d'Angui,  two  'Nantes  Merchants,  have  taken 
upon  them  to  maintain  the  Garrifon  of  Flacentia^ 
upon  condition  of  certain  Grants  made  by  theCourt, 
who  furniflies  them  with  a Ship,  wherein  I am  to 
have  my  Paffage-  Pray  fend  me  your  News  by 
(bme  Ships  of  S.  John  de  Luz>,  which  are  to  (ail 
from  this  place  within  two  Months,  in  order  to 
truck  with  the  Inhabitants  of  Tlacent'ia. 

1 cannot  conclude  this  Letter,  without  giving  you 
fome  account  of  a Difpute  I had  very  lately  at  my 
; Inn,  with  a Portugueze  Phyfician,  who  had  made 
; many  Voyages  to  Angola^  Brezily  and  Goa.  He 
[ maintain’d,  that  the  People  of  the  Continent  of  A- 
merka,  Afia,  and  Africa^  were  defcended  from  three 
different  Fathers,  which  he  thus  attempted  to  prove. 
The  Americans  differ  from  the  AJiatics,  for  they  have 
neither  Hair  nor  Beard  ; the  features  of  their  Face, 

I their  colour  and  their  cufloms  are  different  ; befides 
that,  they  know  neither  meum  nor  tuum,  but  have  all 
things  in  common,  without  making  any  property  of 
Goods,  which  is  quite  contrary  to  the  AJiatk  way 
[|  of  living.  He  added,  that was  fo  far  diftant 
I from  the  other  parts  of  the  World,  that  no  body  tan 
I imagine,  how  a Voyage  fhould  be  made  into  this 
[■;  New  Continent,  before  the  ufb  of  the  Compafs  was 
h found  out;  That  the  Africans  bsing  black  and  flat 
t Nos’d,  had  fuch  monftrous  thick  Lips,  fuch  a fiat 
■ Face,  fuch  foft  woolly  Hair  on  their  Head,and  were 
^ in  their  Conftitution,  Manners,  and  Temper,  fo 
different  from  the  Americans,  that  he  thought  it  im- 
poflible,  that  thefe  two  forts  of  People  fhould  de- 
rive their  Original  from  Adam,  whom  this  Phyfici- 
an would  have  to  refemble  a Turk  or  a Verjian  in  his 
Air  and  Figure.  I anfwer’d  him  presently,  that  fup- 
- pofing  the  Scripture  did  not  give  convincing  evi- 
dence, that  all  Men  in  general  are  defcended  from 
one  firft  Father,  yet  his  reafoning  would  not  be  fuf- 

ficiei  t 


Some  ISlew  Voyages 

ficient  to  prove  the  contrary,  fince  the  difïêrence 
that  is  found  between  the  People  of  Amerlcu  and 
Africa,  proceeds  from  no  other  caufe  but  the  diffè- 
rent qualities  of  the  Air  and  Climat  in  theib  tw,o 
Continents  : That  this  appears  plainly  to  be  true, 
becaufea  Negro  Man  and  Woman,  or  a Savage  Man 
and  Woman,  being  tranfplanted  into  Europe,  will 
produce  fuch  Children  there,  who  in  four  or  five 
Generations,  will  infallibly  be  as  white,  as  the  moft 
ancient  Europeans.  The  Phyfician  deny’d  this  mat- 
ter of  Fa(^,  and  maintain’d,  that  the  Children  def- 
cended  from  this  Negro  Man  or  Woman,  would  be 
born  there  as  black  as  they  are  in  Guinea  ; but  that 
afterwards  the. Rays  of  the  Sun  being  more  oblique 
and  lefs  fcorching  than  in  Africa,  thefe  Infants 
would  not  have  that  black  ffiining  Luffre,  which  is 
fo  eafily  diftinguilhed  upon  the  Skin  of  {\ic\iNegroes 
as  are  brought  up  in  their  own  Country.  To  con- 
firm his  Hjpothefis,  he  affur’d  me,  that  he  had  feen 
many  Negroes  at  Lisbon,  as  black  as  in  Africa,  tho’ 
their  Great  Grandfather’s  Grandfather  had  been  tranf- 
pianted  into  Portugal  many  years  agoe.  He  added 
aifo,  that  thofe  who  were  defeended  from  the  Portu- 
guez^e,  that  dwelt  at  Angola,  Cape  Vert,  &c.  about  a 
hundred  years  agoe,  are  fo  little  tawn’d,  that  ’tis 
impoffible  todiftinguilh  them  from  the  Natives  of 
Portugal  : He  further  confirm’d  his  way  of  reafon- 
ing,  from  an  unconteffable  matter  of  faA,  for,  fays 
he,  if  the  Rays  of  the  Sun  were  the  caufe  of  the 
blacknefs  of  the  Negroes,  from  hence  it  would  fol- 
low, that  the  Brazilians  being  fituate  in  the  lame 
degree  from  the  Equator  with  the  Africans,  fhould 
be  as  black  as  they  are  ; but  fo  they  are  not,  for 
’tis  certain  their  bkin  appears  to  be  as  clear  as  that  of 
the  Pertuguefe.  But  this  was  not  all,  he  maintain’d 
farther,  that  thefe  who  are  defeended  from  the  firft 
Savages  of  Brazil,  that  were  tranfported  into  Portu- 
gal, above  an  Age  agoe,  have  as  little  Hair  and 

Beard 


to  North  America.  191 

Beard  as  their  Anceüors,  and  on  the  contrary,  thofe 
who  are  defcended  from  the  firft  Tartugueze\  who 
peopl’d  the  Colonies  of  Brazil,  are  as  hairy,  and 
have  as  great  Beards,  as  if  they  had  been  born  in 
TortugaL  But  after  all,  continued  he,  though  ail  that 
I have  faid  is  abfolutely  true,  yet  there  are  fome 
People,  who  ralhly  maintain,  that  the  Children  of 
the  Africans  and  Americans,  will  by  degrees  degene- 
rate in  Europe.  This  may  happen  to  thofe  whofe 
Mothers  receive  the  imbraces  of  Europeans,  which  is 
the  reafon  why  we  fee  fo  many  Mullattoh  in  the 
I Ifles  of  America,  in  Spain,  and  in  Portugal  : Whereas 
if  thefe  Women  had  been  as  clofely  kept  up  in  Eu- 
rope, as  the  Portugueze  Women  are  in  Africa  and  A- 
merica,  the  Children  of  the  Brafilians  would  no  more 
degenerate  than  thofe  of  the  Portugueze.  Such  Sir, 
was  the  reafoning  of  this  Dodor,  who  hits  the 
matter  pretty  juftly  towards  the  end  of  his  Dif- 
courfe  ; but  his  Principle  is  moft  falfe,  and  moft  ab~ 
furd,  for  no  Man  can  doubt,  unlefs  he  be  void  of 
Faith,  good  Senfe  and  Judgment,  but  that  was 
the  only  Father  of  all  Mankind,  ’Tis  certain,  that 
the  Savages  of  Canada,  and  all  the  other  People  of 
{America,  have  not  naturally  either  Hair  or  Beard  ; 
i that  the  features  of  their  "ace,  and  their  colour  ap- 
? preaching  to  an  Olive,  ihow  a vaft  difference  be- 
; tween  them  and  the  Europeans,  What  is  the  caufe 
' of  thefe  things  I know  not,  and  yet  I cannot  be- 
; lieve  them  to  be  theeffed  of  their  Air  and  Food. 
,,For  at  that  rate,  thofe  who  are  defcended  from  the 
\ French,  that  firft  fetled  in  Canada  near  a hundred 
1 years  agoe,  and  for  the  moft  part  run  up  and  down 
in  the  Woods,  and  live  like  the  Savages,  fhould  have 
i neither  Beard  nor  Hair,  but  degenerate  alfo  by  de- 
! grees  into  Savages,  which  yet  never  happens.  Af- 
• ter  this  Phyfician  had  alledg’d  all  thefe  Reafons,  he 
: digrefs’d  from  this  Subjed,  and  having  a mind  to  dif- 
cover  his  extravagant  Opimons,  ask’d  me  what  I 

thought 


1 9^  Some  Hew  Foyages 

thought  of  the  Salvation  of  (b  many  Amerkans^  to 
whom  in  all  probability  theGolpel  was  never  preach’d. 
You  may  very  well  believe,  that  I made  no  fcruple 
to  condemn  them  by  wholefale  to  Eternal  Fire, 
which  he  took  very  ill.  ^ How  can  you,  faid  he, 

‘ condemn  thefe  poor  People  with  fo  much  affu- 

* ranee  : ’Tis  probable  that  their  firft  Father,  having 
‘ never  finn’d  as  our  Adam  did,  had  a good  Soul, 

‘ and  an  upright  Heart,  fince  his  Pofterity  do  ex- 

* adly  obferve  the  Law  of  natural  Equity,  which  is 
‘ exprefs’d  in  Latine  in  thefe  well  known  words, 

* Alteri  ne  feceris  quod  tibi  fieri  non  ‘vii  j and  allow  no 

* property  of  Goods,  nor  any  Diftindion  or  Sub- 

* ordination  among  them,  but  live  as  Brethren,  with- 
‘ out  Difputes,  without  Suits,  without  Laws,  and 
‘ without  Malice.  But  fuppofing,  added  he,  that  i 

they  were  originally  defeended  from  Adam,  we  ; 

* ought  not  to  believe,  that  they  are  damn’d  for  their 

* ignorance  of  the  Chrifiian  Dodrine,  for  who  can  i 
' tell  but  God  may  impute  to  them  the  Merits  of' 

‘ Chrill’s  Blood,  by  ways  fecret  and  incomprehen- 

‘ fible  to  us  ; and  befides,  ( fuppofing  that  Man  has  i 
‘ a Free  Will  ) his  Divine  Majefty  without  doubt  | 

* w'iil  have  a greater  regard  to  his  moral  Adions,  I 
‘ than  to  his  Worihip  and  Belief.  The  want  of  i 
‘ Knowledge,  continued  he,  is  an  Unhappinefs,  but 

‘ not  a Crime,  and  vt  ho  can  tell  but  God  has  a mind  j 

* to  be  honour'd  by  infinite  ways  of  paying  him  1 

* Homage  and  Refped,  as  by  Sacrifices,  Dances,  | 

‘ Songs,  and  the  other  Ceremonies  of  the  Americans  i I 
He  had  fcarce  made  an  end  of  his  Difeourfe,  when  j 
I fell  foul  upon  him  with  all  my  might,  as  to  the  j 
preceding  Points  ; but  after  I had  given  him  to  un-  j l 
derftand,  that  if  among  the  multi  vocati,  i.  e,  thofe  | 
who  profefs  the  true  Religion,  who  are  but  a hand-  ! f 
ful  of  Men,  there  are  found  but  Vauci  eleBi,  all  the 
Americans  muft  be  in  a very  deplorable  condition  : 
He  anfwer’d  me  impudently,  that  1 was  very  ralh 

to  I 


to  Nbr^/?' America.  î^l 

to  determine  who  fliould  be  in  the  number,  of  the 
Reprobate  at  the  laft  Judgment,  and  to  condemn 
them  without  giving  any  Quarter;  for,  fays  he, 
this  is  to  infult  the  Wifdorn  of  God,  and  to  make 
him  deal  as  capricioufly  by  his  Creatures,  as  St. 
PW’s  Potter  did  by  his  two  Veffels.  Neverthelefs, 
when  he  faw  that  I treated  him  like  an  impious, 
unbelieving  Wretch,  he  to  be  even  with  me,  re- 
ply’d  in  thefe  fooiilh  words,  Fidem  ego  hie  ejua  adhibe- 
tur  Myfieriis  facris  interpedo,  fed  fidem  illam  ojua  bona 
mentis  foror  ejiy  reBam  rationem  amat.  From 

lence  you  may  judge.  Sir,  whether  this  fine  Phyfi- 
cian  'was  able  to  remove  Mountains.  I am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  8cc. 


LETTER  XXV. 

Dated  at  Fiana  in  Portugal  January  5 1.  1694. 

The  Author’s  departure  from  France  for  Placen- 
tia. A Fleet  of  1,0  Ships  came  to  feize 

upon  that  place  ; hut  is  difappointed,  and  fheers 
off.  The  Reafons  why  the  Englifti  have  had 
fuccefs  in  all  their  Enterprifes  heyond  Sea.  The 
Author  s Adventure  with  the  Governour  of  Pla- 
centia. His  departure  for  Portugal.  An  En* 

\ gagement  with  a Fluffing  Privateer. 

\SIR, 

■ Do  not  at  all  doubt  but  you  vyill  be  fenfibly  affetft- 
. ed  with  my  fad  and  fatal  Mifadventure,  which 
am  now  to  give  you  an  account  of.  And  firft 

i O yott 


194  Some ‘New  Voyages 

you  muft  know,  that  after  we  had  waited  for  a 
fair  Wind  fifteen  or  twenty  days  at  St.  Nazere,  we 
fet  fail  on  the  12th  of  May  laft.  Our  PalTage  was 
neither  long  nor  Ihort,  for  we  arriv’d  at  the  Har- 
bour of  Placentia  the  20/^  of  June,  having  taken  an 
Englijh  Ship  laden  with  Tobacco,  on  the  edges  of 
the:  Bank  of  Newfound  Land.  After  I landed,  I 
went  to  falute  Mr.  Brouillon,  Governor  of  Placentia, 
and  declar’d  to  him  how  glad  I was  to  obey  the 
Orders  of  fo  wife  a Commander.  He  anfwer’d, 
that  he  was  much  furpriz’d  to  find,  that  I had  fol- 
licited  to  be  employ’d  there,  without  acquainting 
him  with  it  the  preceding  year  ; and  that  he  now 
plainly  perceiv’d,  that  the  Project  about  the  Lakes 
of  Canada,  ( which  1 had  mention’d  to  him  ) was  a 
mere  fham  pretence.  I endeavour’d  in  vain  to  per- 
fwade  him  to  the  contrary  ; for  it  Was  not  poffible 
for  me  to  undeceive  him.  Neverthelefs,  I landed 
my  Goods,  and  hir’d  a private  Houfe,  till  fuch  time  i 
as  I could  build  one  for  my  felf,  which  I carried  ; 
on  with  fo  much  diligence,  that  it  was  finilK’d  in  ' 
September,  by  the  affiftance  of  the  Ship-Carpenters, 
who  were  lent  me  gratis,  by  all  the  Bifcay  Captains,  j 
The  Sieur  of  St.  John  de  Luz,  arriv’d  at  Pla- \ 
centia  on  the  iBth  of  July,  with  one  of  his  Ships, 
and  brought  me  a Letter,  wherein  you  acquaint 
me,  that  in  regard  your  Nephew  defires  to  vifit  i 
Canada  the  next  year, you  would  be  very  glad  to  have 
a Didionary  of  the  Language  of  the  Savages,  to- 
gether with  the  Memoirs  which  I promis’d  you. 

On  the  i6th  of  September  we  perceiv’d  an  Englifs 
Fleet  of  twenty  four  Sail,  which  calf  Anchor  in 
the  Road  much  about  the  time  that  it  was  difco- 
ver’d.  It  was  commanded  by  Sir  Francis  Wheeler, 
who  had  gone  to  Martinico  with  a defign  to  feize  j 
that  Ifle,  and  in  his  return  from  thence  had  fail’d 
to  New-England,  to  take  in  fome  Forces  and  Am- j | 
munition  there,  in  order  to  make  himfelf  Mafter 

of) 


to  l^orth  Atnéïici.  ipj 

of  PlaceTitia  j but  when  he  difcover’d  a Redoubt  of 
Stone  lately  built  upon  the  top  of  the  Mountain, 
which  I mention’d  to  you  in  my  laft  Letter  but  one, 
he  thought  it  more  advifable  to  return  quietly  iiito 
Europe,  than  to  make  a fruitlefs  Attempt.  We  had 
planted  four  Canon  upon  this  high  Redoubt,  which 
fogaul’d  the  Ships  of  his  Fleer,  that  they  were  forc’d 
to  weigh  Anchor,  and  hoift  Sail  fooner  than  they 
intended.  The  fault  of  the  Englijh  upon  this  occa- 
fion,  was,  that  they  did  not  enter  the  Harbour  the 
fame  day  that  they  appear’d  before  the  place.  1 
have  obferv’d  it  many  times,  that  Attempts  do  com- 
monly mifcarry,  by  delaying  them  for  a little  while  j 
and  of  this  I could  give  you  at  leaft  fifteen  or  fix- 
teen  Inftances  within  the  compafs  of  my  own 
Knowledge.  But  now  I return  to  the  Quarrel  the 
Governour  had  with  me. 

Fancying  that  I had  follicited  my  Employments 
without  taking  notice  of  him,  he  treated  me  with 
all  manner  of  Reproaches  and  Outrages,  from  the 
time  of  my  Landing,  to  that  of  my  Departure,  and 
I was  not  fatisfy’d  with  appropriating  to  himfelf  the 
I Profits  and  Advantages  of  the  free  Coihpany  that 
♦I  was  given  me,  but  likewil'eftop’d  without  any  feru- 
I pie,  the  pay  of  the  Soldiers  that  were  employ’d  in 
f the  Cod-fifhing  by  the  Inhabitants,  and  made  the 
reft  work  without  Wages.  I fhall  take  no  notice  of  his 
c-  piiblick  Extortion  j for  tho’  he  has  formally  counter- 
afled  the  ten  Articles  contain’d  in  the  Orders  of  Lewti 
I the  totb,  yet  he  had  fo  many  Friends  in  all  the 
j Courts,  that  he  could  not  be  found  guilty  : There’s 
J fome  pleafure  in  making  Prefents  in  his  way,  for 
by  them  he  has  made  joooo  Crowns  per  fas  S' 
fas,  in  the  fpace  of  three  or  four  years.  1 fhould 
: never  have  done,  if  I offer’d  to  give  you  a partieii- 
t lar  account  of  all  the  trouble  and  vexatidri  he  gave 
a me.  I fhall  only  mention  thrie  wich 

V ëtown’d  all  the  reft. 


ip<$  Some  “New  Voyages 

On  the  20th  of  November ^ i.  e.  a Month  after  our 
Fifhermen  fet  fail,  while  I was  entertaining  at  Sup^ 
per  fome  of  the  Inhabitants,  he  came  Mask’d  into 
my  Houfe,  with  his  Servants,  and  broke  the  glafs 
Windows,  Bottles,  and  Drinking-Glaffes,  and  threw 
down  the  Tables,  Chairs,  Cheffs  of  Drawers,  and 
every  thing  that  came  to  hand  Before  I had  time 

to  get  into  my  Chamber,  and  take  my  Piftols,  this 
infolent  Mob  difappear’d  very  feafonably  ; for  I 
would  have  loaded  my  Piftols  and  purfu’d  them,  if 
my  Guefts  had  not  hindred  me.  Next  Morning  his 
Servants  fell  upon  mine,  who  expected  nothing  lefs 
than  to  be  threlh’d  to  death  with  Clubs.  This  fé- 
cond infult  having  provok’d  my  Patience  to  the 
laft  degree,  I was  meditating  fome  Revenge  upon 
thefe  Alfallins,  when  the  Recollets  came  and  remon- 
ftrated  to  me,  that  I muftdiflemble  my  Refcntment, 
to  prevent  any  Innovation  in  the  King’s  Affairs. 
Then  1 refolv’d  to  Ihut  my  felf  up,  and  apply  my 
felf  to  Study,  to  divert  the  vexatious  Thoughts,  of 
not  being  able  to  pull  off  my  Mask.  The  third 
trick  which  he  play’d  me,  at  the  end  of  three  days, 
was  this  ; he  fent  to  arreft  two  Soldiers,  whom  I had 
imploy’d  to  cut  down  fome  Grafs  in  the  Meadows, 
about  half  a League  from  theGarrifon:  They  were 
feiz’d  while  they  were  Mowing,  bound  and  carried 
away  Prifoners,  under  the  pretence  of  being  De- 
ferters,  becaufe  they  had  lain  two  Nights  out  of  the 
Garrifon,  without  his  leave  ; and,  which  would  have 
prov’d  yet  more  fatal  to  thefe  innocent  Men,  he  had 
certainly  caus’d  ’em  to  be  knock’d  on  the  Head,  on 
purpofe  to  vex  me,  if  the  Recollets,  and  his  own  Mif- 
fse,  had  not  earneftly  interceded  on  their  behalf. 

After  this  Accident,  the  Recollets  advifed  me  to  go 
and  feehim,and  to  entreat  him  to  put  an  end  to  all  his 
Pcrfecutions,affuring  him  at  the  fame  time, that  I was 
entirely  his  Servant  and  Friend.  Duras  eft  hie  Jermo, 
Whatever  relutftancy  1 had  to  yield  to  an  advice  fo 

con- 


to  Korth  hmmcti, 

contrary  to  nature,  which,  I muftconfefs,  ftrug- 
g!ed  furioufly  within  me,  yet  I offer’d  fo  much  vi- 
olence to  my  felf,  that  1 fubmitted  to  it.  I was  at 
his  Houfe,  went  into  his  Chamber,  and  being  with 
him  all  alone,  I fpoke  to  him  for  a quarter  of  an 
hour  in  the  moft  fubmiffive  Terms,  that  any  Slave 
could  ufe.  I am  afham’d  to  make  this  Confeffion 
to  you,  for  I blufh  to  my  feif  every  time  I think  of 
fo  mean  a fubmiffion.  However,  inftead  of  his 
liftening  to  my  Reafons,  and  treating  friendly  with 
me,  he  fell  into  a moft  furious  Paftion,  and  loaded 
me  with  a torrent  of  moft  bitter  Reproaches..  In 
this  cafe,  Sir,  I preferr’d  the  Service  of  the  King, 
before  the  Pun<5tilio’s  of  Honour,  fori  did  nothing 
but  retir’d  to  my  own  Houfe,being  well  fatisfy’d  that 
I was  not  alfaffinated  by  his  Domefticks  : But  the 
diforder  which  this  Affair  produc’d,  would  require 
a long  Difcourfe.  It  will  be  more  to  the  purpofe, 
to  come  to  matter  of  Faft  ; I do  affure  you,  that 
he  would  have  laid  me  up,  if  the  Inhabitants  had 
appear’d  to  be  in  his  Intereft.  He  pretended  that 
he  had  been  infulted,  and  confequently  that  he  was 
in  the  fight  in  revenging  himfeif,  whatever  it  coft 
, him.  But  the  tragical  end  of  a Governour,  whofo 
I Throat  was  cut  in  this  Country  about  thirty  or  for- 
^ ty  years  agoe,  furnifh’d  him  with  abundant  matter 
, of  Reflexion.  He  judg’d  it  therefore  his  fafeft  way 
to  diifemble  his  Anger,  being  perfwaded,  that  if  I 
fhould  have  run  him  through  with  my  Sword,  the 
Soldiers  and  Inhabitants  would  have  favour’d  my 
efcape  to  the  Englij%,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Pla- 
eentia.  In  the  mean  time  the  Recollets,  who  had  a 
mind  to  compofe  thefe  growing  Differences,  found 
no  great  trouble  in  reconciling  us,  for  they  Remon- 
ftrated  to  him,  of  what  confequence  it  would  be 
for  us  to  live  in  a good  Correfpondence,and  to  avoid 
■'  the  troubles  that  would  enfue  upon  our  quarrels. 
This  propofal  of  an  Accommodation,  was  in  ap- 
I O 3 peamnce 


Î 


ip8  Some  'Hew  Voyages 

pearance  moft  agreeable  to  him,  and  fo  much  the 
rather,  becaufe  he  was  glad  to  dilTemble  his  Refcnt» 
meats  by  the  external  figns  of  Friendfliip.  So  we 
faw  and  embrac’d  one  another  with  mutual  Pro- 
teftations  of  forgetting  all  that  had  pafs’d  be- 
tween us. 

After  this  Reconciliation,  I had  reafon  to  believe, 
that  his  Heart  would  not  give  the  lye  to  his  Mouth, 
becaufe  I thought  he  was  not  fo  imprudent  as  to  in- 
form the  Court  of  fome  Trifles,  wherein  he  would 
appear  to  have  proftituted  his  Honour  ; but  I was 
deceiv’d,  for  he  took  the  pains  to  add  afterwards  to 
the  Verbal  Procels  he  had  given  in  before  our  Ac- 
commodation, fome  falfiioods  which  he  ought  to 
have  conceal’d.  ’Tis  needlefs  to  acquaint  you,  how 
by  chance  his  Papers  fell  into  my  Hands  ; that  In- 
4ifcretion  might  prove  a difadvantage  to  fome  Per- 
fons,  whom  Heaven  biefs.  I lhall  only  tell  you, 
that  after  the  Recollets  had  feen  and  read  the  Alle- 
gations contain  d in  his  Papers,  they  madenofcru- 
pla  to  advife  me  to  take  care  of  my  felf,  and  inge- 
nuoufly  declar’d  to  me,  that  they  never  intended  to 
meddle  any  more  in  that  Affair,  becaufe  they  per- 
ceiv’d that  they  had  innocently  contributed  to  do 
me  a prejudice,  by  refloring  peace  between  him  and 
me.  This  wholfom  advice  made  me  perceive  the 
danger  to  vyhich  I fhould  be  expos’d,  if  I continued 
any  longer  at  Placentia,  infbmuch,  that  the  fear  I ! 
had  of  being  fent  to  the  Bajlile,  afcer  the  arrival  of  |» 
the  Ships  from  France,  made  me  refolve  to  abandon 
all  hopes  of  making  my  fortune  here,  and  to  throw  N 
up  my  Places.  After  the  Inhabitants  were  acquaint-  v 
ed  with  this  Nevys,  all  of  ’em  except  three  or  four,  ii 
came  running  to  my  Houfe,  to  alfure  me  they  i 
were  ready  to  fign  nry  Verbal  Procels.  in  cafe  I : 
would  change  my  Refolution  : But  infiead  of  ac- 1 
cepcing  their  offer,  I gave  them  to  underftand,  h?-  i''’ 
ving thank’d  thçm  firft  for  their  Good-will,  that'!® 

thçy;; 


to  America.  ipp 

they  would  bring  Mifchief  upon  themfelves,  and 
be  look’d  upon  at  Court  as  Seditious  Perfons , 
and  Difturbers  of  the  publick  Peace  ; fince  by 
a deteftable  principle  of  Politicks,  an  inferior 
Perfbn  is  always  judg’d  to  be  in  the  wrong , 
whatever  reafon  he  may  have  on  his  fide.  Indeed  I 
would  gladly  have  avoided  this  fatal  neceffity  of 
throwing  up  my  Places,  which  feem’d  infenfibly  to 
lead  me  to  (bme  great  Fortune  ; but  at  laft  the  con- 
finement in  the  Bafiile,  made  fucb  a deep  impreffion 
upon  my  Mind,  after  I had  ferjoufly  refleded  upon 
the  troublefom  Circumftances  of  my  Affairs,  that 
I made  no  fcruple  to  embark  in  a little  Veffel, 
which  was  the  only  one,  and  the  laft  that  was  to 
go  to  Franx.  » The  Propofal  I made  to  the  Captain 
of  prefenting  him  with  a looo  Crowns,  was  fo 
well  receiv’d,  that  he  engag’d  to  land  me  upon  the 
Coaftof  Portugal  for  that  Sum,  upon  condition  that 
I fliould  keep  the  Secret.  The  beft  of  the  matter 
was,  that  my  Enemy  had  ufed  the  precaution  of 
writing  to  the  Governors  of  Belle  Ifle,  of  the  Ifle  of 
Re,  and  of  Rochelle,  to  feize  me  as  foon  as  I fhould 
land.  He  reckon’d,  and  not  without  reafon  indeed, 
that  this  Veffel  would  put  into  one  of  thefe  three 
Ports;  But  three  hundred  Piftoles,  dexteroufly  con- 
vey’d to  the  hands  of  fome  People  that  are  notmuch 
I accuftom’d  to  finger  Gold,  have  a wonderful  effe(ft  j 
for  that  very  Sum,  which  indeed  I was  loth  to  part 
with,  fav’d  me  my  Liberty,  and  perhaps  my  Life. 

Purfuant  to  this  Refolution,  I imbarqu’d  the  i^th 
I of  the  laft  Month,  notwithftanding  the  rifque  that 
\ one  runs  by  failing  in  the  Winter  time,  through 
fuch  a Sea  as  lies  between  Newfound-Land  and  France, 

I ’Tis  needlefs  to  inform  you,  that  I left  at  Placentia  a 
great  deal  of  Houlhold  Furniture,  which  I could 
; neither  fell  nor  carry  off.  ’Twill  be  more  edify- 
; ing  for  you  to  hear  the  Journal  of  our  V^oyage.  We 
( incQunter’d  three  terrible  Storms  in  our  Paflage , 

L . Ç>  4 without 


îoo  Some  ISletP  Voyages 

v.’ichout any  damage;  and  in  the  laft  of  thefe, which 
tailed  three  days,  the  Wind  at  North-Weft,  we 
rtm  a hundred  and  fifty  Leagues  without  any  Sail. 
This  laft  Storm  was  fo  violent,  that  the  Seamen  im- 
brac’d,  and  bid  an  eternal  adieu  to  one  another  ; 
for  every  Minute  they  expecfted  to  be  funk  without 
relief.  As  this  Storm  alarm’d  us,  fo  the  contrary 
Winds  from  the  Eaft  and  North- Eaft,  that  fprung 
upon  us  a hundred  Leagues  to  the  Weftward  of  Cape 
Fml[terre,  occafion’d  an  equal  dread  ; for  we  were 
oblig’d  to  f raverfe  the  Sca  for  three  or  four  and  twen- 
ty days,  after  which  we  defcry’d  the  Cape  by  ver- 
rue of  our  frequent  tackings,  and  by  a ftrange  ac- 
cident, wef^  attack’d  by  a Fluking  Privateer,  which 
could  not  board  us,  becaufe  the  Sea  roll’d  fo  high, 
but  contented  her  felf  with  firing  upon  us,  and  that 
with  fo  little  efFed,  that  we  did  not  lofe  one  Man. 
Our  Mafts  and  Rigging  indeed  was  fo  dammag’d, 
that  after  we  were  parted  from  the  Privateer,  by 
the  help  of  the  Night  and  a great  Fog,  we  could 
fcarce  make  ufe  of  our  Sails.  However,  we  refit- 
ted with  ail  poflible  diligence,  and  the  Captain  of 
the  Ship  having  then  a fair  pretence  to  luft  out  of 
the  diretft  courfe  flood  to  the  South-Eaft  in  the 
Night-time.  This  .^feign’d  courfe  did  not  fecure 
us  from  the  Privateer,  which  might  happen  to 
fleer  the  fame  courfe  ; fo  that  in  the  Night-time 
we  put  our  felves  in  a readinefs  to  renew  the 
fight  in  the  Day-time.  In  effed,  he  did  not  pur- 
fue  us,  as  we  apprehended  : But  about  Noon  we 
efcap’d  yet  more  narrowly,  for  we  were  purfu’d  by 
a Salljman  in  fight  of  the  Coaft  for  four  hours,  and 
were  within  a hairs  breadth  of  being  taken,  before 
we  got  under  the  Canon  of  the  Fort  of  this  City. 
Had  we  been  catch’d,  the  Governour  of  Tlacentia 
would  have  had  fome  ground  for  the  joyful  Excla- 
mation, Iftcidh  in  Sdllatn,  &G.  But  thank  God  we  were 
only  frighted. 

As 


to  North- Amcïka.'.  toi 

As  foon  as  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  I paid  down 
my  looo  Crowns  to  the  Captain,  who  has  reafon 
to  look  Upon  this  Action,  as  one  of  the  beft  he 
ever  did  in  his  Life-time.  The  Long-boat  was 
no  fooner  in  the  Water , than  I went  afltoar 
with  all  my  Baggage  j and  as  foon  as  I came  into 
this  City,  I procur’d  Ammunition  and  Pro vi  fions 
for  the  Ship  with  that  Expedition,  that  the  Cap- 
tain weigh’d  Anchor  the  very  next  day,  and  fo  con- 
tinu’d his  courfe  to  France. 

As  for  the  Memoirs  of  the  Country  of  Canada^ 
which  you  have  fo  often  defir’d,  I haveaddrefs’d  ’em 
to  the  Rochel  Merchant,  who  convey’d  your  Letters 
to  me  all  the  while  I was  in  Canaâa.  To  thefe  I 
have  tack’d  a fmall  Catalogue  of  the  moft  neceifary 
words  of  the  Algonkin  Language  ; which,  as  I have 
often  told  you,  is  the  fineft  and  the  moll  univerfal 
Language  in  that  Continent.  If  your  Nephew  conti- 
nues his  defign  of  undertaking  a Voyage  to  that  Coun- 
try, I would  advife  him  to  learn  thefe  words  in  the 
time  of  his  PalTage,  that  fo  he  may  be  able  to  ftay 
five  or  fix  Months  with  the  Algonkins,  and  under- 
ftand  what  they  fay.  I have  likewife  fent  you  an 
explication  of  the  Sea-Terms,  made  ufe  oi  in  my 
Letters.  The  making  of  this  little  Table,  was  a di- 
verfion  to  me  in  my  Voyage  ; for  in  perufing  my 
Letters,  I drew  out  feme  remarks  which  I defign  to 
impart  to  you,  if  I find  that  the  infuing  Memoirs 
give  you  fatisfaâion. 

You  will  readily  guefi,  that  from  the  year  i68^, 
to  this  very  day,  I have  renounc’d  all  manner  of 
ties  to  my  Country.  The  curious  Adventures  that 
I have  .'■elated  to  you  in  Writing  fince  that  time, 
wiil  undoubtedly  afford  an  agreeable  diverfion  to 
your  Friends  ; provided  they  are  not  of  the  number 
of  thoie  unfufterable  Devotees,  who  would  rather 
be  crucifi  d,  than  fee  an  Eccietiaftick  expos'd.  Pray 
be  fo  kind  as  to  write  to  ms  to  Lisbon,  and  inform 

me 


201  Some  New  Koyages 

me  of  what  you  hear,  in  reference  to  my  concern. 
You  have  fuch  good  Correlpondents  at  Vans  y that 
you  cannot  mils  of  knowing  how  things  go.  I 
doubt  not  but  my  Adverfary  feeds  himfelf  with  the 
hopes,  that  his  uiual  Prefents  would  procure  the  ap- 
prehending of  me  in  Francey  where  he  thinks  I would 
be  the  fool  to  land  : But  now  to  be  fure  he’ll  fret 
his  Heart  out,  for  that  he  cannot  gall  me  to  his 
Wiflies.  However,  ’tis  as  much  his  intereft  to  fol- 
licit  my  Death,  ( purfuant  to  his  unjuft  Charge  a- 
gainft  me  ) as  ’tis  my  Glory  to  procure  him  a long 
Life.  Upon  this  foot.  Sir,  the  longer  he  lives,  the 
more  revenge  I fhall  have  ; and  confcquently  I /hall 
have  an  opportunity  of  an  eafie  folace  for  the  lois 
of  my  Places,  and  the  Dilgraçe  1 have  met  with 
from  the  King.  1 am, 

S I Ry 

Toursy  ÔCÇ:,  I 


Memoirs 


20J 


MEMOIRS 

O F 

North'/^wmVtf; 

Contaitihg  a Geographical  Dejcription  of  that 
vajî  Continent  ; the  Cujloms  and  Commerce^  of 
the  Inhabitants  ^ &c. 

S I Ry 

IN  my  former  Letters,  I prefented  you  with  a 
view  of  the  Englifh  and  French  Colonies,  the 
Commerce  ofCd»iîi<*,the  Navigation  upon  theRi- 
vers  and  Lakes  of  that  Country,  the  courfe  of  failing 
from  Eurofe  to  North- America,  the  feveral  Attempts 
made  by  the  Englijh  to  mafter  the  French  Colonies, 
the  Incurfions  of  the  French  upon  NCiVi -Engl and,  andi 
upon  the  Iroejaefe  Country  : In  a word,  Sir,  I have 
reveal’d  a great  many  things,  that  for  reafons  of 
State  or  Politicks,  have  been  hitherto  conceal’d  j in- 
fomuch,  that  if  you  were  capable  of  making  me 
a Sacrifice  to  your  Refentment,  ’tis  now  in  your 
power  to  rpine  me  at  Court,  by  producing  pay 
Letters, 

All  that  I writ  in  the  foregoing  Letters,  and  the 
whole  fubftance  of  the  Memoirs  1 now  fend  you, 
is  truth  as  plain  as  the  Sun-ihine.  I flatter  no  Man, 
and  I fpare  no  body.  I fcorn  to  be  partial  ; I beftow 
praife  upop  thofe  who  are  in  no  capacity  to  ferve 
' ' ’ J ' ' ' ' me. 


204  Some  ISlew  Voyages 

me,  and  I cenfure  the  Condud  of  others,  that  are 
■capable  of  doing  me  an  injury  by  indirect  Methods.  Î 
I am  not  influenc’d  by  that  principle  of  Intereft  ! 
and  Party-making,  that  is  the  rule  of  fome  folks  [ 
words.  I facrifice  alt  to  the  love  of  Truth,  and  ! 
write  with  no  other  view,  than  to  give  you  a juft  * 
Reprefentation  of  things  as  they  are.  ’Tis  beneath  ! 
me  to  mince  or  alter  the  matter  of  fadt,  contain’d 
either  in  the  Letters  I fent  you  fome  ten  or  twelve 
years  agoe,  or  in  thefe  Memoirs.  In  the  courfe  of  ^ 
my  Voyages  and  Travels,  I took  care  to  keep  parti-  * 
cular  Journals  of  every  thing  ; but  a minute  relati-  ' 
on  of  all  Particulars,  would  be  irkfbm  to  you,  be- 
Ldes,  th^t  the  trouble  of  taking  a copy  of  the  Jour- 
nals, before  I have  an  opportunity  of  (hewing  you 
the  Original,  would  require  more  time  than  I can 
well  fpare.  In  thefe  Memoirs  you’ll  find  as  much 
as  will  ferve  to  form  a perfed  Idea  of  the  vaft  Con- 
tinent of  North-.^werif^.  In  the  courfe  of  our  Cor- 
refpondence  from  the  year  i68y,  to  this  time,  I fent  i 
you  five  and  twenty  Letters,  of  all  which  I have  ' 
kept  a double  very  carefully.  My  only  view  in  wri- 
ting of  thefe  Letters,  was  to  inform  you  of  themoft 
eflential  things  ; for  I was  unwilling  to  perplex  and  ' 
confound  your  Thoughts,  with  an  infinity  of  un- 
common things,  that  have  happen’d  in  that  Coun-  • 
try.  If  you’ll  confult  my  Maps,  as  you  read  the  i 
abovemention’d  Letters,  you’ll  find  a juft  Reprefen-  : 
ration  of  all  the  places  I have  fpoke  of.  Thefe  Maps 
are  very  p.articular,  and  I dare  alTure  you,  they  are 
the  corredieft  yet  extant.  My  Voyage  upon  the  Long 
River,  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  making  that  lit- 
tle Map,  which  I fent  you  trom  Mijfilimakinac  in 
1699,  with  my  fixteenth  Letter.  ’Tis  true,  it  gives 
only  abate  Defcripiion  of  that  River,  and  the Ri-  | 
ver  of  the  Mijjhuris  : But  it  requir’d  more  time  than 
I could  fpare,  to  make  it  more  compleat,  by  a 
knowledge  of  the  adjacent  Countries,  which  have  | 

hitherto  1 


to  Norf/?- America.  20 1 

hitherto  been  unknown  to  all  the  World,  as  well  as 
that  great  River,  and  which  I would  never-  have  vi- 
fited,  if  I had  not  been  fully  inftruâied  in  every  thing 
that  related  to  it,  and  convoy’d  by  agoM  Guard.  Ï 
have  plac'd  the  Map  pf  Canada  at  the  front  of  thefe 
Memoirs,  and  defire  that  favour  of  you,  that  you 
would  not  ihew  it  to  any  body  under  my  Name. 
To  the  latter  part  I have  fubjoyn’d  an  Explication 
of  the  Marine^  and  other  difficult  Terms,  made  ufe 
1 of  in  my  Letters,  as  well  as  in  thefe  Memoirs;  which 
you’ll  pleafe  to  confult,  when  you  meet  with  a 
word  that  you  do  not  underftand. 

A jhort  Defcrîptîon  of  Canada. 

You’ll  think.  Sir,  that  I advance  a Paradox,  when 

I acquaint  you  that  New-Fr^we,  commonly  call’d 
' Canada,  comprehends  a greater  extent  of  Ground, 

: than  the  half  of  Eunfe  : But  pray  mind  what  proof 

I I have  for  that  AlTertion.  You  know  that  Euroft 
extends  South  and  North,  from  the  ; f to  the  72 
degree  of  Latitude,  or  if  you  will,  from  Cadiz,  to 
the  North  Cape  on  the  confines  of  Lafland^  and 
I that  it’s  Longitude  reaches  from  the  ^th  to  the  94?^ 

I Degree,  that  is,  from  the  River  Oby,  to  the  Weft 
! Cape  in  TJlandia.  But  at  the  fame  time,  if  we  take 
the  greateft  breadth  of  Europe,  from  Eaft  to  Weft, 
from  the  imaginary  Canal,  ( for  Inftance  ) between 
the  Tanais  and  the  Volga,  to  Dinglcbay  in  Ireland,  k 
makes  but  66  Degrees  of  Longitude,  which  con- 

I tain  more  Leagues  than  the  Degrees  allotted  to  k 
towards  the  Polar  Circle,  though  thefe  are  more  nu- 
merous, by  reafon  that  the  degrees  of  Longitude  are 
unequal  ; And  fince  we  are  wont  to  meafure  Fro-* 
vinces,  Iflands,  and  Kingdoms  by  the  fpace  of 
I Ground,  I am  of  the  Opiraon,  that  we  ought  to 
I make  ule  of  the  fame  Standard,  with  refped  to  the 
; four  parts  of  the  World.  The  Geographers  who  par- 


io6 


Some  'N.ew  Voyages 

cel  out  the  Eârth  in  their  Clolets,  according  to  their 
fancy  ; thefe  Gentlemen,  I fay,  might  have  been 
aware  of  this  advance,  if  they  had  been  more  care- 
ful. But,  to  come  to  Canada  j 

All  the  World  knows,  that  Canada  reaches  front 
the  to  the  6 pi»  Deg.  of  Latitude,  that  is,  from 
the  South  fide  of  the  Lake  Erriè,  to  the  North  fide  of 
Hudfons  Bay  ; and  from  the  284th,  to  the  5 5 6t;&  De- 
gree of  Longitude,  'viz.,  from  the  River  Miffijipi,  to 
Cape  Rafe  in  the  Ifland  of  Nsw-Foundland.  I af- 
firm therefore,  that  Europe  has  but  ii  Degrees  of 
Latitude,  and  3 g of  Longitude,  more  than  Canada, 
in  which  I comprehend  the  Ifland  of  New-Fo«»<^- 
land,  Acadia,  and  all  the  other  Countries  that  lye  to 
the  Northward  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  which 
is  the  pretended  great  boundary  that  fevers  the 
French  Colonies  from  the  Were  I to  reckon 

in  all  the  Countries  that  lye  to  the  North-Weft  of 
Canada,  I fliould  find  it  larger  than  Europe  : But  I 
confine  my  felf  to  what  is  difcover’d,  known  and 
own’d  ; I mean,  to  the  Countries  in  which  the 
French  trade  with  the  Natives  for  Beavers,  and  id 
which  they  have  Forts,  Magazines,  Miflaonaries,  and 
fmall  Settlements. 

’Tis  above  a Century  and  a half  fince  Canada  was 
difcover’d.  John  Verajan  was  the  firft  Difcoverer, 
though  he  got  nothing  by  it,  for  the  Savages  eat  hint 
up.  James  Cartier  was  the  next  that  went  thither,* 
but  after  failing  with  his  Ship  above  Quebec,  he  re- 
turn’d to  France  with  a forry  opinion  of  the  Coun- 
try. At  laft  better  Sailors  were  iraploy’d  in  the  Dif- 
covery,  and  trac’d  the  River  of  St.  Laurence  more 
narrowly:  And  about  the  beginning  of  the  laft  Cen- 
tury, a Colony  was  fenc  thither  from  Rouan,  which 
fetled  there  after  a great  deal  of  oppofition  from  the 
Natives.  At  this  day  the  Colony  is  fo  populous, 
that ’tis  computed  to  contain  iSoocd  Souls.  I have 
already  given  you  îbme  accoun:  of  that  Country  in 

my 


St, 


bi 


fc 


to  Nbrf/^America. 


207 


my  Letters,  and  therefore  fliall  now  only  point  to  the 
* moft  noted  places, and  take  notice  of  what  may  grati- 
fie your  curiofity  beyond  what  you  have  yet  heard. 

We  are  at  a lofs  to  find  the  Head  of  the  River  of 
ît.  Laurence,  for  tho’  we  have  trac’d  it  feven  or  eight 
hundred  Leagues  up,  yet  we  could  never  reach  its 
ource  ; the  remoteft  place  that  the  Coureurs  de  Bois 
go  to,  being  the  Lake  Lenemipigon,  which  difimbogues 
into  the  Upper  Lake,  as  the  Upper  Lake  do’s  into  the 
Lake  of  Hurons,  the  Lake  of  Hurom  into  that  of  Erris 
alias  Conti,  and  that  of  Erriè,  into  the  Lake  of  Frc»- 
tenac,  which  forms  this  laft  great  River,  that  runs  for 
twenty  Leagues  with  a pretty  gentle  Stream,  and 
fweeps  thro’  thirty  more  with  a very  rapid  Current, till 
it  reaches  the  City  of  Monreal\  from  whence  it  con- 
tinues its  courfe  with  fome  moderation  to  the  City 
of  Quebec  ; and  after  that  fpreads  out,  and  inlar- 
ges  it  felf  by  degrees  to  its  Mouth,  which  lies  a hun- 
dred Leagues  further.  If  we  may  credit  the  North- 
Country  Savages,  this  River  takes  its  rife  from  the 
great  Lake  of  the  Jffimpouals,  which  they  give  out  to 
be  larger  than  any  of  the  Lakes  I mention’d  but  now, 
being  fituated  at  the  diftance  of  fifty  or  fixty  Leagues 
from  the  Lake  of  Lenemipigon.  The  River  of  St* 
Laurence  is  20  or  22  Leagues  broad  at  its  Mouth,  in 
I the  middle  of  which  there’s  an  Ifland  call’d  Anth 
à cofli,  which  is  twenty  Leagues  long.  This  Iflandbe- 
I longs  to  the  Sieur  Joliet  a Canadan,  who  has  built  a 
|j:  little  fortify’d  Magazine  upon  it,  to  guard  his  Goods 
.1;  and  his  Family  from  the  Incurfions  of  the  Eskl- 
maux,  of  whom  more  anon.  He  deals  with  the  o- 
t|  ther  Savage  Nations,  namely,  the  Mo%^gnois,  and 
^ the  Vapipanachois  in  Arms  and  Ammunition,  by  way 
f of  exchange  for  the  Skins  of  Sea- Wolves  or  Sea- 
i Calves,  and  fome  other  Furs., 

Over  againft  this  Ifland,  to  the  Southward  of  it;^ 
i we  find  the  Ifle  call’d  V IJleFercee,  which  is  a great 
V-  Rock  with  a palfage  bor’d  through  k,  in  which 

ûm 


io8  Some  TSLew  Voyages 

the  Sloops  can  only  pals.  In  time  of  Peace  the 
Bifcayms  of  Frame,  and  the  Normans,  us’d  to  fifh  for 
Cod  at  this  place  : For  here  that  Fifh  are  very  plen- 
tiful, and  at  the  fame  time  larger,  and  more  proper 
for  drying  than  thofe  of  New-Foundland.  But  there 
are  two  great  Inconveniencies  that  attend  the  filh- 
ing  upon  this  Ifland  ; one  is,  that  the  Ships  ride  in 
great  danger,  unlefs  they  have  good  Anchors  and 
ftrong  Cables  ; another  Inconvenience  is,  that  this 
place  affords  neither  Gravel  nor  Flint-ftones  to 
iftretch  out  the  Fifh  upon  before  the  Sun,  and  that 
the  Fifhermen  are  forc’d  to  make  ufe  of  a fort  of 
Hurdles.  ~ 

There  are  other  Fifhing-places  befides  this,  which 
lie  fome  Leagues  higher  up  upon  the  fame  fide  of 
the  River.  Such  is  that  call’d  Gafpè,  where  the  Ships 
Crew  fometimes  trade  in  Skins  with  the  Gafpefians, 
to  the  prejudice  of  the  Proprietors  of  this  River. 
The  other  places  for  Cod-fifh  lie  toward  Monts  notre 
dame,  in  the  little  Bays  or  Rivers  that  empty  them- 
feives  into  the  River  of  Laurence. 

On  the  other  fide  of  the  River,there  lies  the  wide  ex- 
tended Country  of  Labrador,  or  of  the  Eskimaux,  who 
are  fuch  a wild  barbarous  People, that’no  means  what- 
foever,  have  hitherto  been  able  to  civilife  ’em.  One 
would  think  that  good  old  Homer  had  this  People  in 
his  view,  when  he  fpeaks  of  the  Cyclopes  j for  the 
Charader  of  the  one,  fuits  the  other  admirably  well, 
as  it  appears  from  thefe  four  Verfes,  in  the  ninth 
Book  of  his  OdyJJea,  which  are  fo  pretty,  that  I can- 
not forbear  inlerting  them  in  this  place. 

T'oTmv  ctyppccs  /BaAw^iyoi  Stè 

v-^rtKoôy  tpioov  vâoKst  xeinva. 

(TTiéioi  yAacfvpoîca'  difMÇiVet  M szccçoi 
ITec/^y  àPArÎAcoy 


That 


to  ISlorth  Amznc^. 


16^ 


That  is  ; this  People  do  not  perplex  themfelves 
with  voluminous  Laws,  and  vexatious  Suits;  they 
delight  only  in  the  tops  of  Mountains,  and  deep 
Caves,  and  every  one  confines  his  care  to  the  ma- 
nagement of  his  own  Family,  without  troubling 
his  Head  about  his  Neighbour.  The  Danes  were  the 
firft  difcoverers  of  this  Country,  which  is  full  of 
Ports,  Havens,  and  Bays,  that  the  Quebec  Barques 
refort  to  in  the  Summer,  in  order  to  truck  with  the 
Savages  for  the  Skins  of  Sea-Calves.  The  Com- 
merce I fpeak  of,  is  carried  on  after  this  manner. 
As  foon  as  the  Quebec  Barques  come  to  an  Anchor, 
;hefe  Devils  come  on  board  of  them  in  their  little 
Canows  made  of  the  Skins  of  Sea-Calves,  in  the 
orm  of  a Weavers  Shuttle,  with  a hole  in  the 
middle  of  it,  refembiing  that  of  a Purfe,  in  which 
hey  ftow  themfelves  with  Ropes,  fitting  fuqat  upon 
:heir  Brech.  Being  fet  in  this  falhion  they  row 
jvith  little  Slices,  fometimes  to  the  Right,  andfome- 
imes  to  the  Lefr>  without  bending  their  Body  for 
ear  of  Over-fetting.  As  foon  as  they  are  near  the 
Barque,  they  hold  up  their  Skins  upon  the  end  of  the 
par,  and  at  the  fame  time  make  a demand  of  fo 
many  Knives,  Powder,  Ball,  Fufees,  Axes,  Kettles, 
In  fine,  every  one  ftiews  what  he  has,  and  men- 
ions what  he  expels  in  exchange  : And  (b  when 
he  Bargain  is  concluded,  they  deliver  and  receive 
I heir  Goods  upon  the  end  of  a Stick,  Asthefepi- 
«4fül  Fellows  ufe  the  precaution  of  not  going  on 
jjiDoard  of  our  Boats,  fo  we  take  care  not  to  fuffer 
a 00  great  a number  of  Canows  tofurround  us  ; for 
ihey  have  carry’d  off  oftner  than  ones,  fome  of 
i)ur  foall  Veffels,  at  a time  when  the  Seamen  were 
bufied  in  hauling  in  the  Skins,  and  delivering  out  the 
ibther  Goods.  Here,  we  are  oblig’d  to  be  very  vi- 
'gilant  in  the  Night-time,  for  they  know  bow  to 
imake  great  Sloops,  that  will  hold  thirty  or  forty 
and  ran  as  faft  as  the  Wind  ; And  ’cis  for  this 
^ ■ P 


2 ! O Some  Voyages 

^eafon  that  the  Malouïnsy  who  filh  for  Côd  at  Tetît 
Nord,  and  the  Sfaniards  who  follow  the  fame  Fifhery 
at  Pcrtocboua,  are  oblig’d  to  fit  out  long  Barques  to 
fcour  the  Coaft  and  purfue’em  ; for  almoft  every 
year  they  furprife  fome  of  the  Crew  on  fhoar,  and 
cut  their  Throats^  and  fometimes  they  carry  off 
the  VeflTel.  We  are  affur’d,  that  their  number  of 
Warriours,  or  Men  that  bear  Arms , amounts  to 
thirty  thoufand  ; but  they  are  fuch  cowardly  fel- 
lows, that  five  hundred  Clifiims  from  Hudjons  Bay  y 
ufed  to  defeat  five  or  fix  thoufand  of  them.  They 
are  polTefs’d  of  a very  large  Country,  extending 
from  over  againft  the  files  of  M'mgan  to  Hudfons 
Streight.  They  crofs  over  to  the  Ifland  of  Newfound- 
Land  qs  tty  day,  at  the  Streight  of  Ifle,  which 

is  not  above  feven  Leagues  over  j but  they  never 
came  fo  far  as  Placentia,  for  fear  of  meeting  with 
other  Savages  there. 

Hudfons  Bay  ad/oyns  to  this  Terra  of  Labrador, 
and  extends  from  the  j 2 Degree  and  thirty  Mi- 
nutes to  the  6;  of  Latitude.  The  Original  of  its 
name  was  this.  Captain  Henrj  Hudfcn,  an  Englifls 
Man  by  Birth,  obtain’d  a Ship  from  the  Dutch,  in 
order  to  trace  a paffage  to  China  through  an  imagi- 
nary Streight  to  the  Northward  of  'Honh- America. 
He  had  firfi  form’d  a defign  of  going  by  the  way 
of  NovaZcmbla’y  but  upon  feeing  the  Memoirs  of 
a Danijh  Pilot,  who  was  a friend  of  his,  he  drop’d 
that  thought.  This  Pilot,  namely , Frederick  An- 
(child,  had  fetout  from  Norway  or  Tfandia,  fome 
years  before,  with  a defign  to  find  out  a Paffage  to 
Jafan  by  Davis’s  Streight,  which  is  the  Chimerical 
Streight  1 fpoke  of.  The  firft  Land  he  defcry’d  was 
Havage  Bay,  feated  on  the  North  lide  of  the  Terra 
of  Labrador',  then  fweeping  along  the  Coaft,  he  en- 
ter’d a Streight,  which  about  twenty  or  thirty  years 
afterwards,  was  chtiften’d  Hudfons  Streight.  After 
that,  fleering  to  the  Weflvvard,  he  cams  upon  fome 

Coafts 


to  Nortir Amçnca..  lis 

Coafts  that  run  North  and  South  j upon  which  he 
flood  to  the  North,  flattering  himfelF  with  the  hopes 
of  finding  an  open  paflage  to  crofs  the  Sea  oîjeffô; 
DUC  after  failing  to  the  Latitude  of  the  Polar  Cir- 
cle, and  running  the  rifque  of  perifliing  in  the  Ice, 
do  not  know  how  often,  without  meeting  with  a- 
ny  paflage  or  open  Sea,  he  took  up  a refoiution  of 
turning  back;  but  the  Seafon  was  then  fo far  advanc’d, 
and  the  Ice  fo  cover’d  up  the  furface  of  the  Water, 
that  he  was  forc’d  to  put  in  to  Hudfons  Baj,  and  win- 
ter there  in  a Harbour,  where  feveral  Savages  fur- 
nifli’d  his  Crew  with  Provifions  and  excellent  Skins. 

foon  as  the  Sea  was  open,  he  return’d  to  Den- 
mark.  Now,  Captain  Hudfon  being  afterwards  ac- 
quainted with  this  Dane,  undertook  upon  his  Jour- 
nals to  attempt  a paflage  to  Japan  through  the 
Streight  of  Davü  ; but  the  Enterprife  fail’d,  as  well 
iis  that  of  one  Button,  and  fome  others.  However, 
Budfon  put  in  to  the  Bay  that  now  goes  by  his  name, 
athere  he  receiv’d  a great  quantity  of  Skins  from 
he  Savages  ; after  that,  he  difcover’d  New  Holland, 
vhich  is  now  call’d  New-Tork,  and  fome  other 
iOuntries  retzining  to  New- England  t upon  the  whole, 
tis  not  fair  to  call  this  Streight  and  this  Bay,  by 
he  name  of  Hudfon",  in  regard  that  the  abovemen- 
iion’d  Dane,  Frederick  Anfchdd,  was  the  firfl  difcoverer 
)f  them  ; he  being  the  firft  European  that  defcry’d 
he  Countries  of  North- America,  and  chalk’d  out  the 
vayto  the  others.  Upon  this  Hî^^^/ûw’s  Journals,  the 
Inghfi)  made  feveral  attempts  to  fettle  a Commerce 
vith  the  Amerkans.  The  great  quantity  of  Beaver- 
kins  and  other  Furs  that  he  purchas’d  of  the  Savages 
vhile  he  Winter’d  in  the  Bay,  put  the  notion  în- 
> the  lieads  of  fome  Englijh  Merchants,  who  there- 
pon  formî’d  a Company  for  the  carrying  on  of  this 
4ew  Commerce.  With  this  view,  they  fitted  out 
ome  Ships  under  the  command  of  Captain  Nelfin, 
f ho  loft  fome  of  ’eth  in  the  Ice  not  far  from  the 
P 2 Streight, 


211  Some  Voyages 

Streight,  having  efcap’d  narrowly  himfelf.  Howe* 
ver,  he  enter’d  the  Bay,  and  plac’d  himfelf  at  the 
Mouth  of  a great  River,  which  rifes  towards  the 
Lake  of  the  Jfimpouals,  and  falls  into  the  Bay  at  a 
place  where  he  built  a Redoubt,  and  mounted  fome 
Cannon  upon  it.  In  thefpace  of  three  or  four  years 
after,  the  Englijh  made  fome  other  little  Forts  near 
that  River,  which  prov’d  a confiderable  baulk  to 
the  Commerce  of  the  French^  who  found  that  the 
Savages  who  us’d  to  deal  with  ’em  in  Furs  on  the 
North  fide  of  the  upper  Lake,  were  not  then  to  be 
feen. 

It  came  to  pafs  in  procefs  of  time,  but  how  I 
cannot  tell,  that  one  RatiJJon,  and  one  Grcz,elkry 
met  in  that  great  Lake  fome  ClijHmi,  who  pro-i 
mis’d  to  conduâ:  ’em  to  the  bottom  of  the  Bay, 
where  the  had  'not  yet  penetrated.  In  ef- 
fed:,  the  CUfiims  were  as  good  as  their  word  ; for 
they  Ihew’d  ’em  the  place  they  fpoke  of,  befides 
feveral  other  Rivers  upon  which  there  was  a fair! 
profpecS:  of  making  fuch  Settlements , as  would' 
carry  on  a great  trade  in  Skins  with  feveral  Savage 
Nations.  Thefe  two  Frenchmen  return’d  to  the  Up- 
per Lake,  the  fame  way  that  they  went,  and  from| 
dien'ce  made  the  beff  of  their  way  to  Quebec^  where 
they  offer’d  to  the  chief  Merchants  of  the  place,* 
to  carry  Ships  to  Hudfon’s  Bay  ; but  their  Projedlj 
was  rejected.  In  fine,  having  met  with  this  re-: 
pulfe,  they  went  tb  France,  in  hopes  of  a more  fa-' 
vourable  hearing  at  Court  : But  after  the  prefenting 
of  Memorial  upon  Memorial,  and  fpending  a great: 
deal  of  Money,  they  were  treated  as  vvhimfiéal 
Fellows.  Upon  that  occafion  the  King  of  England'% 
Ambaffadour  did  not  lofe  the  opportunity  of  pef- 
fwading  them  to  go  to  Ij>ndon,  where  they  met  with 
fuch  a favourable  Reception,  that  they  got  feveral 
Sliips,  which  they  carry ’d  to  the  Bay,  not  without 
difficulty,  snd  built  feyeral  Forts  in  diffierent  places,' 


to  ^orthKmzûc2L,  2 1 j 

that  did  great  fervice  in  promoting  the  Commerce. 
Then  the  Court  of  France  repented,  though  too 
late,  that  they  did  not  give  ear  to  their  Memorials  ; 
I and  finding  no  other  remedy,  refolv’d  to  diflodge 
the  at  any  rate.  In  effeât,  they  attack’d ’em 
vigoroufly  by  Sea  and  Land,  and  difpolTefs’d  ’em  of 
all  their  Forts,  excepting  Fort  Nelfon,  where  they 
could  not  exped  fuch  an  eafie  Conqueft.  Some 
years  after,  the  Englifi  refolv’d  to  ufe  their  utmoft 
efforts  to  retake  thefelPofts;  and  their  refblution 
was  crown’d  with  Succefs,  for  they  diflodg’d  the 
French  in  their  turn,  and  at  this  day  the  French  are 
[ making  preparations  to  repay  ’em  in  their  owiï 
. Çoin. 

' That  Country  is  fo  cold  for  feven  or  eight  Months 
of  the  year,  that  the  Sea  freezes  ten  Foot  deep, 
“he  Trees  and  the  very  Stones  fplit,the  Snow  is  ten  or 
:welve  Foot  deep  upon  the  Ground,  for  above  fix 
llonths  of  the  year,  and  during  that  feafon,  no 
jody  can  ftir  out  of  Doors,  without  running  the 
ifque  of  having  their  Nofe,  Ears  and  Feet  mortifi- 
1 ;d  by  the  Cold.  The  paflage  from  Europe  to  that 
l^ountry  is  fo  difficult  and  dangerous,  by  reafon  of 
he  Ice  and  the  Currents,  that  one  mult  be  reduc’d  to 
' he  laft  degree  of  mifery,  or  be  blind  to  a foolilh 
i leighth,  that  undertakes  fuch  a wretched  Voyage. 

’Tis  now  time  to  pafs^from  Hudfins  Bay,  to  the 
' uperior  or  Upper  Lake.  ’Tis  eafier  to  make  this 
'^oyage  upon  Paper,  than  to  go  adually  through 
' : ; for  you  muff  fail  almoft  a hundred  Leagues  up 
le  River  of  Machakandibi,  which  is  fo  rapid  and 
ill  of  Cataracts,  that  a light  Canow  work’d  by 
X Watermen,  ffiall  not  fail  ’em  under  thirty  or 
lirty  five  days.  At  the  head  of  this  River  we  meet 
ith  a little  Lake  of  the  fame  name,  from  whence 
re  are  oblig’d  to  a Land-carriage  of  feven  Leagues, 
ji  get  at  the  River  of  Mkhiplkotan,  which  , we  run 
W4  in  tçn  or  twelve  days,  though  ^t  the  fame 
P 5 " time 


1 1 4 Some  New  Vo'^ages 

time  we  have  feveral  Land-carriages  upon  it  : For 
going  down  this  River  we  pafs  feveral  Catarads., 
where  we  are  oblig’d  either  to  carry  our  Canows 
by  Land,  or  to  drag  ’em  back  again.  Thus  we 
arrive  at  the  Upper  Lake,  which  is  reckon’d  to  be 
five  hundred  Leagues  in  Circumference,  including 
the  windings  of  the  Creeks,  and  little  Gulfs.  This 
little  frelh-water  Sea  is  calm  enough  from  the  be- 
ginning of  May,  to  the  end  of  September.  The  South  : 
fide  is  the  fafeft  for  the  Canows,  by  reafon  of  thé 
many  Bays,  and  little  Rivers,  where  one  may  put 
in  in  cafe  of  a Storm.  There  is  no  fetled  Savage  | 
Nation  upon  the  brinks  of  the  Lake,  that  I know  i 
of.  ’Tis  true  indeed,  that  in  Summer  feveral  Nor-| 
them  Nations  come  to  Hunt  and  Filh  in  thefe  parts,  I 
and  bring  with ’em  the  Beaver-Skins  they  have  got  ; 
in  the  Winter,  in  order  to  truck  with  the  Coureurs 
de  Bois,  who  do  not  fail  to  meet  ’em  there  every 
year.  The  places  where  the  Interview  happens, 
are  Bagouafcb,  Lemipifaki,  and  Chagouamigon.  ’Tis 
fome  years  fince  Mr.  Dulhut  built  a Fort  of  Pales  or  ; 
Stakes  upon  this  Lake,  where  he  had  large  Ma-j 
gazines  of  all  farts  of  Goods.  That  Fort  was  call’d  : 
Camanifiigoym,  and  did  confiderableDilfervice  to  the 
English  Settlements  in  Hudjons  Bay  ; by  reafon  that 
it  fav’d  feveral  Nations  the  trouble  of  tranfporting  | 
theif  Skins  to  that  Bay.  Upon  that  Lake  we  find  ; 
Copper  Mines,  the  Mettal  of  which  is  fo  fine  and  i 
plentiful,  that  there  is  not  a feventh  part  lofs  fronvj 
the  Oar.  It  has  fome  pretty  large  Iflands,  which  I 
are  replenilh’d  with  Elks  and  wild  AlTes  j but  there’s  I 
fcarce  any  that  goes  to  hunt  upon  ’em,  by  reafon  | 
of  the  danger  of  croffing  over.  In  fine,  this  Lake  I 
abounds  with  Sturgeons,  Trouts,  and  white  Fifii.j 
The  Climate  is  unfufferably  cold  for  fix  Months  of| 
the  year,  and  the  Snow  joyn’d  to  the  Froft,  com- 1 
monly  freezes  the  Water  of  the  Lake  for  ten  or  j 
twelve  Leagues  over.  !' 


to  Korth  hmçxica., 


21^ 


From  the  Superiour  or  Upper  Lake,  I fleer  to  that 
of  Hurons,  to  which  I allot  four  hundred  Leagues 
in  Circumference.  Now  to  make  this  Lake,  you 
muft  fail  down  by  the  fall  call’d  Saut  St.  Mary,  which 
I defcrib’d  in  my  fifteenth  Letter.  This  Lake  is  fitu- 
ated  in  a fine  Climate,  as  you’ll  perceive  from  the 
Map.  The  North  fide  of  it  is  beft  for  the  Naviga- 
tion of  Canows,  by  reafon  of  the  frequency  of  Ifles 
which  afford  ihelter  in  bad  Weather.  Thc  South. 
fide  is  pleafanter,  and  more  convenient  for  the 
Hunting  of  Deer,  Which  are  there  very  plentiful.  The 
figure  of  this  Lake  comes  near  to  an  equilateral  Tri- 
angle. Of  all  its  Ifles,  that  call’d  Manitoudin,  is  the 
moft  confiderable , toeing  above  twenty  Leagues 
long,  and  ten  broad.  In  former  times,  the  Outaouas 
of  the  Nations  of  Talon  and  dwelt  in  it  ; but 
the  dread  they  were  under  upon  the  account  of  the 
Irocjuefe,  oblig’d  both  them  and  their  NeigHbours  to 
retire  to  Mijjilimakinac.  That  part  of  the  Conti- 
nent that  faces  this  Ifland  , is  inhabited  by  the 
Nûckès  and  the  Miffitagues,  in  two  diflerent  Villa- 
ges, which  are  twenty  Leagues  diftant,  the  one 
from  the  other.  Towards  the  Eaft  end  of  this  I- 
fland,  we  fall  in  with  the  River  des  Francois,  which  Ï 
took  notice  of  in  my  fixteenth  Letter.  ’Tis  as 
broad  as  the  Seine  is  at  Paris,  and  runs  not  above  for^ 
tv  Leagues  in  length  from  its  fourcs  in  the  Lake 
Neplccrini,  to  its  Mouth.  To  the  North- Weft  of 
this  River,  there  lies  the  Bay  of  Toranto,  which  is 
twenty,  or  five  and  twenty  Leagues  long,  and  fif- 
teen broad  at  its  Mouth.  This  Bay  receives  a Ri- 
ver that  fprings  from  a little  Lake  of  the  fame  name, 
and  forms  feveral  Cataradis  that  are  equally  im- 
praticable  both  upon  the  afcent  and  defcent.  Up-^ 

I on  the  fide  of  this  River  you’ll  fee  a Man’s  Head 
: mark’d  in  my  Map,  which  fignifies  a large  Village 
!;of  the  Hurons,  that  was  deftroy’d  by  the  îroqueje. 
You  may  go  from  the  fource  of  this  River  to  the 
; P 4 Lake- 


1\  6 Some  New  Voyages 

Lake  Frontenac,  jby  making  a Land-carriage  to  the 
River  of  Tanacuatc,  that  falls  into  that  Lake.  P^pon 
the  South  fide  of  the  Bay  of  Toronto,  you  fee  the  Fort 
call’d  Fort  Suppofè,  which  I mention’d  in  my  %'^d 
Letter,  and  about  thirty  Leagues  to  the  Southward 
of  that,  you  find  the  Country  of  Themontate,  which 
being  formerly  inhabited  by  the  Hurons,  was  en- 
tirely depopulated  by  the  Irc^ueje. 

From  thence  I pafs  diredly  to  my  Fort,  with- 
out amufing  you  with  the  different  Landskips  I met 
with  in  the  fpace  of  thirty  Leagues.  That  Fort  I 
have  fpoke  fo  often  of  already,  that  without  flop- 
ping there,  I fhall  run  direcftly  to  the  Bay  of  Saki- 
nac,  reckoning  it  needlefs  at  the  fame  time,  to  take 
any  notice  of  the  many  Shelves  and  Rocks  that  lye 
hid  under  the  Water  for  two  Leagues  off  the  Coaft. 
This  Bay  is  fixteen  or  feventeen  Leagues  long,  and 
fix  broad  at  its  Mouth  : In  the  middle  of  which  v;e 
meet  with  two  little  Iflands,  that  are  very  fervice- 
able  to  the  Paflengers  j for  if  it  were  not  for  the 
conveniency  of  putting  in  there,  they  would  be  ob- 
lig’d for  the  moft  part,  rather  to  march  quite  round 
the  Bay,  th.in  to  run  the  hazard  of  croffing  di redly 
over  in  a Canow.  The  River  of  Sakinac  falls  into 
the  bottom  of  the  Bay.  This  River  runs  fixty  Leagues  | 
in  length,  with  a gentle  Current,  having  orily  three  I 
little  Catarads  that  one  may  fhoot  without  danr  | 
ger.  ’Tis  as  broad  as  the  Seine  is  at  Seve  Bridge.  [! 
Once  in  two  years  the  Outaeuas  and  the  Hurons,  are  |t 
wont  to  hunt  great  quantities  of  Beavers  upon  the  | 
confines  of  the  River  of  Sakinac.  Between  the  Ri-  |i 
ver  I now  fpeak  of,  and  Mijjilimakinac,  we  meet  I 
with  no  place  that  is  worth  our  regard.  As  iox  Mif-  j 
(ilimahnac  it  felf,  I have  already  imparted  to  you  | 
all  that  I can  fay  of  that  Poft,  which  is  of  fb  great  | 
importance  to  our  Commerce,  and  at  the  fame  time  j 
fent  you  a draught  of  it.  I fiiall  therefore  purfue  | 
civ  courfe  to  tfie  Lake  Errie,  remembring  that  Ï i 

defçrib’^  j 


to  ISlortl?  America.  ii7 

defcrib’d  the  Ilhefe  Lake  in  my  fixteenth  Letter, 
The  Lake  Erriè  is  juftly  dignified  with  the  illu- 
ftrious  name  of  Conti  ^ for  affuredly  ’tis  the  fined: 
Lake  upon  Earth.  You  may  judge  of  the  goodnefs 
of  the  Climate,  from  the  Latitudes  of  the  Countries 
that  furroundit.  Its  Circumference  extends  to  two 
hundred  and  thirty  Leagues  ; but  it  affords  every 
where  fuch  a charming  Profped,  that  its  Banks  are 
deck’d  with  Oak-Trees,  Elms,  Chefnut-Trees,  Wal- 
nut-Trees, Apple-Trees,  Plum-Trees,  and  Vines 
which  bear  their  fine  clutters  up  to  the  very  top  of 
the  Trees,  upon  a fort  of  ground  that  lies  as  fmooth 
as  one’s  Haiid.  Such  Ornaments  as  thefe,  arc  fuf- 
ficient  to  give  rife  to  the  moft  agreeable  Idea  of  a 
Landskip  in  the  World.  I cannot  exprefs  what 
vatt  quantities  of  Deer  and  Turkeys  are  to  be  found 
in  thefe  Woods,  and  in  the  vatt  Meads  that  lye  up- 
on the  South  fide  of  the  Lake.  At  the  bottom  of 
the  Lake,  we  find  wild  Beeves  upon  the  Banks  of 
two  pleafant  Rivers  that  difembogue  into  it,  with- 
out Catarads  or  rapid  Currents.  It  abounds  with 
Sturgeon  and  white  Filh  j but  Trouts  are  very  fcarce 
in  it,  as  well  as  the  other  Filh  that  we  take  in  the 
Lakes  of  Hurons  and  Ilimfe.  ’Tis  clear  of  Shelves, 
Rocks,  and  Banks  of  Sand  j and  has  fourteen  or 
fifteen  fathom  Water.  The  Savages  affure  us,  that 
’tis  never  difturb’d  with  high  Winds,  but  in  the 
Months  of  December f January,  and  February,  and  e- 
! ven  then  but  feldom,  which  indeed  I am  very  apt 
to  believe,  for  we  had  but  very  few  Storms,  when 
1 i winter’d  in  my  Fort  in  1688,  though  the  Fort 
|;  lay  open  to  the  Lake  of  Harms.  The  Banks  of  this 
I Lake  are  commonly  frequented  by  none  but  Warri? 
Ï purs,  whether  the  Iroi^ae(e,  the  lUnefe,  the  Oumamhj^ 
^c.  and  ’tis  very  dangerous  to  ftop  therè.  By  this 
t means  it  comes  to  pals,  that  the  Stags,  Roe-Budks 
! find  Turkeys,  run  in  great  Bodies  up  and  down  thç 
I Bîoar,  all  round  the  Lake,  In  foriner  times  the 
i ' ’{iiTonom^ 


P 1 8 Some  Netp  Voyages 

rieroncns,  and  the  Andafiogueronons,  liv’d  upon  the 
Confines  of  this  Lake,  but  they  were  extirpated  by 
the  Iroquefe,  as  well  as  the  other  Nations  mark’d  in 
the  Map. 

Upon  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake  we  defcry  a 
point  of  Land,  that  Ihoots  fifteen  Leagues  into  the 
Main  ; and  about  thirty  Leagues  beyond  that  to 
the  Eaftward,  we  meet  with  a fmall  River  that  takes 
its  rife  near  the  Bay  of  Ganaraske,  in  the  Lake  of 
Frontenac  \ and  would  afford  a fhort  palTagcfrom  the 
one  Lake  to  the  other,  if  ’twere  not  incumber’d 
with  Catarads.  From  thence  to  the  Streight  or 
Mouth  of  the  Lake,  you  have  thirty  Leagues  ; the 
Streight  being  a League  over,  and  fourteen  Leagues 
long.  Upon  this  Streight  you  fee  Fort  Suppo/è  mark’d 
in  the  Map,  which  is  one  of  the  Forts  that  I men- 
tion’d in  my  z^d  Letter.  From  that  imaginary 
Fort  to  the  River  of  Conde,  we  have  twenty  Leagues. 

The  River  of  Condè  runs  fixty  Leagues  in  length 
without  Catara<3:s,  if  we  may  credit  the  Savages, 
who  affur’d  me,  that  one  may  go  from  its  fource 
to  another  River  that  falls  into  the  Sea,  without  any 
other  Land-carriage  than  one  of  a League  in  length, 
between  the  River  and  the  other.  I faw  only  the 
Mouth  of  the  firft  River,  where  our  Outaouas  tried 
their  Limbs,  as  I told  you  in  my  fifteenth  Letter. 
The  Iflands  that  you  fee  mark’d  in  the  Map  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Lake  Errle,  are  replenifh’d  with  Roe- 
Bucks,  and  with  Fruit-Trees,  which  nature  has  ge- 
neroufly  provided,  in  order  to  entertain  the  Tur- 
keys, Feafants  and  Deer  wich  their  Fruit.  In  fine, 
if  there  were  a clear  and  free  paffage  for  Vef- 
fels,  from  Quehc  to  this  Lake,  it  might  be  made  the 
fine!!,  tlie  richelf,  and  the  mort  fertile  Kingdom  in 
the  World  : For  over  and  above  all  the  beauties  I 
have  mention’d,  there  are  excellent  Silver  Mines  a- 
bout  twenty  Leagues  up  the  Country  , upon  a 
certain  Hill , from  whence  the  Savages  brought 


to  America.  219 

as  great  lumps,  that  have  yielded  that  precious  Met- 
tal  with  little  wafte. 

From  the  Lake  Errîè,  I fteer  my  courfe  to  that 
of  Frontenac,  which  I could  not  forbear  to  fpeak  of 
in  my  feventh  and  (eventeenth  Letters.  This  Lake 
( as  I intimated  above  ) is  i8o  Leagues  in  Circumfe- 
rence, its  figure  is  Oval,  and  its  depth  runs  between 
twenty  and  twenty  five  Fathom.  On  the  South  fide 
it  receives  feveral  little  Rivers,  particularly  thofe  of 
theTfonontomns, of  the  Onnontagues,  and  of  the  Famine  y 
on  the  North  fide  ’tis  joyn’d  by  the  Rivers  of  Ga~ 
naraske,  and  of  Teonontate.  Its  fides  are  deck’d  with 
tall  Trees,  and  the  ground  is  indifferent  even  and 
level,  for  it  hasno  fteep  Coafts.  On  the  North  fide 
we  meet  with  feveral  little  Gulfs.  You  may  go 
from  this  Lake  to  that  of  Hurans,  by  going  up  the 
’RvietTanaouate,  from  whence  you  have  a Land-car- 
riage of  fix  or  eight  Leagues  to  the  River  of  Toron- 
to,  which  falls  into  it.  You  may  likewife  have  a 
palTage  from  the  Lake  of  Frontenac,  to  that  of  Errie, 
through  the  Bay  of  Ganaraske,  by  making  a Land- 
carriage  from  thence  to  a little  River  that’s  full  of 
CataraAs.  The  Villages  of  the  Onnontagues,  Tfonon- 
touans,  Goyogouans,  and  Onnoyoutes,  are  not  far  difiant 
from  the  Lake  of  Frontenac.  Thefe  Irotyuefe  Nations 
are  very  advan'tageoufly  feated.  They  have  a plea- 
fant  and  fertile  Country  5 but  they  want  Roe-Bucks 
and  Turkeys,  as  well  as  Fifii,  of  which  their  Ri- 
vers are  altogether  deflitute,  infomuch  that  they  are 
forc’d  to  filh  in  the  Lake,  and  to  broil  or  dry  their 
Fifh  with  a Fire,  in  order  to  keep  ’em  and  tranf- 
port  ’em  to  their  Villages,  They  are  in  like  man- 
ner forc’d  to  range  out  of  their  own  Territories,  in 
queft  of  Beavers  in  the  Winter-time,  either  towards 
Ganaraske , or  to  the  fides  of  the  Lake  of  Toron- 
to, or  elfe  towards  the  gre^t  River  of  the  Outaoms  ; 
where  ’twould  be  an  eafie  matter  to  cut  all  their 
Throats,  by  purfuing  the  courfe  I laid  down  in  my 

Letters. 


2,20  Some  Voyages 

Letters.  I have  already  touch’d  upon  the  Forts  of 
Frontenac  and  Niagara  j as  well  as  upon  the  River  of 
St.  Laurence,  which  here  takes  leave  of  the  Lakes, 
and  purfues  a compacter  courfe  to  Mmreal  and  Que- 
kc,  where  its  waters  mingling  with  thofe  of  the 
Sea,  become  fo  brackifli,  that  they  are  not  drink- 
able. 

It  remains  only  to  give  you  a Defeription  of 
cadia,  and  the  Ifland  of  Nw/omd-Land,  which  are 
tvi^o  Countries  that  differ  widely  from  one  another. 
The  Coaft  of  Acadia  extends  from  Kenebekif  one  of 
the  Frontiers  of  New-England,  to  fljle  Percée,  near 
the  Mouth  of  the  River  of  Sr.  Laurence.  This  Sea- 
Coaft  runs  almoft  three  hundred  Leagues  in  length, 
and  has  upon  it  two  great  Navigable  Bays,  name- 
ly, the  Bay  call’d  Françoife,  and  the  Bay  des  Cba-^ 
leurs.  It  has  a great  many  little  Rivers,  the  Mouths 
of  which  are  deep,  and  clean  enough  for  the  greateft 
Ships.  Thefe  Rivers  would  afford  a plentiful  Salmon- 
fifhery,  if  there  were  any  body  to  undertake  it  ; and 
moft  of ’em  as  well  as  the  Gulfs  that  lies  before ’em, 
furnifh  fuch  Cods  as  we  take  at  the  IJle  Percée.  For  in 
the  Summer  time,  that  fort  of  Fiih  make  in  to  the 
Coaft  in  Shoals,  efpecially  about  the  Iflands  of  Cape 
Freton,  and  of  St.  John.  ’Tis  true,  the  latter  has 
no  Harbours,  and  the  former  has  none  that  receive 
any  Veffel  above  the  burthen  of  a Barque  ; but  if 
thefe  two  Iflands  were  peopled,  the  Inhabitants 
might  fit  out  Sloops  to  manage  the  Filhery  ; and  to- 
wards the  latter  end  of  Augufi,  when  the  FUh  are 
cur’d  and  ready,  the  Ships  might  come  to  an  An- 
chor near  the  Land,  and  fo  take  ’em  in.  Two 
Gentlemen  of  the  name  of  Amour  of  Quebec,  have 
a Settlement  for  Beaver-hunting  upon  the  River  of 
St.  John  ; which  is  a very  pleafant  River,  and  a- 
dorn’d  with  Fields  that  are  very  fertile  in  Grain. 
’Tis  Navigable  for  twelve  Leagues  up,  from  its 
îi|ûuth.  Betwççn  çhe  point  of  Acadia,  apd  the  I- 


to  ISlorth- Avasncà,  ttî 

fland  of  Cape  Breton,  there  is  a Channel  or  Strei^ht 
about  two  Leagues  in  breadth,  which  is  deep  enough 
to  carry  the  greateft  Ships  in  France.  ’Tis  call’d  the 
pafs  des  Canjeaux,  and  would  be  much  more  fre- 
quented than  it  is,  if  the  Merchant-men  bound  to 
Canada,  would  fet  out  from  France  about  the  i pb  of 
March  ; for  then  they  might  pafs  that  way,  being 
affur’d  of  a clear  palTage  at  all  feafons  of  the  year, 
whereas  the  Channel  of  Gape  de  Raye,  is  oftentimes 
cover’d  with  Ice  in  : And  by  this  contrivance,^ 
the  Ships  would  arrive  at  Quebec  in  the  beginning  of 
May. 

Moft  of  the  Countries  of  Acadia  abound  with 
Corn,  Peafe,  Fruit,  and  Pulfe;  and  have  a plain 
diftinftion  of  the  four  Seafons  of  the  year,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  ’tis  extream  cold  for  three  Months  in 
Winter.  Several  places  of  Acadia,  afford  Mails  as 
ftrong  as  thofe  we  have  from  Norway  j and  if  there 
were  occafion,  all  forts  of  Ships  might  be  bulk  there  r 
For  if  you’ll  believe  the  Carpenters,  the  Oak  of 
that  Country  is  better  than  ours  in  Europe,  ia  a 
word,  ’tis  a very  fine  Country  ; the  Climate  is  in* 
different  temperate,  the  Air  is  pure  and  wholefom, 
the  Waters  clear  and  light,  and  there’s  good  accom- 
modation for  Hunting,  Shooting,  and  Filliing.  The 
Animals  that  we  naeet  with  there  moft  commonly, 
are  Beavers,  Otters,  and  Sea-Calves,  all  of  ’em  be^ 

' ing  very  numerous.  Thofe  who  love  Meat  are  in- 
debted to  the  Dodlors,  who  perfwaded  the  Popes  to 
Metamorphofe  thefe  terreftrial  Animals  into  Fiflif 
for  they  are  allow’d  to  eat  of  ’em  without  fcruple 
in  the  time  of  Lent.  To  be  plain,  the  knowledge 
1 have  of  that  Country,  makes  me  forefee  that  the 
Engl^  will  be  makers  of  it  fome  time  or  other.  ï 
could  give  very  piaufible  reafons  for  the  Prophecy. 
They  have  already  begun  to  ruine  the  Commerce 
that  the  French  had  with  the  Savages,  and  in  a fhort 
time,  they’ll  compafs  its  intire  Deftrudion.  The 

French 


2 2 i Some  ISieiP  Voyages 

French  they  will  prize  their  Goods  too  high,  though 
they  are  not  fo  good  as  thofe  of  the  Englijh  j and  yet 
the  Englijh  fell  their  Commodities  cheaper.  ’Twere 
a pity  that  we  fliould  tamely  leave  to  the  Englifh  a 
Country,  theConqueliof  which  they  have  attempt- 
ed fo  often,  in  confideration  of  our  Fur-trade  and 
and  Cod-filLing.  ’Tis  impoffible  to  hinder  ’em  to 
poifefs  themfelves  of  the  Settlements  upon  the  Coaft 
of  Acadia^  by  reafon  that  they  lye  at  fuch  a diftance 
from  one  another  ; fo  that  they’ll  certainly  fucceed  in 
fuch  Enterprifes,  as  indeed  they  have  done  already. 
The  French  Governours,  they  aâ  with  the  fame  view, 
as  many  of  thofe  who  are  imploy’d  in  Pofts  beyond 
Sea.  They  look  upon  their  place  as  a Gold  Mine 
given  ’em,  in  order  to  enrich  themfelves  j fo  that 
the  publick  Good,  muft  always  march  behind  pri- 
vate Intereft.  Mr,  de  Meneval  fufFer’d  the  Englijh 
to  poffefs  themfelves  of  Port  Royal,  becaufe  that  place 
was  cover’d  with  nothing  but  (ingle  Palilïadb’s. 
But  why  was  it  not  better  fortified  ? 1 can  tell  you 
the  reafon  j he  thought  he  had  time  enough  to  fill 
his  Pockets,  before  the  Englip  would  attack  it.  This 
Governour  fucceeded  to  Mr.  Perrot,  who  was  broke 
with  Difgrace,  for  having  made  it  his  chief  bufinefs' 
fo  enrich  himfelf;  and  after  returning  to  France, 
went  back  again  with  feveral  Ships  laden  with  Goods, 
.in  order  to  fet  up  for  a private  Merchant  in  that 
Country.  While  Mr.  Perrot  was  Governour,  he  fuf- 
fer’d  the  to  poffefs  themfelves 'of  feveral  ad- 

vantageous Pofts,  without  offering  to  ftir.'  His  chief 
bufinefs  was  to  go  in  Barques  from  River  to  River, 
in  order  to  traffick  with  the  Savages:  And  after  he 
was  difgrac’d,  he  was  not  contented  with  a Com- 
merce upon  the  Coafts  of  Acadia,  but  would  needs 
extend  it  to  the  Enghp  Plantations  ; but  it  coft  him' 
dear,  for  fome  Pyrates  fell  in  with  him,  and  after 
feizing  his  Barques,  duck’d  himfelf,  upon  which  hef 
died  immediately. 

The 


fo  Nbr^/?- America.  2i| 

The  three  principal  Savage  Nations  that  live  upon 
the  Coaftsof  are  the xht-Mlkmah^ 

and  the  Canïbas,  There  are  fome  other  erratick  Na- 
tions, w ho  go  and  come  from  Acadia,  to  New-  England ^ 
and  ^o\iy  Û\QX\zvc\tioï MahÎKgansyScccokisfi.Tià.  Ofenan- 
go.  The  firfl:  three  ("having  fix’d  Habitations)  are  in- 
tirely  in  the  interefts  of  the  and  I muft  fay,  that 

in  time  of  War  they  gall  the  Englijh  Colonies  with 
their  Incurfions,  fo  much,  that  we  ought  to  take 
care  to  perpetuate  a good  underftanding  between 
them  and  us.  The  Baron  of  Saint  Cajleins,  a Gen- 
tleman of  Oleron  in  Bearn,  having  liv’d  among  the 
Abenakis  after  the  Savage  way,  for  above  twenty 
years,  is  fo  much  refpeded  by  the  Savages,  that  they 
look  upon  him  as  their  Tutelar  God.  He  was  for- 
merly an  Officer  of  the  Carignan  Regiment  in  Ca~ 
nada  ‘,  and  upon  the  breaking  of  that  Regiment, 
threw  himfeif  among  the  Savages,  whole  Language 
ihe  had  learn’d.  He  married  among  ’em  after  their 
faffiion,  and  prefer’d  the  Forrefts  of  Acadia  to  the 
Pyrenean  Mountasins,  that  encompafs  the  place  of  his 
Nativity  : For  the  firft  years  of  his  abode  with  the 
iSavages,  he  behav’d  himlelf  lb,  as  to  draw  an  inex- 
preffible  efteem  from  ’em.  They  made  him  their 
Great  Chief  or  Leader,  who  is  in  a manner  the  So- 
|/eraign  of  the  Nation  ; and  by  degrees  he  has  work’d 
limfelf  into  fuch  a Fortune,  which  any  Man  but 
le  would  have  made  fuch  ule  of,  as  to  draw  out  of 
hat  Country  above  two  or  three  hundred  thoufand 
browns,  which  he  has  now  in  his  Pocket  in  good 
Iry  Gold.  But  all  the  ufe  he  makes  of  if,  is,  to 
)uy  up  Goods  for  Prefents  to  his  Fellow-Sa- 
ages,^  who  upon  their  return  from  Hunting,  pre- 
ent  him  with  Beaver-Skins  to  a treble  value.  The 
lovernours  General  of  Canada  keep  in  with  him, 
nd  the  Governours  of  New-England  are  afraid  of 
iim.  He  has  feveral  Daughters,  who  are,  all  of 

’em, 


2 24  Some  l^eu>  Voyages 

’em,  married  very  handfomly  to  Fre»c^«?ew,  andha^ 
good  Dowries.  He  has  never  chang’d  his  Wife } 
by  which  means  he  mean’d  to  give  the  Savages  to 
underhand,  that  God  do’s  not  love  inconftant  Folks. 
’Tis  faid,  that  he  indeavour’d  to  convert  thefe  poor 
People,  but  his  indeavours  prov’dfuccefslefsj  fothat 
’tis  in  vain  for  thejefuits  to  preach  up  the  Truths 
of  Chriftianity  to  ’em  ; though  after  all,  thefe  good 
Fathers  are  not  difcourag’d,  nay,  they  think  that 
the  adminiftring  of  Baptifm  to  a dying  Child,  is 
worth  ten  times  the  pains  and  uneafinefs  of  living 
aipong  that  People. 

Tort^Rpyalj  the  Capital  or  the  only  City  of  Aca- 
dia,  is  in  efFed  nomore  than  a little  paultpy  Town, 
that  is  fomewhat  inlarg’d  fincethe  War  broke  out  in 
1689.  by  the  acceflîonof  the  Inhabitants  that  liv’d 
ïiQUï  Bofion, the  Metropolitan  of  A great 

many  of  thefe  People  retir’d  to  Tort- Royal,  upon 
the  apprehenfion  that  the  Englijh  would  pillage  ’em, 
and  carry  ’em  into  their  Country.  Mr.  de  Mem- 
•val  furrendred  this  place  to  the  Englijh,  as  1 faid  be- 
fore ; he  could  not  maintain  fuch  a poft  with  the 
handful  of  Men  that  he  had,  becaufe  the  Paliffadoes 
were  low,  and  out  of  order.  He  made  a Capitula- 
tion with  the  Commander  of  the  Party  that  made 
the  Attack;  but  the  Englijh OfUcsr  broke  his  word 
to  him,  and  us’d  him  both  ignominioufly  and 
harfiily.  Tort-Royal  is  feated  in  t|te  Latitude  of  44 
Degrees , and  40  Minutes,  upon  the  edge  of  a 
very  fine  Bafin  , which  is  a League  broad,  and 
two  Leagues  long,  having  at  the  entry  about  fix- 
teen  or  eighteen  fathom  Water  on  one  fide,  and  fix 
or  feven  on  the  other  ; for  you  muft  know  that  the 
Ifland  call’d  Tijle  aux  Chevres  which  Bands  in  the  . 
the  middle,  divides  the  Channel  into  two.  There’s  ; 
excellent  anchorage  all  over  the  Bafin  ; and  at  the 
bottom  of  it,  there’s  a Cape  or  point  of  Land  thad 
parts  two  Rivers,  at  which  the  tide  rifes  ten  or 

twelvâ  I 


N E w 


^vuth  hti.\ 

■>  awvt^ 

Smit;S  SütvnJ.  'Ÿ>^  ‘ 

n w^ütii  , ^P  iF 


^.^H^rlll^cit  . 


Jiratts  £rf  ^Beüe^ 

^ û,  io.  xa,  ja  . ^ 

'‘'-.  talCZÉBniÉS!ldBBKâ!!S3BB3Bd 


Vtrl.X.  j7.  zzj' 


C-oty 


éftLXtt  JT, 


C^ll 


3aîvne.^.  j 

® •^Wj  d 

ÿWÆ  -n 


,iCace 


3^ 


to  North  Amenta,. 

twelve  Foot.  Thefe  Rivers  are  bounded  by  plea- 
fcnt  Meads,  which  in  Spring  and  Autumn  are  co- 
ver’d with  all  forts  of  freih  Water-foul.  In  fine, 
Tort-Royal  is  only  a handful  of  Houfes  two  Story 
high,  and  has  but  few  Inhabitants  of  any  Note.  It 
, fubfifts  apon  the  traffick  of  the  Skins,  which  the 
I Savages  brir^  thither  to  truck  for  Euràpean  Goods. 
In  former  times,  the  Farmer’s  Company  had  Ma- 
gazins  in  this  place,  which  were  under  the  care 
1 of  the  Governours.  I could  eafily  mention  fome 
of  ’em,  if  I were  not  apprehenfive  that  thefe  Me- 
moirs may  be  fecn  by  others  befides  your  felf. 

The  Ifland  of  Newfound- Land,  is  three  hundred 
Leagues  in  Circumference.  It  lies  at  the  diftance 
of  fix  hundred  and  fifty  Leagues  from  France,  and 
forty  or  fifty  Leagues  from  the  Bank  of  the  fame 
name.  The  South  fide  of  the  Ifland  belongs  to  the 
French,  who  have  feveral  Settlements  there  for  the 
fifliing  of  Cod.  The  Eaft  fide  is  inhabited  by  the 
Englijh,  who  are  poflfefs’d  of  feveral  confiderable 
Polls,  fituated  in  certain  Ports,  Bays,  and  Havens, 
which  they  have  taken  care  to  fortifie.  The  Weft 
of  the  Ifland  iswaffc,  and  was  never  yet  poiTefs’d. 
The  Ifland  is  of  a triangular  Figure,  and  full  of 
Mountains,  and  impradicableForrefts.  It  has  fome 
great  Meadows,  or  rather  Heaths,  which  are  cover- 
ed with  a fort  of  Mofs  inftead  of  Grafs.  The  Soil 
of  this  Country  is  good  for  nothing,  as  being  a 
mixture  of  Gravel,  Sand  and  Stones  ; fo  that  the 
Fifliery  was  the  only  motive  that  induc’d  the  French 

I and  the  Englijh  to  fettle  there.  It  affords  great  ftore 
of  Game,  for  Water-fowl,  Patridgesand  Hairs  5 
but  as  for  the  Stags,  ’tis  alrnoft  impoffifile  to  come 
S at  ’em,  by  reafon  that  the  Mountains  are  fo  high, 

I and  the  Woods  fo  thick.  In  this  Ifl^d,  as  well  as 
in  that  of  Cape  Breton,  we  find  Porphyry  of  fe- 
veral colours  I and  care  has  been  taken  to  fend  to 
■^France  fome  pieesi  of  it  for  a Patrero,  which  were 

Q,  found 


rxô  Some  New  Voyages 

found  to  be  very  pretty,  only  they  were  hard  to  cut. 

J.  havefeen  fcmeof ’em  that  were  red  ft reak’d  with 
green,  and  feem’d  to  be  extream  fine  ; but  the  mif- 
chief  is,  itfpHts  fo  when  ’tis  taken  out  of  the  Quar- 
ries, that  it  cannot  be  made  ufe  of,  but  by  way  of 
incruftation. 

This  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton  affords  likewife 
black  Marble,  or  a fort  of  Brefche  with  grey  Veins, 
which  is  hard,  and  not  eafily  polifh’d.  This  Stone 
is  apt  to  fplit,  for  ’tis  not  equally  hard,  and  it  has 
knots  in  it.  There  are  no  fetled  Savages  in  the  I- 
fland  of  Newfound-Land.  ’Tis  true,  the  Eskimaux  do 
fometimes  crofs  over  to  it  at  the  Streight  of  Bede  IJle 
in  great  Sloops,  with  intent  to  furprife  the  Crew  of 
the  Filhermen  upon  the  Coaft  call’d  Vetit  Nord.  Our 
Settlements  are  at  Placentia,  at  the  Ifland  of  St.  Peter,  \ 
and  in  the  Bay  of  TrepaJJez.  From  Cape  Rafe  to  Cha~ 
feau  Rouge,  the  Coaft:  is  very  clean,  but  from  Chapeau 
Rouge  to  Cape  Rafe,  the  Rocks  render  it  dangerous,  i 
There  are  two  conllderable  Inconveniences,  that  at-  ! 
tend  the  landing  upon  this  Ifland.  In  the  firft  place, 
the  Fogs  are  here  fo  thick  in  the  Summer,  for  twenty 
Leagues  off  into  the  Main,  that  the  ablefi:  and  moft 
expert  Sailor  dare  not  ftand  into  the  Land  while  : 
they  laft  : So  that  all  Ships  are  oblig’d  to  lye  bye 
for  a clear  day,  in  order  to  make  the  Land.  The 
fécond  Inconveniency,  which  is  yet  greater,  pro- 
ceeds from  the  Currents  which  run  to  and  again, 
without  any  perceivable  variation,  by  which  means 
the  Ships  are  fometimes  drove  in  upon  the  Coaft, 
when  they  reckon  upon  ten  Leagues  offing.  Bur, 
which  is  worft  of  all,  the  infenfible  motion  of  the 
rowling  Waves, throw’s  ’eminlbnfibly  upon  theRocks, 
which  they  cannot  poffibly  avoid,for  want  of  ground 
to  anchor  upon.  ’Twas  by  this  means  that  the 
King’s  Ship  the  Pretty  w'as  loft  in  1692,  as  well  as  a 
great  many  others  upon  feveral  occalions. 


Of 


to  Iwf/?- America.  227 

Of  all  our  Settlements  in  North- Vlacen- 
iia  is  the  Poft  of  the  greateft  Importance  and  Ser- 
vice to  the  King,  in  regard  that  ’tis  a place  of  re- 
fuge to  the  Ships  that  are  oblig’d  to  put  into  a Har- 
bour, when  they  go  or  come  from  Canada,  and  even 
to  thole  which  come  from  So\xth-4merica,  when 
they  want  to  take  in  frefh  Water  or  Provifi» 
ons,  and  have  Iprung  their  Mails,  or  been  dam- 
mag’d  in  a Storm  This  place  is  lituated  in  the  La- 
titude of  47  Degrees,  and  fome  Minutes,  almoft  at 
the  bottom  of  the  Bay  that  goes  by  the  fame  name. 
The  Bay  is  ten  or  twelve  Leagues  broad,  and  twenty 
j odd  Leagues  long.  The  Fort  ftands  upon  the  fide 
of  a Neck  or  narrow  Streight,  which  is  fixty  Paces 
' over,  and  fix  Fathoms  water  deep.  The  Ships  that 
enter  into  the  Port,  are  oblig’d  to  graze,  ( Ib  to 
fpeak  ) upon  the  angle  of  the  Baûions.  The  Port 
or  Harbour  is  a League  long,  and  a quarter  of  a 
League  over  : Before  the  Port  there’s  a large,  fine 
road,  which  is  a League  and  a half  wide  ; but  lies 
lb  bleak  to  the  North- Weft,  and  Weft- North- Weft 
Winds,  the  ftrongeft  and  moft  boifterous  Winds  that 
^ are,  that  neither  Cables  nor  Anchors,  nor  large  flout 
Ships  can  withftand  their  furious  (hocks  j tho’  indeed 
; thele  violent  ftorms  feldom  happen  but  in  the  lat- 
ter end  of  Autumn.  The  fame  year  that  the  Pretty 
was  loft,  the  King  loft  another  of  69  Guns  call’d 

ithe  Good,  in  this  Road  ; and  if  the  four  or  five  other 
Ships  that  belong’d  to  the  fame  Squadron,  had  not 
took  the  precaution  of  fleering  into  the  Port,  they 
had  certainly  underwent  the  fame  fate.  This  Road 
f!  then  which  is  only  expos’d  to  the  North-Weft,  and 

i Weft-North-Weft  Winds,  has  fome  hidden  Rocks 
on  the  North  fide,  befides  thofe  at  Pomme  Verte,  where 
i feveral  of  the  Inhabitants  are  wont  to  filb.  All  thefe 
i things  you  may  fee  plainly  upon  the  Plan  that  Ï 
Cent  you  along  with  tny  Letter. 

z C 


,oro^ 


2i8  Some  Voyages 

Commonly,  there  comes  thirty  or  forty  Ships 
from  France  to  Tlacentia  every  year,  and  fometimes 
fixty;  Some  come  with  intent  to  fifh,  and  others 
have  no  other  defign  than  to  truck  With  the  Inha- 
bitants, who  live  in  the  Summer  time  on  the  other 
fide  of  the  Fort.  The  ground  upon  which  their  Hou- 
fes  Hand,  is  call’d  La  grand  Grave,  for  in  efFeâ:,  they 
have  nothing  but  Gravel  to  fpread  their  Cod-fim 
upon,  in  order  to  have  ’em  dry’d  by  the  Sun  after 
they  are  falted.  The  Inhabitants  and  the  Frew^Filher- 
men,fend  their  Sloops  every  day  two  Leagues  off  the 
Port  to  purfue  the  Filhery  j and  fometimes  the  Sloops 
return  fo  over-loaded,  that  they  are  in  a manner  bu- 
ry’d  in  the  Water.  You  cannot  imagine  how  deep 
they  fink,  and  ’tis  impoffible  you  fiiould  believe  it, 
unlefs  you  faw  it.  The  Filhery  commences  in  the 
beginning  of  June,  and  is  at  an  end  about  the  mid- 
dle of  Augu^.  In  the  Harbour  they  catch  a little 
fort  of  a filh,  which  they  put  upon  their  Hooks  as  a 
bait  for  the  Cod. 

Placentia  is  in  great  want  of  Gravel,  which  oc- 
cafions  the  thinnefs  of  the  Inhabitants.  If  the  Go- 
vernours  prefer’d  the  King’s  Service  to  Avarice,  they  ^ 
might  make  it  a confiderable  Poll,  and  a great  ma-  ; 
ny  would  make  gravel  Walks  at  their  own  charge  ; 
but  as  long  as  the  Governours  prey  upon  the  for- 
tunes of  private  Men,  under  the  fair  pretence  of 
the  King’s  Service,  which  is  always  in  their  Mouths, 

I can’t  fee  that  this  Settlement  will  ever  be  in- 
larg’d  or  improv’d.  Do’s  not  the  Governour  dif 
grace  his  Prince,  and  fink  the  charaéfer  of  his  Poll, 
in  turning  Filherman,  Merchant,  Vintner,  and  &A- 
ing  in  the  way  of  a thoufand  meaner  and  more  i 
Mechanical  Trades?  Is  not  this  a piece  of  Tyran- 
ny? To  force  the  Inhabitants  to  buy  what  Goods 
they  want,  out  of  fuch  and  fuch  a Ship,  and  to  fell 
their  Cod  to  fuch  other  Ships  as  the  Governour  is 
interefs’d  in,  and  that  as  a principal  Owner  : To 

appro- 

'■1 


to  TSlorth'A.mtïK2i, 

appropriate  to  himfelf  the  Rigging  and  Tackle  of 
the  Ships  that  are  call  away  upon  theCoaft,  to  flop 
the  Crew  of  Merchantmen  for  his  own  Filhery,  to 
fell  Habitations  or  Settlements,  to  ftifle  the  bidding 
up  for  EfFeéts  fold  by  way  of  Audion  that  he  may  in^ 
grofsthem  by  his  foie  Authority, to  change  the  Pfovi- 
flons  laid  up  in  Magazines  for  his  Majefty’s  Troops, 
to  carry  off  the  good  Biskuit  and  put  bad  in  the 
room  of  it,  to  make  fo  much  Beef  and  BaCon  for 
the  fubfiftance  of  the  Garrifon,  to  force  the  Inha- 
bitants to  fend  their  Servants  and  Carpenters  to 
fome  work,  in  which  his  Majefty’s  Service  is  lefs 
concern’d  than  his  own  Pocket  : Thefe,  I fay,  are 
things  that  I take  to  be  plain  infraélions  of  the  Or- 
ders iffued  forth  by  Lewis  the  XIV.  Thefe  are  a- 
I buffs  that  muft  be  redrefs’d,  if  we  would  have  the 
King  to  be  well  ffrv’d  : And  yet  there’s  nothing 
done  in  it.  For  my  part,  I am  unacquainted  with  the 
I reafon  of  the  delay  ; thoff  that  have  a mind  to  know, 
had  beft  ask  the  Deputies  of  Monfieur  Je  P * * *. 
I am  fully  perfwaded,  that  all  thefe  Pyracies  do  not 
come  to  the  King’s  Ear,  for  he’s  too  juft  to  fuffer 
^em. 

To  conclude  j Placentia  bears  neither  Corn,  nor 
Rie,  nor  Peaff,  for  the  Soil  is  good  for  nothing  j 
not  to  mention,  that  if  it  were  as  good  and  as  fer- 
tile as  any  m Canada,  yet  no  body  would  give  them-' 
felves  the  trouble  to  cultivate  it  ; for  one  Man  earns 
: roorein  Cod-filhing  in  one  Summer,  than  ten  would 
do  in  the  way  of  Agriculture,  In  the  great  Bay  of 
^ 'Placentia,  there  are  fome  little  Harbours,  (befides 
çhat  of  the  Fort  ) which  the  Bifcaj  FiOiermen  re-^ 
fort  to.  Such  are  the  little  and  the  great  B^rin,  St, 

; l.çtuvençe,  Martir^  Cbapmt  Bouge,  &ç. 


S 


1^0 


Some  New  Voyages 


A Lift  of  the  Savage  Nations  o/"  Canada. 


The  Ahenakis. 
The  Micmac, 
The  Canibas, 


Tloofe  in  Acadia. 


Thefe  are  all  of  ’em  good  War- 
rionrs  ; they  arc  nrore  aâive  and 


Mahingans.  >le(s  cruel  than  the  Iroojucfe.  Their 


1 he  Openangos. 
The  Soccokis. 
The  Etechemins. 


Language  differs  a little  from  that 
of  the  Algcnkms. 


The  Nations  that  Ije  upon  the  Rsver  of  St.  Laurence, 
from  the  Sea  to  Monreul. 


The  Tapinachois.  7 t 

The  Aiountaneers.^  ^ 

The  Gafpeftans 

The  Harons  of  Loreto,  the  Iroquefe  Tongue. 

'The  Abenakü  of  Scilleri,}  i - r 

The  ' Î The  Language 

The  Agnies  of  the  Fall  call’d  Sant  St,  Louts  j they 
fpeak  the  Iroquefe  Language,  and  are  good  War- 
riours. 

The  Iroqaefe  of  the  Mountain  of  Momeal  ; they  fpeak 
the  Iroqaefe  Language,  and  are  a brave  People. 


fpeak  the  Algonkin  Lan* 


Thofe  upon  the  Lake  of  Hurons. 


The  Hurons,  the  Iroquefe  Language. 

The  Outaouas, 

The  Nockes, 

The  Mifftfagues.{ 

The  Attikamek.  ^ 

The  Outehipoues,  alias  Sauteurs,  good  Warriour=- 


The  Algonkin  Language, 


to  North  America» 


^3» 


Upon  the  Ilinefè  Lake,  and  the  adjacent  Comtry. 


Some  llinefe  at  Chegakou. 

The  Oumamis,  good  Warriours. 

The  Maskoutens, 

The  Kikapous,  good  Warriours.  - 

The  Outagamis,  good  Warriours. . " ^‘’'^^^«Language, 
Malm-mi  «ndarc^afprjghtly 


They  fpeak  the 


The  Vonteouatamü. 

The  Ojatimns,  good  Warriours. 
The  Sakts. 


Iadive  fort  of  Peo- 
ple. 


In  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Lake  Frontenac. 


TheTfonontouani.')  -pj.^gpg  fpeak  a different  Lan- 

ihQ  Onmtagues.  o <b 

The  Onnoyoutes  and  Agnks,  at  a fmall  diftance. 


Near  the  River  of  the  Outaouas. 


The  Tabitibi. 

The  MonZaOni. 

The  Machakandibi. 

The  Nopemen  d' AchirinU 
The  I^epifrini. 

The  Temiskammk. 

To  the  North  of  Miffifipi,  and  upon  the  Confines  of  the 
Upper  Lake,  and  Hudfon’s  Bay. 

The  Nadouejfis.  "| 

The  AJfimpouals» 

The  Sonkaskitons. 

The  Ouadbatons. 

The  Atintons.  ^Thefe  fpeak  Algonkin, 

TheC2'^)?/«oj  brave’ 

Warriour’s  and 
adive  brisk  Men. 

The  Ekimaux. 

0.4 


1 They  fpeak  the  Algon- 
^kin  Language,  and  all  of 
’em  are  very  cowardly. 


À 


a j 1 Some  ISlew  Voyages 

A Lift  ef  the  An'mah  of  the  South  Countries  of  Ca? 
nada. 

Wild  Beeves. 

Little  Stags  or  Harts. 

Roebucks  of  three  different  Species. 

Wolves,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Èurope. 

Lynx’s,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Michibichi,  a fort  of  baftard  Tygre. 

Ferrets  7 • 

Weefels  Europe. 

Alh- colour’d  Squirrels. 

Rabbets  Europe. 

Badgers,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

White  Beavers,  but  very  fcarce. 

Reddifh  Bears.  ' 

Musk  Rats, 

Reddifh  Foxes,  as  in  Europe. 

Crocodiles  in  the  MiJJtfipi. 

Ojfa,  an  Animal  like  a Hare,  upon  the  MiJftfpL 

A Lifi  of  the  Animals  of  the  North  Countries  o/*  Canady. 

Orignals  or  Elks. 

Caribous  or  wild  Affes. 

Black  Foxes. 

Silver  colour’d  Foxes. 

A fort  of  wild  Cats,  call’d  Enfans  du  Eiahle,  or  tlie 
Devil’s  Children. 

Carcaious,  an  Animal  not  unlike  a Badger. 
Porcupines. 

Fontereaux,  an  Amphibious  fort  of  little  Pole- 
Cats. 

Martins. 

Pole- Cats,  fuch  as  we  have  in 
Black  Bears. 


White 


to  North  Amcmi.  iH 

White  Bears. 

SifBeurs,  an  Animal  that  makes  a whizzing  noife» 
Flying  Squirrels. 

White  Hares.  ' 

Beavers. 

Otters. 

Musk-Rats. 

SuiJJe  Squirrels,  or  a fort  of  Squirrels,  whofe  Hair  rq-^ 
fembles  a Suijfes  Doublet. 

Great  Harts. 

Sea- Wolves  or  Calves. 


A Defcriptio»  of  fuch  Animals  or  Beafts,  as  are  not  menv 
tiond  in  the  Letters. 

THe  Michihichi  is  a fort  of  Tyger,  "rhj  Animait 
only  ’tis  lefs  than  the  common  Ty-  ^ 
ger,  and  not  fo  much  Ipeckl  d.  As  loon 
as  it  defcries  a Man,  it  runs  away,  and  climbs 
the  firft  Tree  it  meets  with.  It  attacks  all  brute 
Animals  whatfoever,  and  conquers  ’em  with  eafe  ; 
and,  which  is  very  lingular  and  peculiar  to  it  above 
all  other  Animals,  it  runs  in  to  the  affiftance  of  the 
Savages,  when  they  purfue  Bears  and  wild  Beeves  ; 
upon  fuch  occafions  it  makes  as  if  ’twere  afFraid 
of  no  body,  and  Tally’s  out  with  fury  upon  the 
hunted  Animal.  The  Savages  call  thefe  Animals  a 
fort  of  Manitous,  that  is.  Spirits  that  love  Men;  and 
’tis  upon  that  fcore  they  efteem  and  refped  ’em  to 
fuch  a degree,  that  they  would  choofe  rather  to  die, 
than  to  kill  pne  of  ’em. 

The  white  Beavers  are  much  valued,  upon  the  ac- 
count of  their  being  uncommon,  though  at  the 
fame  time,  their  Hair  is  neither  fo  large  nor  fo  finp 
as  that  of  the  common  Beavers.  As  there  are  but 
few  of  thefe  white  Beavers,  fp  thqfe  vyhich  are  quite 
black  are  very  fcarce. 


2^4  Sortie  ISlew  Voyages 

The  Reddijh  Bears  are  mifchievous  Creatures,  for 
they  fall  fiercely  upon  the  Huntfmen,  whereas  the 
black  ones  fly  from  ’em.  The  former  fort  are  lefs, 
and  more  nimble  than  the  latter. 

The  Crocodiles  of  MiJJifipi,  are  exa(ffly  the  fame 
with  thofe  of  the  JVz/e  and  other  places.  I have 
feen  that  Crocodile  that  is  at  Rngolifraa  in  Aejuitainey 
and  find  that  it  has  the  lame  figure  with  thefe,  on- 
ly ’tis  fomewhat  lefs.  The  moft  ufual  method  that 
the  Savages  have  for  taking ’em  alive,  is  to  throw 
great  Wreaths  or  Cords  made  of  the  barks  of  Trees 
with  a running  knot,  upon  their  Neck,  the  middle 
of  their  Body,  their  Paws,  &c.  After  they  are  thus 
fiez’d,  they  fhut  ’em  up  between  ten  or  twelve 
Stakes,  and  there  tie  ’em  after  their  Belly  is  turn’d 
upwards.  While  they  lie  in  this  pofture,  they  flea 
’em  without  touching  their  Head  or  their  Tail,  and 
give  ’em  a Coat  of  Fir-bark,  to  which  they  fet  fire, 
having  cut  the  Ropes  that  keep’d  ’em  fafl.  Upon 
fuch  occafions,  thefe  Animals  make  a fearful  houl- 
ing  and  crying.  To  conclude,  the  Savages  are  fre- 
quently fwallow’d  up  by  thefe  Creatures,  whether 
in  fwimming  over  a River,  or  in  fieeping  upon  its 
Banks.  Arkfie  in  the  68Diapafon  of  his  ijrASong, 
gives  this  Defcription  of  a Crocodile. 

Vive  fuh  liio  e dentro  a la  Riviera  y 
Ei  Cor  pi  Xjmani  jon  le  fue  Vivandcy 
De  le  Ver  [one  mifere  è mcaisîe, 

Di  Viand  anti  è d inf  dice  naute. 

That  is,  it  lives  both  in  the  River,  and  upon  its 
Banks  ; it  fquafhes  People  with  its  murdering  Tooth  j 
it  feeds  upon  the  Bodies  of  poor  Travellers,  of  un- 
fortunate Palfengers,  and  Sailours. 

The  Ojjdy  are  little  Animals  like  Hares,  and  re- 
femble  ’em  in  every  thing,  excepting  the  Ears  and 
Hind-feet.  They  run,  and  cannot  climb.  Their 

Females 


■ ‘i 


to  Nbrf/?  America.  2^5 

Females  have  a Bag  under  their  Belly,  where  their 
young  ones  enter  upon  a purfuit,  in  order  to  fave 
themlelves  along  with  the  Mother,  who  immedi- 
ately betakes  her  felf  to  flight. 

The  Silver- colour’d  Foxes  are  of  the  The  Animals 
fame  ihape  with  thofe  of  Europe,  as 
well  as  the  black  ones.  The  black 
ones  are  very  fcarce,  and  whofoever 
catches  one,  is  fure  to  fell  it  for  its  weight  in  Gold. 
This  fpecies  is  met  with  only  in  the  coldeft  Coun- 
tries. 

The  White  Bears  are  a monftrous  Animal,  and  ex- 
traordinary long  ; their  Head  has  a formidable  Af- 
peft,  and  their  Hair  is  very  large  and  thick  ; they 
are  fo  fierce,  that  they’ll  come  and  attack  a Sloop 
in  the  Sea,  with  feven  or  eight  Men  in  it.  ’Tis 
faid,  that  they’ll  fwim  fix  or  (even  Leagues  without 
being  tyr’d.  They  live  upon  Fifli  and  Shells  upon 
the  Sea-lhoar,  from  whence  they  feldom  ftragglc 
far.  I never  faw  but  one  of  ’em  in  my  Life-time, 
which  had  certainly  tore  me  to  pieces,  if  I had 
not  fpy’d  it  at  a diftance,  and  fo  had  time  to  run 
back  tor  fhelter  to  FortLe«à  at  Vlacentia. 

The  Flying  Squirrels  are  as  big  as  a large  Rat,  and 
of  a greyilh  white  colour.  They  are  as  droufie,  as 
thofe  of  the  other  Species  are  watchful.  They  are 
call’d  Flying  Squirrels,  in  regard  that  they  fly  from 
one  Tree  to  another,  by  the  means  of  a certain  Skin 
which  ftretches  it  felf  out  in  the  form  of  a Wing, 
when  they  make  thefe  little  Flights. 

The  WhiteHares  are  only  fuch  in  Winter, for  as  foort 
as  the  Spring  comes  on,  they  begin  to  turn  grayifh, 
and  by  degrees  recover  the  fame  colour  as  our  Hares 
have  in  France,  which  they  hold  till  the  end  of 
Autumn. 

The  Suijje  Squirrels  are  little  Animals,  refembling 
little  Rats.  The  Epithet  of  SuiJJe  is  beftow’d  upon 
’em,  in  regard  that  the  Hair  which  covers  their  Bo- 
dy, 


2y6  Some  Voyages 

dy,  is  ftréak’d  with  black  and  white,  and  refêsir 
bles  a Suijfes  Doublet  ; and  that  thefe  ftreaks  make 
a ring  on  each  Thigh,  which  bears  a great  deal  of 
refemblance  to  a Suijfes  Cap. 

The  large  Stags  are  neither  higher  nor  thicker,than 
thofe  we  have  in  Europe  ; but  they  are  call’d  large 
in  proportion  to  two  other  Species  of  Harts  that 
frequent  the  Southern  Countries.  The  lelTer  fort 
affords  the  moft  deliciou?  Meat. 

The  Sea-Wolvesf  which  fome  call  Sea-Calves^  are 
as  big  as  MaflifFs.  They  are  almoft  always  in  the 
Water,  or  at  leaft  they  never  go  far  from  the  Sea 
fide.  Thefe  Animals  do  not  walk  fb  much  as  they 
crawl,  for  when  they  raife  themfelves  out  of  the  Wa- 
ter, they  only  creep  upon  the  Sand  or  Clay.  Their 
Head  has  the  form  of  an  Otter’s  Head,  and  their 
Feet,  which  have  no  Legs,  referable  thofe  qf  aGoofe. 
The  Female  kind  bring  forth  their  young  ones  upon 
the  Rocks,  or  upon  fome  little  Iflands,  juft  by  the 
Sea.  The  Sea-Wolves  live  upon  Filh,  and  refort  to 
cold  Countries.  There’s  a prodigious  number  of 
^em  about  the  Mouth  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence. 

As  for  the  remaining  Animals  of  Canada,  I gave 
you  an  account  of  ’em  in  my  Letters.  I will  not 
offer  to  Ihew  you  what  methods  the  Savages  take  to 
catch  or  kill  all  thefe  Animals,  for  fuch  an  under- 
taking would  be  endlefs.  This  I can  affure  you  of  in 
the  general,  that  they  rarely  go  a Hunting  to  no 
purpofe,  and  that  they  make  no  ufe  of  their  Dogs, 
but  in  the  Hunting  of  Elks,  and  fometimes  in  Hunt- 
ing of  Beavers,  as  you  lhall  fee  under  the  Head  cf 
the  Diverfjons  of  Hunting  and  Shooting  among  the 
Savages. 


4 


to  North  Atncnca. 


^17 


4 Lifi  of  the  Fowl  or  Birds  that  frequent  the  South  Coun~ 
tries  of 

Vultures. 

Huards,  a River-fowl  as  big  as  a Goofe. 

Swans. 

Black  Geefe./ 

Black  Ducks.V 

Plungeons.  Yuch  as  we  have  in  Europe, 

Coots. 

Rayles. 

Turkeys. 

Red  Partridges. 

Pheafants. 

Large  Eagles. 

Cranes.  7 

Blackbirds.^fuch  as  we  have  in  Enroba» 

Thrulhes.  S 
Wood-Pigeons. 

Parrots. 

fallows  Eurofe. 

Several  forts  of  Birds  of  Prey  that  are  not  known 

in  Europe. 

Nightingales  unknown  in  Europe,  as  well  as  lèverai 
other  little  Birds  of  different  colours,  particularly 
that  call’d  Oifeau  Mouche,  a very  little  Bird  refem^ 
bling  a Fly  j and  great  quantities  of  Pelicans. 

The  Birds  of  the  North  Countries  of  Canada. 

wti?é  Geefe.}^”*  “ 

Ducks  of  ten  or  twelve  forts. 

Teals. 

Sea-Mews. 

Grelans. 

Sterlets. 


Some  New  Voyages 


258 

Sea-Parrots. 

Moyacks. 

Cormorants.  ' 

Heath-Cocks. 

Snipes. 

Plungeons. 

Plo'/ers.  I 

Lapwings.  Vfuch  as  we  have  in  Eurofe, 

Herns. 

Courbeious. 

The  Water- 
Fowl  call’d 
Che-valier.  j, 

Beateurs  de  Faux,  a Fowl  as  big  as  a Quail. 

White  Partridges. 

Large  black  Partridges. 

Reddilh  Partridges. 

Woodhens. 

Turtledoves. 

White  Ortolans,  a Bird  no  bigger  than  a Lark. 

Ravenf'"}^'^^^  as  we  have  in  Eurefe. 

Vultures. 

Spar-Hawks.  7 

Merlins.  ^like  ours  in  Europe. 

Swallows.  S 

Bees  De  feie,  a fort  of  a Duck. 

A Table  of  the  Infers  that  are  found  in  Canada. 

Adders. 

Afps. 

Rattle-Snakes. 

Lowing  Frogs. 

Gnats  or  Midges. 

Gad-Bees. 

B/ulots  or  burning  Handworms^ 


to  North- Amena. 


139 


A Defcriptlon  of  fucb  Birds  as  are  not  accounted  for  in 
my  Letters, 


The  Fowl  or 
Birds  of  the 
Southern  Coun-^ 
tries. 


TH  E Muards  are  a Frefli water- Fowl, 
as  big  as  a Goofe,  and  as  dull  and 
heavy  as  an  Afi.  They  have  black  and 
white  Feathers,  a pointed  Beak,  and  a 
very  IhortNeck.  They  only  duck  or  dive  in  the  Sum- 
mer, for  they  cannot  ufe  their  Wings  j and  in  that 
Seafon,  the  Savages  take  the  Diverfion  of  furround- 
ing ’em  with  feven  or  eight  Canows,  difpers’d  here 
and  there,  and  fo  obliging ’em  to  dive  down,  when 
they  offer  to  come  up  to  take  breath.  The  Savages 
have  Entertain’d  me  feveral  times  with  this  agree- 
able Amufement,  during  the  courfe  of  the  Voyages 
1 made  with  them. 

The  Red  Vartridges  are  wild  and  little,  and  muck 
different  from  the  Red  Partridge  we  have  in  Europe^  as 
well  as  the  Pheafant,  whofe  Feathers  being  of  a 
white  colour  with  black  fpecks,  make  a very  agree- 
able diverlity. 

The  largeft  Eagles  we  find  in  this  Country,  are 
no  bigger  than  Swans.  Their  Head  and  their  Tail 
is  white,  and  they  have  frequent  Ingagements 
with  a fort  of  Vultures,  that  commonly  have  the 
better  of  it.  In  our  Voyages  we  had  frequent  occafi- 
onsof  feeing  thefe  Ingagements,  which  laft  as  long  as 
the  Eagle  can  keep  up  the  force  of  its  Wings. 

The  Parrots  are,  met  with  in  the  le’imfe  Country, 
and  upon  the  River  of  Mijfifipi.  They  are  very 
fmall,  and  are  the  fame  with  thofe  that  we  bring 
from  BratcÀl  and  Cayenne. 

That  .fort  of  Nightingale  that  Î faw,  is  of  a pecu- 
liar form  ; for  ’tis  of  a leffer  fize  than  the  European^ 
and  of  a blewiih  colour,  and  its  notes  are  more  di- 
verfified  ; befides  that,  it  lodges  in  thé  holes  of 
Trees,  and  four  or  five  of  ’em  do  commonly  keep 

together 


240  Voyages 

together  upon  the  thickeft  Trees,  and  with  Joynt 
Notes  Warble  o’er  their  Songs. 

The  Flylike  Bird  is  no  bigger  than  one’s  Thumbs  ^ 
ri^  and  the  colour  of  its  Feathers  is  fb  changeablcj 
that  ’tis  hard  to  faften  any  one  colour  upon  it.  They 
appear  fometimes  red,  fometimes  of  a Gold  colour, 
at  other  times  they  are  blew  and  red  ; and  proper- 
ly fpeaking,  ’tis  only  the  brightnefs  of  the  Sun  that 
makes  us  unfenfible  of  the  change  of  its  gold  and 
red  colours.  Its  beak  is  as  iharp  as  a Needle.  It 
flies  from  Flower  to  Flower,  like  a Bee,  and  by  its 
fluttering  fucks  the  flowery  Sap.  Sometimes  about 
Noon  it  pearches  upon  the  little  branches  of  Plum- 
trees  or  Cherry-trees.  I have  fent  Ibme  of  ’em  dead 
to  France,  it  being  impoffible  to  keep  ’em  alive,  and 
they  were  look’d  upon  as  a great  Curiofity. 

There  are  ten  or  twelve  forts  of  1 
Ducks  in  this  Country.  Thofe  call’d 
Franchut,  are  the  fmalleft  indeed,  but 
they  are  much  the  prettyeft.  The  Fea- 
thers upon  their  Neck  looks  fo  bright,  by  vertue  of  i 
the  variety  and  livelinefs  of  their  colours,  that  a Fur 
of  that  nature  would  be  invaluable  in  Mufcovy  or 
Turky.  They  owe  the  name  of  Branchas,  to  their 
refiing  upon  the  branches  of  Trees.  There’s  ano- 
ther Species  of  Ducks  in  this  Country,  that  are  as 
black  as  Jackdaws,  only  their  Beak  and  the  circle 
of  their  Eyes  are  red. 

The  Seamews,  Grelans  and  Sterlets,  are  Fowls  that 
fly  incelTantly  over  Seas,  Lakes,  and  Rivers,  in  or- 
der to  catch  little  Fi/h.  Their  Flefli  is  good  for  no- 
thing, befides  that,  they  have  no  fubflance  of  Bo- 
dy, though  they  feem  to  be  as  big  as  Pigeons. 

Th^  Sea-Varrots  bear  the  name  of  Parrots,  upon 
the  account  that  their  Beak  is  of  the  fame  form 
with  that  of  the  Land  Parrot.  They  never  quit  the 
Sea  or  the  Shoar  ; and  are  alvvays  flying  upon  the 
furface  of  the  Water,  in  quefr  of  little  Filh.  Their 

coloujr 


to  Arnenca.  241 

colour  is  black,  and. their  fizeis  much  the  fame  with 
that’  of  a Pullet.  There  are  great  numbers  of  ’em 
upon  the  bank  of  Neivfound-Land , and  near  the 
Coaft  of  the  Ifland,  which  the  Seamen  catch  with 
Hooks  cover'd  vvntha  Cod’s  Roe,  and  hung  over  the 
Prow  of  the  Ship. 

The  Moyach  are  a fort  of  Fowl,  as  big  as  a 
Goofe,  having  a fhort  î>îeck,  and  a broad  Foot  j 
and  which  is  very  ftrange,  their  Eggs  are  half  as  big 
again  as  a Swan’s,  and  yet  they  are  all  Yelk,  and 
that  fo  thick,  that  they  muft  be  diluted  with  Water, 
before  they  can  be  us’d  in  Pancakes. 

The  fVbite  Partridges,  are  as  big  as  our  red  Par- 
tridges. Their  Feet  are  cover’d  with  fuch  a thick 
down,  that  they  refemble  thnfe  of  a young  Rab- 
bet. They  are  only  feen  in  the  Winter  time,  and  , 
fome  years  they  are  fcarce  feen  at  all,  though  on 
the  other  hand,  in  Other  years  they  are  fo  plenti- 
fui,  that  you  may  buy  .a  dozen  for  Nine-pence. 
This  is  the  moft  ftupid  Animal  in  the  World  ; it 
firs  upon  the  Snow,  and  fuffers  it  felf  to  be  knock’d 
on  the  head  with  a pole  without  offering  to  ftir. 

I am  of  the  opinion,  that  this  unaccountable  num- 
nefs  is  occafion’d  by  itS’  long  flight  from  Greenland  to 
Canada.  This  conjecture  is  not  altogether  ground- 
lefs,  for ’tis  obferv’d,  that  they  never  come  in  flocks 
to  Canada,  but  after  the  long  continuance  of  a North 
or  a North-Eaft  Wind. 

The  Black  Partridges  are  truly  very  pretty.  They 
are  bigger  than  ours  ; and  their  beak  together  with 
the  circle  of  the  Eyes,  and  the  Feet  are  red  j their 
plumage  being  of  a Ihining  black  colour.  Thefe  A- 
nimals  are  very  proud,  and  feem  to  have  a fenfe 
bf  their  beauty  as  they  walk.  They  are  but  very 
uncommon,  as  well  as  the  reddiih  Partridges,  which 
refemble  Quails  in  their  bulk  and  brisknefs. 

The  White  Ortolans  are  only  met  with  in  Winter  ; 
but  I am  of  the  opinion,  that  their  Feathers  are  na- 

R turally 


24*-  Some  Voyages 

turally  of  a white  colour,  and  that  they  retrieve 
their  natural  colour  in  the  places  they  retire  to,  when 
they  difappear  in  Canada.  They  are  indifferent  < 
good  to  eat  when  they  are.  fat,  but  that  they  feidora 
are.  In  the  Winter  great  quantities  of ’em  are  . 
catch’d  about  the  Barns,  with  Nets  ftretch’d  out 
upon  the  Straw, 


A Defcriftm  of  the  InJeSli  Canada. 

TH  E Adders  of  Canada  do  no  harm  at  all.  The 
Afp  indeed  are  very  dangerous,when  the  People 
bathe  in  the  ftagnating  Water  towards  theSouthCoun- 
tries.  The  Rattle-Snake  ot  Sounding  5erp£»risfbcaird,in 
regard  that  at  the  extremity  of  its  Tail,  it  has  a fort 
of  a Cafe,  containing  certain  bones  which  make 
fuch  a noife  when  the  Serpent  creeps  along,  that 
’tis  heard  thirty  Paces  off.  Thefé  Serpents  betake 
themfelves  to  flight  when  they  hear  the  found  of 
Mens  Feet,  and  commonly  fleep  in  the  Sun  either 
in  green  Fields,  or  open  Woods.  They  never  fling 
but  when  they  are  trod  upon. 

The  Lowing  Frogs  are  fo  call’d  with  refpeâ:  to  their 
croaking,  which  founds  like  the  lowing  of  an  Oxe. 
Thefe  Frogr  are  twice  as  large  as  thofe  we  have  in 
Europe.  The  Canada  Gad-Bees  are  a fort  of  Flies  a- 
bout  twice  as  big  as  Bees  ; but  of  the  fame  form  with 
a common  Fly.  They  ffing  only  between  Noon, 
and  three  a Clock  in  the  Afternoon  ; but  then  they 
doit  fo  violently,  that  they  fetch  Blood.  However-, 
’tis  only  upon  certain  Rivers  that  they  are  met  with. 
The  Brûlots  are  a fort  of  Hand-worms,  which 
cleave  fo  hard  to  the  Skin,  that  their  pricking  occa- 1 
fions  the  fame  fenfe,  as  if  ’twere  a burning  Coal,  or 
a fpark  of  FirCi  jThefe  little  Animals  are  unper-  j 
ceivable,  though  at  the  fame  time  they  are  pretty  ^ 
numerous, 

the] 


to  Nbrti- America. 


*4f 

71)6  Names  of  the  Ftjh  in  the  River  of  St,  LaurenCC^ 
from  its  Mouth  to  the  Lakes  of  Canada. 

Balenots  or  little  Whales. 

A Filh  almoft  as  big  as  a Whale,  call’d  Souffleur, 

White  Porpoifes. 

Salmon,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Eels. 

Maycrel,  as  in  Europe. 

Herrings. 

Gafperots,  a fmall  Filh  like  a Herringt. 

Bafes. 

Shad-firti. 

Cod-filh. 

Plaices. 

Smelts. 

Turbots. 

Pikes. 

The  Gold  colour’d  Fifii. 

Roaches. 

Lampreys. 

Merles  or  Sea-Tench. 

Thornbacks. 

Cungars. 

Sea-Cows,  a kind  of  Porpoifes. 

The  SheS‘Fi(ha 

Little  Lobft ers. 

Crab-fifh. 

Cockles.  ' 

Mufdes. 

The  Fijh  that  are  found  in  the  Lakes  of  Canada,  and  m 
the  Rivers  that  fall  into  *em. 

Sturgeons. 

The  Armed  Fiflxi 

% $ Txmtêo 


244  Voj)iges 

Trouts. 

White-Filh. 

A fort  of  Herrings. 

Eels. 

Mullets. 

Carp. 

Gull-Filh.. 

Gudgeons. 

"The  Fijh  found  in  the  River  of  Miflîfjpî. 

Pikes,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe, 

Carps. 

Tench. 

Perches. 

Dabs,  and  feveral  others  that  are  not  known  in 
Europe. 


A Defcription  of  the  FiJh  that  are  not  mention  d in  the  \ 
Letters, 

Jhofe  between  E Balenot  is  a fort  of  3 Whale,  ; 

the  Mouth  ef  onlv ’tis  lefs  and  more  fleihy,  and  ; 

the  Lakes.  proportion  to  the 

Northern  Whales.  This  Filh  goes  fifty 
or  fixty  Leagues  up  the  River. 

The  Souffleurs  are  much  of  the  fame  fize,  only 
they  are  fhorter  and  blacker.  When  they  mean  to 
take  breath  after  diving,  they  fquirt  out  the  Water 
through  a hole  behind  their  Head,  after  the  fame 
manner  with  the  Whales.  Commonly,  they  dog 
the  Ships  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence. 

The  IVhite  Forpoijes  are  as  big  as  Oxen.  They  al- 
ways go  along  with  the  Current;  and  go  up  with 
the  tide  till  they  come  at  fre/h  Water,  upon  which  ' 
they  retire  with  the  ebb  Water.  They  are  a ghaftly 
fort  of  Animals,  and  are  frequently  taken  before 
Qwhec,  The 


to  Norf/?’ America.  245 

The  Gafferots  are  a fmall  Fifh,  not  unlike  a Her- 
ring. In  the  Summer  time  they  make  in  to  the  ftioar 
in  fuch  flioals,  that  the  Cod-filhers  take  as  many 
of  ’em  as  ferves  for  Bait  for  that  Fi/hery.  Thefe 
Fifhermen  do  likewife  make  ufe  of  Herrings,  when 
the  feafon  obliges  them  to  put  into  the  ftioar  to 
Spawn.  In  a word,  all  the  Filh  that  are  made  ufe 
of  for  a Bait  to  make  the  Codfifh  bite  at  the  Hook, 
are  call’d  Boete  in  the  Filhermens  Dialed. 

The  Gold-colour  d Fip  are  nice  Food.  They  are 
about  fifteen  Inches  long  ; their  Scales  are  yellow, 
and  they  are  valued  very  high. 

The  Sea-Cows,  which  are  a fort  of  Porpoifes,  are 
bigger  than  the  Normandy  Beeves.  They  have  a fort 
of  Paws  cut  like  a Goole’s  Foot,  their  Head  refem- 
bles  that  of  an  Otter  ; and  their  Teeth,  which  are 
two  Inches  thick,  and  nine  Inches  long,  are  reck- 
on’d  the  fineft  Ivory  that  is.  ’Tis  faid  that  they 
; range  wide  of  thelhoar,  towards  Sandy  and  Marftiy 
I places. 

i ThzLobfiers  OÏ  this  River  feem  to  be  exadly  the 
j fame  with  thofe  we  have  in  Europe. 

I The  Cockles  are  of  a piece,  with  thofe  we  have 
upon  the  coaft  of  France,  excepting  that  they  are 
larger,  and  have  a more  agreeable  tafte,  though 
their  Flefti  feems  to  partake  more  of  crudity  and 
; indigeftion. 

; The  Mufcles  of  this  River  are  prodigious  large, 
^ and  tafte  very  well;  but  ’tis  next  to  an  impoffibilicy 
to  eat  ’em  without  breaking  one’s  Teeth,  by  reafon 
:Of  their  being  ftuff’d  with  Pearl;  1 call  k Pearl,  tho’ 
the  name  of  Gravel  or  Sand  may  be  more  proper, 
with  refped  to  its  value,  for  I brought  to  Paris^ky 
or  fixtyof  the  largeft  and  fineft,  which  were  rated 
only  at  a penny  a piece  ; notwichftanding  that  we 
had  broke  above  two  thoufand  Mufcles  to  make  up 
that  number. 

i ' R5 


The 


Î4^  Some  lS[ett>  Voyages 

The  Lake-Sturgeons  are  commonly  five  or  fix  Foot 
long:  But  I once  fawone  of  ten  Foot,  and  ano- 
ther of  twelve  in  length.  The  Savages  catch  ’em 
with  Nets  in  the  Winter,  and  Grapples  in  the  Sum- 
mer. ’Pis  faid,  they  have  a certain  fort  of  Flefha- 
bout  their  Head,  that  tafts  like  Beef,  Mutton,  and 
Veal  Î but  I have  eat  of  it  lèverai  times,  and  ne- 
ver could  obferve  any  fuch  thing,  which  makes  me 
look  upon  the  allegation  as  chimerical. 

The  Fijb  in  Armour  y is  about  three  Foot  and  a 
half  long.  ’Tis  defended  by  fuch  ftrong  and  hard  j 
Scales,  that  ’tis  impoffible  for  any  other  Fifli  to  hurt  i 
if,  Its  Enemies  are  Trouts  and  Roaches,  but  ’tis  | 
admirably  well  provided  for  the  repulfing  of  their  | 
Attacks,  by  vertue  of  its  pointed  Snout,  which  is  \ 
a Foot  long,  and  as  hard  as  its  Skin.  It  eats  very  I 
well,  and  its  ple/h  or  Subftance  is  as  firm  as  ’tis  ; 
white.  1 

The  Lake  Dabs  or  Sanding!  are  not  above  a Foot  j 
long,  but  they  are  very  thick  all  over.  They  are  if 
call’d  Barbues  in  French,  with  allufion  to  a certain  ■ 
fort  of  Beards  that  hang  down  from  the  fide  of  their 
Muzzle,  and  are  as  big  as  ears  of  Corn.  Thole  j 
which  we  find  in  the  River  of  Mifjifipi,  are  of  a : 
monftrcus  fize.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  are  ‘ 
catch’d  with  a Hook,  as  well  as  with  a Net  j and  . 
make  very  pood  Viduals. 

The  AliJJifipi  Carps  are  likewife  of  an  extraordina- 
ry fize,  and  admirably  well  tailed.  They  are  of 
the  fame  form  with  ç>urs.  In  the  Autumn  they  put 
in  tov/ards  the  Ihoar,  and  are  eafily  catch’d  with 
a Net. 

The  largeft  Trouts  we  meet  whh  in  the  Lakes,  are 
five  Foot  and  a half  long,  and  of  one  Foot  Diameter- 
Their  flelh  is  red,  and  they  are  catch’d  with  great 
Hooks  made  fall  to  pieces  of  Wire. 

The  Filh  catch’d  in  the  Lakes,  are  better  than  | 
thofewetake  at  Sea,  or  in  the  Rivers,  particularly 

the 


to  i^orth-Arti^ncs,»  247 

the  white  Fifli,  which  for  goodnefi  and  nice  Eat- 
ing, are  far  beyond  all  the  other  Species.  The  Sa- 
vages that  live  upon  the  fides  of  thofe  little  frefh- 
waterSeas,  prefer  the  Broth  of  Fifli,  to  Meat,  broth, 
when  they  are  indifpos’d.  This  choice  they  ground 
! upon  experience.;  whereas  the  French  on  the  other 
hand  find  that  Venifon  Broth  is  at  once  more  fub- 
fiantial  and  reftorativc. 

The  Rivers  of  Canada  are  replenifli’d  with  an  in- 
finity of  other  filhes,  that  are  not  known  in  Europe. 
The  Filh  catch’d  in  the  North- Country  Rivers,  are 
different  from  thofe  of  the  South  ; and  thofe  taken 
in  the  Long  River ^ which  difimbogues  into  the  Ri- 
ver of  Mi^Jipi,  favour  fo  rank  of  Mud  and  Clay, 
that  ’tis  impoffible  to  eat  of  ’em  ; abating  for  a fort 
of  little  Trouts  that  the  Savages  take  in  the  adjacent 
Lakes,  which  make  a tolerable  Mefs. 

The  Rivers  of  the  OtentatSy  and  the  Mijfourüy  pro- 
duce fuch  odd  fhap’d  fiflies,  that  ’tis  impoffible  to 
defcribe  ’em  without  they  were  drawn  upon  Paper. 
Thefe  Fifhes  tails  but  forrily,and  yet  the  Savages  love 
it  mightily,  which  I take  to  proceed  from  their  know- 
ing no  better. 


'TheTrees  aud  Fruits  of  the  South  Countries  of  Câmââ. 

ReT-Oak^^^'}^^^^  as  we  have  in  Europe^ 

; Bitter  Cherry-trees, 

Maple-trees. 

Afti-trees. 

yn<te»-trees  K”*  ® 

Nut-trees  of  two  fort% 

I Chefnut-trees. 

‘ Apple-trees. 

; R 4 

i 


Pear  trees. 


248  Some  "Mew  Voyages 

Pear-trees. 

Plum-trees. 

Cherry-trees. 

Hazel-trees,  fuch  as  we  have  in  * 

Vines. 

A fort  of  Citrons- 
Water  Melons. 

Sweet  Citruls. 

Wild  Goofebenies. 

Pine-apples. 

Tobacco,  fuch  as  our  Tobacco. 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  North  Countries  of  Câùâàâ. 

White  Oak. 

Red  Oak. 

Birch- trees. 

Bitter  Cherry  trees. 

Mapple-trees. 

Pine-trees. 

Epinettes. 

Fir-trees  of  three  forts. 

Peruffes. 

Cedar- trees. 

Afpin- trees. 

White  Wood. 

Alder- trees. 

Maiden  Hair. 

Strawberries. 

Rasberries. 

Goofeberries. 

Bluets. 


A Defer ipion  of  the  above-mention  d Trees  and  Fruits. 

YO  Ü muft  remark , that  all  the  Wood  of 
Canada  is  good  of  its  kind.  The  Trees 
that  ftand  expos’d  to  the  North- Winds  are  ape 

to 


to  North  America.  149 

to  be  influenc’d  by  the  Froft,  as  it  appears  from  the 
chops  and  chinks  that  it  occa fions-' 

The  Bitter  Cherry-tree,  has  a hard  and  whitiflj 
^Wood/ with  a grey  Bark.  Some  of  ’em  are  as  tall 
as,  the  lofcyeft  Oaks,  and  as  big  as  a Hoglhead; 
This  Tree  grows  ftreightj  it  has  an  oval  Leaf,  and 
is  made  ufe  of  in  Beams , Rafters,  and  other  Carr- 
penter’s  work. 

The  Maf/ple-tree  is  much  of  the  fame  height  and 
bulk  ; but  it  has  a brown  Bark,  and  the  Wood  is 
reddilh.  It  bears  no  refemblance  to  that  fort  we  have 
in  Europe.  It  yields  a Sap,  which  has  a much  plea- 
lanter  tafte  than  the  beft  Limohade  or  Cherry-wa- 
ter, and  makes  the  whalfomeft  drink  in  the  World. 
This  Liquor  is  drawn  by  cutting  the  Tree  two  In- 
ches deep  in  the  Wood,  the  cut  being  run  floping 
to  the  length  of  ten  or  twelve  Inches.  At  the  lower 
end  of  this  gafti,  a Knife  is  thruft  into  the  Tree 
flopingly,  fo  that  the  wafer  running  along  the  Cut 
or  Galh,  as  through  a Gutter,  and  falling  upon  the 
Knife  that  lies  acrofs  the  Channel,  runs  out  upon 
the  Knife,  which  has  VeflTcls  plac’d  underneath  to 
receiveit.  Some  Trees  will  yield  five  or  fix  Bottles 
of  this  water  a Day  5 and  fome  Inhabitants  of  Ca- 
nada, might  draw  twenty  Hogfheads  of  it  in  one 
day,  if  they  would  thus  cut  and  notch  all  the  Map- 
ples  of  their  refpedive  Plantations.  The  gafh  do’s 
no  harm  to  the  Tree.  Of  this  Sap  they  make  Su- 
gar and  Syrup,  which  isfo  valuable,  that  there  can’t 
be  a better  remedy  for  fortifying  the  Stomach.  ’Tis 
but  few  of  the  Inhabitants  that  have  the  patience 
to  make  Mappk-Water,  for  as  common  and  ufual 
things  are  always  flighted,  fo  there’s  fcarce  any  bo- 
dy but  Children  that  give  themfelves  the  trouble  of 
gafliing  thefe  Trees.  To  conclude,  the  North-Coun- 
try Mapples  have  more  Sap  than  thofe  of  the  South 
Countries  ; but  at  the  fame  time  the  Sap  is  not  fo 
fweet. 


There 


2 5®  Some  î^ew  Voyages 

There  are  twoibrfs  of  Nut-trees  in  this  Country. 
The  one  bears  round,  and  the  other  long.  Nuts* 
-but  neither  of  ’em  is  good  for  any  thing,  no  more 
than  the  wild  Chefnuts  that  grow  in  the  Ilimfc 
Country. 

The  Apples  that  grow  upon  fome  of  their  Ap- 
ple-trees, eat  well  when  they  are  Codied,  but  they 
are  good  for  nothing  when  they’re  Raw.  Upon 
the  MiffififnnàcQà,  there’s  a fort  of  Apples  that  have 
a tafte  not  .unlike  that  of  fome  European  Apples.  The 
Pears  are  good,  but  very  fcarce.  . 

The  Cherries  are  fmall,  and  extream  red  j and 
though  their  tafte  is  not  good,  yet  the  Roe-bucks 
like  ’em  fo  well,  that  in  the  Summer  time  they  fçarce 
ever  mils  to  lye  under  the  Cherry-trees  all  Night 
long,  efpecially  if  it  blows  hard. 

This  Country  affords  three  forts  of  excellent  Plums, 
which  bear  no  refemblance  to  ours  either  in  figure 
or  colour.  Some  are  long  and  fmall,  fome  are  round 
and  thick,  and  fome  very  littje. 

The  Vines  twine  round  the  Trees  to  the  very  top  j 
and  the  Branches  of  thofe  Trees  are  fo  cover’d  with 
Grapes,  that  one  would  take  the  Grape  to  be  the 
fruit  of  the  Tree.  In  fome  Countries  of  North-  i 
America,  the  Grape  is  little,  but  very  well  tafted  ; 
but  towards  the  MiJJifipi,  ’tis  long  and  thick,  and  fo 
is  the  clufter.  There  has  been  fome  Wine  prefs’d 
from  the  Grapes  of  that  Country,  which  after  long 
ftanding  became  as  fweet  as  Canary,  and  as  black 
as  Ink. 

The  Citrons  of  l:^onh-Amerlca  are  fo  call’d,  only 
becaufe  their  form  refembles  that  of  our  Citron, 
Inftead  of  a Rind,  they  have  only  a fingle  Skin.  They 
grow  upon  a Plant  that  rifes  three  Foot  high, and  do’s 
not  bear  above  three  or  four  at  a time.  This  Fruit 
is  as  wholfomas  its  Root  is  dangerous  j for  the  one 
is  very  Healthy,  and  the  juice  of  the  other  is  a mor^ 
tal  fubtile  Poyfon.  While  1 ftay’d  at  Fort  Fronte- 


to  North  Ametïca,  % 5 1 

me,  in  the  year  1684,  I faw  an  Iro^mfe  Wpman 
take  down  this  fatal  Potion,  with  a defign  to  fol- 
low her  deceas’d  Husband  ; after  ihe  had  took  leave 

her  Friends,  and  fung  the  Death  Song,  with  the 
Fornialities  that  are  ufuai  among  thefe  blind  Wretch- 
' es.  The  Poifon  quickly  work’d  the  defir’d  efFed  ; 
for  this  Widdow,  who  in  Eurefe  would  be  juftly 
look’d  upon  as  a miracle  of  Conftancy  and  Fideli- 
ty, had  no  fooner  fwallowed  the  murdering  Juice, 
than  fhe  fell  into  two  or  three  fhivering  Fits,  and  fo 
expir’d. 

The  Water-Melons,  call’d  by  the  Spaniards  Algiers 
Melons,  are  round  and  thick  like  a Ball  ; fome  are 
red,  and  fome  white,  and  the  kernels,  which  are 
very  large,  are  fometimes  black,  fometimes  red. 
j As  for  their  tafte,  ’tis  exaélly  the  fame  with  that  of 
the  Spanijls  or  Tortugue:^  Melons. 

The  Citruls  of  this  Country  are  fweet,  and  of  a 
(different  nature  from  thofe  of  Europe  j and  I’m  in- 
form’d, that  the  American  Citruls  will  not  grow  in 
Europe.  They  are  as  big  as  our  Melons',  and  their 
Pulp  is  as  yellow  as  Saffron.  Commonly  they  are 
bak’d  in  Ovens,  but  the  better  way  is  to  roaft  ’em 
under  the  Embers,  as  the  Savages  do.  Their  tafte 
is  much  the  fame  with  that  of  the  Marmelade  ol' 
Apples,  only  they  are  fweeter.  One  may  eat  as 
much  of ’em  ashepleafes,  without  fearing  any  dif- 
order  from  ’em. 

The  wild  Goofeberries  are  good  for  nothing,  but 
for  Confits:  But  that  fort  of  Confits  are  feldont 
made,  for  Sugar  is  too  dear  in  Canada,  to  be  itu- 
ploy’d  forfuch  ufes. 


A 


2 f 2 Some  l^ew  ployages 


A Defer ipt ton  of  the  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  Northern  Coun^ 


tries. 


h e CanadaWitch-tretti  are  much  different  from 


thofe  We  have  in  fome  Provinces  of  France  ; 
both  for  bulk  and  quality.  The  Savages  make  Ca- 
nowsof  their  Bark,  fome  of  which  is  red,  and  fome 
white;  but  both  are  equally  proper  for  that  ufe. 
That  which  has  the  feweft  Veins  and  Chops,  is  the 
befi  ; but  the  red  bark  makes  the  fineft  fhow.  There 
are  fome  little  Baskets  made  of  the  young  Birches, 
that  are  much  efteem’d  in  France  ; and  Books  may  be 
made  of  'em,  the  Leaves  of  which  will  be  as  fine 
as  Paper.  This  I can  fpeak  by  experience,  for  I 
have  frequently  made  ufe  of  ’em  for  want  of  Pa- 
per, in  writing  the  Journal  of  my  Voyages.  Nay, 
I remember  I have  feen  in  a certain  Library  in 
France,  a Mânufcript  of  the  Gofpel  of  St.  Matthenv, 
written  in  Greek  upon  this  fort  of  Bark  ; and,  which 
is  yet  more  furprifing,  I was  then  told,  that  it  had 
been  written  above  a thoufand  years  ; and  at  the 
fame  time  I dare  fwear,  that  ’twas  the  Genuine 
Birch-bai>»f«NeW'Fr<îWf?,  which  in  all  appearance 
was  not  then  difeover’d. 

The  Tine-trees  are  very  tall,  ftraight,  and  thick  j 
and  are  made  ufe  of  for  Mafts,  which  the  King  s 
Pinks  do  oftentimes  tranfport  to  France.  ’Tis  faid, 
that  fome  of  thefe  Trees  are  big  enough,  to  ferve 
for  a Mart  to  a Firft-rate  Ship. 

The  Efmette  is  a fort  of  a Pine,  with  a fharper  and 
thicker  Leaf.  ’Tis  made  ufe  of  in  Carpenters  work, 
and  the  matter  which  drains  from  it,  fmells  as  fweet 
as  Incenfe. 

There  are  three  forts  of  FrVi  in  this  Country,  which 
are  faw’d  into  Dales  by  certain  Mills,  that  the  Que- 
bec Merchants  have  caus’d  to  be  built  in  fome 
places. 


The 


I to  Nort/;  America. 

' The  Tertijje  is  the  propereft  of  all  green  Woods 
« for  the  building  of  Ships,  upon  the  conlideration  thac 
‘ 'tis  comparer,  and  has  çlofer  Pores,  fo  that  it  do’s 
not  foak  or  drink  in  the  moifture  as  much  as  others, 
i Here  are  two  forts  of  Cedar,  namely,  the  white 
and  the  red  ; but  one  muft  view  ’em  narrowly  be- 
; fore  he  can  diftinguilh  ’em,  by  reafon  that  both 
of  ’em  have  much  the  fame  fort  of  Bark.  Thefe 
« Trees  are  low,  bufiiy,  and  full  of  Branches  and  lit- 
j tie  Leaves,  refembling  the  tag  of  a Lace.  The  Wood 
of  this  Tree,  is  almoft  as  light  as  Cork  ; and  the 
Savages  make  ufe  of  it  in  the  Wreaths  and  Ribs  of 
their  Canows.  The  red  fort  looks  admirably  well, 
j and  may  be  made  into  Houlhold-Goods,  which  will 
' retain  an  agreeable  fmell  for  ever. 

The  Jjps  are  little  Shrubs,  which  grow  upon  the 
fides  of  Pools  or  Rivers  ; and  in  a word  , in 
moift  and  marlhy  Countries.  This  Wood  is  the 
! common  food  of  the  Beavers,  who,  in  imitation  of 
i the  Ants,  take  care  to  make  a colledUon  of  it  round 
j their  Hutts  in  the  Autumn,  which  ferves  ’em  for 
! fuftenance  when  the  Ice  imprifons  ’em  in  Winter. 

I The  White  Wood  is  a midling  fort  of  Tree,  that’s 
j|  neither  too  big  nor  too  little.  ’Tis  almoft  as  light 
ij  as  Cedar,  and  as  eafily  work’d  upon.  The  Inha- 
bitants of  Canada  make  little  Canows  of  it,  for  üfh- 
ing  and  crofting  the  Rivers. 

: Maidenhair  is  as  common  in  the  Forrefts  of  Cana^^ 

. da,  as  Fern  is  in  thole  of  France,  and  is  efteem’d  be- 
yond that  of  other  Countries  ; infomuch,  that  the 
Inhabitants  of  Quebec  prepare  great  quantities  of  its 
Syrup,  which  they  fend  to  Paris,  1<! ants,  Rouan,  anà 
feveral  other  Cities  in  France. 

Strawberries  and  Rasberries,  are  wonderfully  plenti- 
ful in  Canada,  and  tafte  extream  well.  We  meet 
likewife  with  fome  white  Goofeberries  in  this  Coun- 
try ; but  they  ferve  for  no  ufe,  unlefs  it  be  to  make  a 
fort  of  Vinegar  of  ’em,  that  is  very  ftrong, 

,,  ■ The 


^54  New  Poyages 

The  Bluets  are  certain  little  Berries,  not  unlike 
fmall  Cherries,  only  they  are  black,  and  perfedly 
round.  The  Plant  upon  which  they  grow,  is  as  big 
ai  a Rasberry-bulh.  Thefe  Berries  fervc  for  feveral 
ufes,  after  they  aredry’d  in  the  Sun,  or  in  an  Oven; 
for  then  they  make  Confits  of  ’em,  or  put  ’em  into 
Pyes,  or  infufe ’em  in  Brandy.  The  North- Coun- 
try Savages  make  a Crop  of  ’em  in  the  Summer, 
which  affords  ^m  very  feafbnable  relief,  efpecially 
when  their  hunting  comes  fliort. 


A General  View  of  the  Commerce  of  Canada. 

I Come  now  to  give  a brief  and  general  account 
of  the  Commerce  oi  Canada,  which  I have  al- 
ready touch’d  upon  in  my  Letters.  The  Normans 
were  the  firft  that  fet  up  this  trade,  and  ufually  they 
fet  out  from  Havre  de  Grace,  or  Dieppe  ; but  the  Ro- 
chellers  have  now  work’d  ’em  out  of  it,  for  as  much 
as  the  Rocbel  Ships  furnilh  the  Inhabitants  of  that 
Continent  with  the  neceffary  Commodities.  There 
are  likewife  fome  Ships  fent  to  Canada  from  Bour- 
deaux  and  Bayonne,  with  Wines,  Brandy,  Tobacco, 
and  Iron. 

The  Ships  bound  from  France  to  that  Country, 
pay  no  Culiom  for  their  Cargo,  whether  in  clear- 
ing in  France,  or  in  their  entries  at  Quebec  ; abating 
for  the  Brazil  Tobacco  which  pays  five  Sols  a pound; 
that  is  to  fay,  a Roll  of  400  pound  weight,  pays  a 
hundred  Livres  by  way  of  Entry,  to  the  Office  of 
the  Farmers- General. 

Molt  of  the  Ships  go  laden  toCanada,  and  return 
light  or  empty.  Some  indeed  bring  home  Peafe 
when  they  are  good  cheap  in  the  Colony,  and  o- 
thers  take  in  a Cargo  of  Pianks  and  Boards:  Others 
again  go  to  the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton,  and  there 

ta  ko 


to  Nbrf/j- America.  ^ J 5 

take  in  a Cargoe  of  Pit-Coal,  which  they  carry  to 
the  Iflands  of  Martinko  or  Guardaloufa,  where  the 
refining  of  Sugars  occafions  a great  confumption  of 
Coals.  But  thofe  Ships  which  either  belong,  or  are 
recommended  to  the  topping  Merchants  of  the  Co- 
lony, are  fraughted  with  Sk^ins,  which  turns  to  a 
great  account.  I have  feen  fome  Ships  unload  at 
Quebec,  and  then  fleer  to  flacentia,  to  take  in  Cod- 
filh  which  they  purchas’d  with  ready  Mony  ; but 
generally  fpeaking,  theie’s  morclofl  than  got  by  that 
way  of  trading.  The  Merchant  that  has  carried 
on  the  greatefl  trade  in  Canada,  is  the  Sieur  Samuel 
Bernon  of  Rachel,  who  has  great  Ware-Houfes  at 
Quebec,  from  which  the  Inhabitants  of  the  other 
Towns  are  fupplied  wichfuch  Commodities  as  they 
: want.  ’Tis  true,  there  are  fome  Merchants  at  Que- 
bec, who  are  indifferent  rich,  and  fit  out  Ships  uponf 
their  own  bottom,  that  ply  to  and  again  between 
France  and  Canada  ; and  thefe  Merchants  have  their 
> Correfpondents  at  Rachel,  who  fend  out  and  take  in 
' every  year  the  Cargoes  of  their  Ships. 

; There’s  no  difference  between  the  Pyrates  that 
. fcowr  the  Seas,  and  the  Canada  Merchants  ; unlefs 
; it  be  this,  that  the  former  fometimes  inrich  ’emfelves 
} all  of  a fudden  by  a good  Prize  ; and  that  the  lat- 
' ter  can’t  make  their  fortune  without  trading  for  five 
I or  fix  years,  and  that  without  running  the  hazard 
I'  of  their  Lives.  I have  known  twenty  little  Ped- 
1 lars  that  had  not  above  a thoufand  Crowns  flock 
I when,  I arriv’d  at  Quebec,  in  the  year  1683  ; and 
when  I left  that  place,  had  got  to  the  tune  of 
twelve  thoufand  Crowns.  ’Tis  an  unqueftion’d  truth, 
that  they  get  fihy  ■per  Cent  upon  all  the  Goods  they 
deal  in,  whether  they  buy  ’em  up  upon  the  arrival 
of  the  Ships  at  Quebec,  or  have ’em  iwm  Franceby 
way  of  Commiflion  j bat  over  and  above  that, 
there  are  fome  little  gaudy  Trinkets,  fuch  as  Rib- 
bands, Laces,  Embroideries,  Tobacco-Boxes,  Watch- 

; 


Some  Tslew  Voyages 

cs,  and  an  infinity  of  other  baubles  of  Iron  Ware, 
upon  which  tiiey  get  a hundred  and  fifty  fer  Cent, 
all  Cofts  clear. 

in  this  Country  a Hogfhead  of  Rourdeaux  Wine, 
Vi/hich  contains  2fo  Bottles,  is  worth  about  forty 
French  Livres,  in  time  of  Peace,  and  fixty  in  time 
of  War.  A Hogftiead  of  Nants  or  Bayonne  Branày, 
will  fetch  8o  or  a loo  Livres.  Jn  the  Taverns  a 
Bottle  of  Wine  cofts  fix  French  Sous,  and  a Bottle 
of  Brandy  is  fold  for  twenty.  As  for  dry  Com' 
modities,  their  price  rifes  and  falls  upon  occafion. 
Brazil  Tobacco  is  worth  40  Sous  a pound  by  way 
of  Retail,  and  ;yby  Wholefale,  Sugar  will  fetch 
at  leafi-  20  Sous  a pound,  and  fometimes  2)  or  ;o. 

The  ear  Heft  Ships  that  come  from  France,  fet  ou 
commonly  in  the  latter  end  o? April, or  the  beginning 
o^'-May  i but  to  my  mind,  they  might  ftiorten  their 
Voyage  by  one  half,  if  they  put  to  Sea  about  the 
middle  oï-  ' March,  and  then  fweep’d  along  the  North 
Coaft  of  rht  A^zor es  Iflands  j for  in  thofe  Seas  the 
&uth  and  South- Eaft  Winds  commonly  blow from 
the  beginning  of  April,  to  the  end  of  May.  I have 
mention  d this  fever al  times  to  the  moft  expert  Pi- 
lots; but  they  ftill  pat  me  off  with  the  plea,  that 
they  dare  not  fteer  that  Courfe  for  fear  of  fome 
R.Ocks  : And  yet  thefe  Rocks  are  not  to  be  met  with 
biit  in  their  Charts.  I have  read  fome  Defcripti- 
onsof  the  Ports,  Roads,  and  Coafts  of  thefe  Iflands, 
and  of  the  adjacent  Seas,  done  by  the  Portugueze, 
which  make  no  mention  of  the  Shelves  that  are 
chalk’d  down  in  all  our  Charts  : On  the  contrary, 
they  affirm  that  thç  Coaft  of  thefe  Iflands  is  alto- 
gether clear,  and  that  for  twenty  Leagues  off  into 
the  Main,  thefe  imaginary  Rocks  were  never  met 
with. 

As  foon  as  the  French  Ships  arrive  at  ^ehec,  the 
Merchants  of  that  City  who  have  their  Faclours  in 
the  other  Towns,  load  their  Barques  with  Goods  in 

order 


! to  America.  157 

order  to  tranlport  ’em  to  thefè  other  Tovs^ns.  Such 
Merchants  as  a<5t  for  themlelves  at  Tr&is  Rivieres,  of 
I Monreal, they  come  down  in  Perfon  to  Quehc  to  Mar- 
I ket  for  thcmfelves,and  then  put  their  EfFeds  on  board 
ofBarqueSjto  be  convey’d  home.  If  they  pay  for  their 
[ Goods  in  Skins,  they  buy  cheaper  than  if  diey  made 
I their  payments  in  Money  or  Letters  of  Exchange  ; 
by  reafbn  that  the  Seller  gets  confiderably  by  the 
Skins  when  he  returns  to  France,  Now,  you  muft 
take  notice,  that  all  thefe  Skins  are  bought  up  from 
the  Inhabitants,  or  from  the  Savages,  upon  which  the 
Merchants  are  confiderable  Gainers.  To  give  you 
an  inftance  of  this  matter.  A Perfon  that  lives  in  the 
Neighbourhood  of  Q^uehec,  carries  a dozen  of  Mar- 
tins Skins,  five  or  fix  Foxes  Skins,  and  as  many  Skins 
of  wild  Cats,  to  a Merchants  Houfe,  in  order  to 
fell  ’em  for  Woollen  Cloth,  Linnen,'  Arms,  Ammu- 
nition, &c.  In  the  truck  of  thefe  Skins,  the  Mer- 
chant draws  a double  profit,  one  upon  the  fcore  of 
his  paying  no  more  for  the  Skins,  than  one  half  of 
I what  he  afterwards  fells  ’em  for  in  the  lump  to  the 
; Faétours  for  the  Rocbel  Ships  ; and  the  other  by  the 
! exorbitant  rate  he  puts  upon  the  Goods  that  tlie 
' poor  Planter  takes  in  exchange  for  his  Skins.  If  this 
be  duly  weigh’d,  we  will  not  think  it  ftrange  that 
i;  thefe  Merchants  have  a more  beneficial  Trade,  than 
a great  many  other  Tradefmen  in  the  World,  in 
my  feventh  and  eighth  Letter,  I related  the  particU- 
^ lars  of  the  Commerce  of  this  Country,  efpecially 
1 that  which  the  Inhabitants  carry  on  with  the  Sava- 
ges, who  fupply  ’em  with  the  Skins  of  Beavers,  and 
other  Animals.  So  that  now  it  remains  only  to 
give  you  an  Inventory  of  the  Goods  that  are  pro- 
: per  for  the  Savages,  and  of  the  Skins  which  they 
I give  in  exchange,  together  with  their  neat  Prices. 


Short 


içS  Some  NI?»  Voyages 

Short  and  light  Fufees. 

Powder. 

Ball  and  cut  Lead,  or  Small-Hiot. 

Axes  both  great  and  fmalL 
Knives  with  their  Sheaths. 

Sword-  blades  to  ma  ke  Darts  of. 

Kettles  of  all  fizes. 

Shoemakers  Awls. 

Fifli- hooks,  of  all  fizes. 

Flint  Stones. 

Caps  of  blew  Serge. 

Shirts  made  of  the  common  Brittany  Linnen, 
Woolffed  Stockins,  fhort  and  coarfe. 

Brafil  Tobacco. 

Coarfe  white  Thread  for  Nets. 

Sewing  Thread  of  feveral  colours. 
Pack-thread. 

Vermillion. 

Needles,  both  large  and  fmall 
Venice  Beads. 

Some  Iron  Heads  for  Arrows,  but  few  of  ’em. 
A fmall  quantity  of  Soap. 

A few  Sabres  or  Cutlaffes. 

Brandy  goes  off  incomparably  well. 


The  Names  of  the  Skins  given  in  exchange,  "svith  their 
Rates. 


The  Skins  of  Winter  Beavers,  alias  Mufeovy 
Beavers,  are  worth  per  pound  in  the  Farmer  Ge- 
nerals Warehoufe.  - - 4 Livres.  10  Sous.  ‘ 

The  Skins  ot  fat  BeaVers,  the  Hair  of  which  falls  •' 
ofl^  while  the  Savages  make  ufe  of  ’em,  per  pound, 

_ — ^ L.  o S.  i, 

Of  Beavers  taken  in  Autumn,  fer  3 10 

Of  1 


to  North- Amtïicâ. 


Livres.  Soasi 

Of  dry  or  common  Beavers,  fer  found  3 o 

Of  Summer  Beavers,  fer  found.  — ■ 3 o 

The  Skin  of  a white  Beaver  is  not  to  be  valued^ 
no  more  than  that  of  |rFox  that’s  quite  black. 

The  Skins  of  Silver-corour’d  Foxes  a piece.  4 o 

Of  common  Foxes,  in  good  order,  ± o 

Of  the  common  Martins.  1 o 

Of  the  prettyeft  fort  of  Martins.  4 o 

Of  red  and  fmooth  Otters.  ± o 

Of  the  Winter  and  brown  Otters.  — 410 

or  more. 

Of  the  fineft  black  Bears.  — 7 o 

The  Skins  of  Elks  before  they^re  drefs’d,  are  worth 

fer  found  about.  o 12 

The  Skins  of  Stags  are  worth  fer  found  about  q 8 

The  wild  Cats  or  Enfans  de  Diable,  a piece  i i y 

Sea  Wolves — a piece.  i ly 

or  more. 

Fole-Cats,  and  Weafels  — — o 16 

Musk  Rats.  — ~ — ► o 6 

Their  Tefticles.  — ~ — of 

Wolves.  2 10 

The  white  Elk-skins,  i.  e.  thofe  drefs’d  by  the  Sava- 
ges a piece  8orm. 

A drefs’d  Harts  Skin  is  worth  —■  - * y orm« 

A Caribous  » - — — 6 

A Roe-buck’s  3 

To  conclude,  you  muft  take  notice  that  ehefe 
Skins  are  upon  fome  particular  occafions  dearer  than 
1 rate  ’em,  but  the  difference  is  but  very  finally 
whether  under  or  over. 


S a 


'An 


i6o  Some  Z'îew»  Voyages 

An  Account  of  the  Government  of  Canada  in  Ge- 
neral. 

IN  Canada  the  Politick,  .Civil,  Ecclefiaftical  and 
Military  Government,  ^ all  in  a manner  one 
thing,  in  regard,  that  the  wifeft  Governours  have 
fubjeded  their  Authority  to  that  of  the  Ecclefi- 
afiicks  ; and  fuch  Governours  as  would  not  imbarque 
in  that  Intereft,  have  found  their  Poft  fo  uneafie, 
that  they  have  been  recall’d  with  dilgrace.  1 could 
inftance  in  feveral,  who  for  not  adhering  to  the 
Sentiments  of  the  Bifliop  and  the  Jefuits,  and  for 
refufing  to  lodge  their  Power  in  the  hands  of  thele 
infallible  Gentlemen,  have  been  turn’d  out,  and 
treated  at  Court  like  hot-headed  Incendiaries.  Mr. 
de  Frontenac  was  one  of  this  number,  who  made  fuch 
an  unhappy  exit  ; for  he  fell  out  with  Mr.  Duchef- 
nau.  Intendant  of  that  Country,  who  finding  him- 
felf  proteded  by  the  Clergy,  induftrioufly  infulted 
that  illuftrious  General  ; and  the  General  was  forc’d 
to  give  way,  under  the  weight  of  an  Ecclefiaftical 
League,  by  reafon  of  the  Springs  they  fet  at  work 
againft  him,  in  oppofitioa  to  all  the  principles  of  Ho- 
nour and  Confcience. 

The  Governour  General  that  means  to  negled  no 
opportunity  of  advancing  or  inriching  themfelves, 
do  commonly  hear  two  Mafles  a Day,  and  are  ob- 
lig’d to  confefs  once  in  four  and  twenty  hours. 
He  has  always  Clergy- men  hanging  about  him 
where-ever  he  goes,  and  indeed  properly  fpeaking, 
they  are'  his  Counfellours.  When  a Governour  is 
thus  back’d  by  the  Clergy  j the  Intendants,  the  Un- 
der-Governours,  and  the  Sovereign  Council,  dare’s 
not  cenfure  his  Condud,  let  it  be  never  fo  faulty  ; 
for  the  protedion  of  the  Eccleftafticks,  /belters  him 
from  all  the  charges  that  can  be  laid  againft  him. 

The  Governour  General  of  Quebec,  has  twenty 
thoufand  Crowns  a year,  including  the  pay , of  his 

Com- 


I 


to  KorthArntncsi. 


i6i 


Company  of  Guards,  and  the  particular!  Govern- 
ment of  the  Fort.  Over  and  above  this  Income, 
the  Farmers  of  the  Beaver-Skins  make  him  a Pre- 
fent  of  a thoufand  Crowns  a year  j his  Wines  and 
all  his  other  Provifions^ported  from  France  pay  no 
Fraight  ; not  to  mention  that  by  certain,  ways  and 
means  he  fucks  as  much  Money  our  of  the  Coun- 
try, as  ail  the  above-mention’d  Articles  amount  to. 
The  Intendant  has  eighteen  thoufand  Livres  a year  j 
but  the  Lord  knows  what  he  makes  othfrwiie  ; 
I have  no  mind  to  touch  there,  for  fear  of  being 
rank’d  among  thofe  Detraéfors , who  fpeak  the 
truth  too  lincerely.  The  Bilhops  Incomes  are  fo 
fmall,  that  if  the  King  were  not  gracioufly  pleas’d 
to  add  to  his  Bilhoprick  fome  other  Benefices  in 
France , that  Reverend  Prelate  would  be  reduc’d 
to  as  fliort  Commons,  as  a hundred  of  his  Chara- 
I <ffer  are  in  the  Kingdom  of  Naples.  The  Major  of 
; Qwhec  has  (lx  hundred  Crowns  a year,  the  Gover- 
j nour  of  Trou  Rivieres  has  a thoufand  ; and  the  Go- 
il  vernourof  Monreal  is  allow’d  two  thoufand.  A Cap- 
tain has  a hundred  and  twenty  Livres  a Month, a Lieu- 
tenant ninety  Livres,  a refoim’d  Lieutenant  is  al- 
j low’d  but  forty,  and  a common  Soldier’s  pay  is  fix 
I Sous  a Day,  of  the  current  Money  of  the  Country. 

Î The  People  repofea  great  deal  of  confidence  iri 
jhe  Clergy  in  this  Country  as  well  as  eifewhere. 
Here  the  outward  /hew  of  Devotion  is  ftridly  ob- 
ferv’d,  for  the  People  dare  not  abfent  from  the  great 
Maffes and  Sermons,  without  a lawful  Excufe.  But 
after  all,  ’tis  at  the  time  of  Divine  Service,  that  the 
married  Women  and  Maids  give  their  humours  a 
full  loofe,  as  being  affur’d  that  their  Husbands  and 
Mothers  are  bufie  at  Church.  The  Priefts  call  Peo- 
ple by  their  names  in  the  Pulpit  ; they  prohibit  un- 
der the  pain  of  Excommunication,  the  reading  of 
Romances  and  Plays,  as  well  as  the  ufe  of  Masks, 
land  playing  ftt  Ombre  or  Lanlquenet.  Thejefii- 


it§ 


i6i  Some  2^em  Voyages 

its  and  the  Recollets  agree  as  ill  as  the  Molinifts 
and  the  Janfenifts.  The  former  pretend  that  the 
latter  have  no  right  to  confefs.  Do  but  look  back 
to  my  eighth  Letter,  and  there  you’ll  fee  fome  in- 
ftances  of  the  indifereet  zeal  of  the  Ecclefiafticks. 

The  Governour  General  has  the  difpofal  of  all 
Military  Ports  ; He  beftows  Companies,  Lieute- 
nancies, and  Under- Lieutenancies,  upon  who  he 
pleafes,  with  his  Majefty’s  gracious  Approbation  J 
but  he  is  not  allow’d  to  difpofe  of  particular  Gover- 
nourlhips,  or  of  the  place  of  a Lord  Lieutenant  of 
a Province,  or  of  the  Major  of  any  Town.  He  is 
im  power’d  to  grant  to  the  Gentry  and  the  other  In- 
habitants, Lands  and  Settlements  all  over  Canada  j 
but  thefe  Grants  murt  be  given  in  concert  with  the 
Intendant.  He  is  likewife  authoris’d  to  give  five  and 
twenty  Licences  a year  to  whom  he  thinks  fit,  for 
trading  with  the  Savage  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con- 
tinent. He  is  inverted  with  the  power  of  fufpend- 
ing  the  execution  of  Sentences  againft  Criminals  j 
and  by  vertue  of  this  Reprieve,  can  eafily  pro- 
cure ’em  a Pardon,  if  he  has  a mind  to  favour  ’em. 
But  hecan’t  difpofe  of  the  King’s  Money,  without 
the  confent  of  the  Intendant,  who  is  the  only  Man 
that  can  call  it  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Treafurer  of 
the  Navy. 

The  Governour  General  can’t  be  without  the  fer- 
vice  of  the  Jefuits,  in  making  Treaties  with  the  Go- 
vernours  of  New-England,  and  New-Tork,  as  well  as 
with  the  irequefe.  lam  at  a lofs  to  know,  whether 
thefe  good  Fathers  are  imploy’d  in  fuch  Services, 
npon  thefcore  of  their  judicious  Counfels,  and  their 
being  perfeéhiy  well  acquainted  with  the  Country, 
and  the  King’s  true  inrerertsj  or  upon  the  confi- 
deration  of  their  fpeaking  to  a Miracle,  the  Lan- 
guages of  fa  many  different  Nations,  whofe  inte- 
rert  are  quite  oppofite  ; or  out  of  a fenfe  of  that  con- 
defeenfion  and  fubmiflion,  that  is  due  to  thefe  worthy 
Companions  of  our  Saviour.  The 


to  l^orth  Axnmca.» 


The  Members  of  thefupreme  Council  oî  Cana- 
can’t  fell  or  convey  their  Places  to  their  Heirs^  or 
to  any  body  elfe  without  the  King’s  approbation  ; 
though  at  the  fame  time  their  places  may  be  worth 
not  fo  much  as  the  place  of  a Lieutenant  to  a Compa- 
ny of  Foot.  When  they  have  nice  points  under 
their  confideration,  they  .ufually  confult  the  Priefts 
or  Jefuits  ; And  if  any  caufe  comes  before  ’em,  in 
which  thefe  good  Fathers  are  interefs’d,  they  are 
fure  not  to  be  caft,  unlefs  it  be  (o  very  black,  that 
the  cunningeft  Lawyer  can’t  give  it  a plaufible  turn. 
I’ve  been  inform’d  by  feveral  Perfons,  that  the  Je- 
fuits drive  a great  trade  in  European  Commodities, 
and  Canada  Skins  ; but  I can  fcarce  believe  it,  or  at 
leaft  if  it  be  fo,  they  muft  have  Correfpondents 
and  Fadors  that  are  as  clofe  and  cunning  as 
themfelves  j which  can  never  be. 

The  Gentlemen  of  that  Country,  are  oblig’d  to 
be  very  cautious  in  carrying  even  with  the  Ecdefi’ 
afikks,  in  refpedl  of  the  good  or  harm  that  the  good 
Fathers  can  indireftly  throw  in  their  way.  The 
Bilhopand  the  Jefuits  have  fuch  an  influence  over 
I the  Governours  General,  as  is  fufficient  to  procure 
places  to  the  Children  of  the  Noblemen  or  Gentle- 
men that  are  devoted  to  their  Service,  or  to  obt  lin 
the  Licences  that  I fpoke  of  in  my  eighth  Letter. 
’Tis  likewife  in  their  power  to  ferve  the  Daughters 
of  fuch  Gentlemen,  by  finding  ’ein  agreeable  and 
rich  Husbands.  The  meanett  Curates  muft  be  ma- 
nag’d cautioufly,  for  they  çan  either  ferve  ordilTervc 
the  Gentlemen,  in  whofe  Seignories  they  are  no  more 
than  Miffionaries,  there  being  no  fix'd  Cures  in  Ca~ 
Hida,  which  indeed  is  a grievance  that  ought  to  be 
redrefs’d.  The  Officers  of  the  Army  are  likewife 
oblig’d  to  keep  up  a good  correfpondence  with  the 
Ecckfiafikks,  for  without  that  ’tis  impoffible  for  ’em 
to  keep  their  ground.  They  muft  not  only  take 
care  tfiat  thf  ir  own  çonduél  be  regular  ; but  likewife 

S 4 look 


164  Some  New  Voyages 

look  after  that  of  the  Soldiers,  by  preventing  the 
Difbi  ders  they  might  commit  in  their  Quarters. 

Conimonly  the  Troops  are  quarter’d  upon  the  In- 
habitants of  the  Cotrx,  or  Seignories  of  Canada,  from 
O£ioher  to  May  The  Mafter  of  the  Houfe  furnifhes 
his  Military  Gueftsonly  with  Utenfils,  and  imploys 
him  all  the  while  at  the  rate  of  ten  Sous  a Day  befides 
bis  Viâuals,  in  the  cutting  of  Wood,  grubbing  up 
of  Grounds , rooting  out  Stumps , or  the  threlh- 
ing  of  Corn  in  a Barn.  The  Captain  gets  likewife 
by  their  work  ; for  to  make  ’em  difcount  the  half  of 
their  pay  to  him,  he  orders  ’em  to  come  thrice  a 
Week  to  exercife  their  Arms  at  his  Quarters.  Now, 
their  Habitations  being  diftant  four  or  five  Arpents 
from  one  another,  and  one  Cote  or  Seignory  being 
two  or  three  Leagues  in  Front,  the  Soldiers  choofe 
rather  to  give  the  Captain  a fpill,  than  to  walk  fo  far 
In  the  Snow  and  the  Dirt  : And  the  Captain  takes 
it  very  confcientioufly,  upon  the  plea  that  Volenti 
non  jit  injuria.  As  for  fuch  Soldiers  as  are  good 
Tradefmen,  he’s  fure  of  putting  their  whole  pay  in 
his  Pocket,  by  vertue  of  a Licence  that  he  gives  ’em 
to  work  in  the  Towns,  or  any  where  elfe.  In  fine, 
moft  of  the  Officers  marry  in  this  Country,  but  God 
knows  what  fort  of  Marriages  they  make,  in  taking 
Girls  with  a Do<vry,  confifting  of  eleven  Crowns,  a 
Cock,  a lien,  an  Ox,  a Cow,  and  fometimes  a 
Calf.  I knew  feveral  young  Women,  whofe  Lov- 
ers, after  denying  the  Fad,  and  proving  before  the 
Judges  the  fcandalous  Converfation  of  their  Miftref- 
fes,  were  forc’d  upon  the  perfwafion  of  the  Ecck- 
Jiafitcks  to  fwallow  the  bitter  Pill,  and  take  the  very 
fame  Girls  in  Marriage.  Some  Officers  indeed  marry 
well,  but  there  are  few  fuch.  The  occafion  of  their 
marrying  fo  readily  in  that  Country,  proceeds  from 
the  difficulty  of  converfing  with  the  foft  Sex.  After 
a Man  has  made  four  Villts  to  a young  Woman,  he 
U oblig’d  to  unfold  hIsMind  to  her  Father  and  Mo- 


to  l^orth  hmcncsL,  i6y 

ther  ; he  muft  then  either  talk  of  Marriage,  or  break 
off  all  Gorrefpondence  ; or  if  he  do’s  not,  both  he 
and  fhe  lies  under  a Scandal.  In  this  Country  a Man 
can’t  vifit  another  Man’s  Wife,  without  being  cen- 
fur’d,  as  if  her  Husband  was  a Cuckold.  In  fine, 
a Man  can  meet  with  no  diverfion  here,  but  that 
of  reading,  or  eating,  or  drinking.  Though  after 
all,  there  are  fome  Intrigues  carry’d  on,  but  with 
the  fame  caution  as  in  Spaht,  where  the  vertue  of 
the  Ladies  confifts  only  in  dilguifing  the  matter  hand- 
fomly. 

Now,  that  I am  upon  the  Subjed  of  Marriage, 
I can’t  forbear  to  acquaint  you  with  a comical  Ad- 
venture that  happen’d  to  a young  Captain,  who 
was  prefs’d  to  marry  againfi  his  will,  becaufe  all  his 
Companions  and  Acquaintances  were  already  buck- 
led. This  young  Officer  having  made  feme  Vifirs 
to  a Counfellor’s  Daughter,  he  was  defir’d  to  tell 
what  Errand  he  came  upon  ; and  Mr.  de  Frontenac 
himfelf,  being  related  to  the  young  Lady,  who  is 
certainly  one  of  the  moft  accomplifh’d  Ladies  of 
this  Age,  us’d  his  utmoft  efforts  to  ingage  the  Cap- 
tain to  marry  her.  Tiie  Captain  being  equally 
well  pleas’d  with  a free  accefs  to  the  Governour’s 
Table,  and  the  company  of  the  Lady  whom  he 
met  there  not  unfrequently  j the  Captain,  1 fay, 
being  equally  fond  of  thefe  two  Advantages,  en- 
deavour’d to  ward  off  the  defign,  by  asking  fome 
time  to  confider  of  it.  Accordingly,  two  Months 
were  granted  him  ; and  after  that  time  was  expir’d, 
he  had  (till  a mind  to  let  out  his  Traces,  and  fodcr 
fir’d  two  Months  more,  which  were  granted  him 
by  the  Bifliop’s  intsreeffion.  When  the  laft  of  thefe 
two  was  at  an  end,  the  Cavalier  began  to  beappre- 
henfive  that  he  was  in  danger  of  lofing  both  his 
good  Cheer,  and  the  agreeable  company  of  the  La- 
dy. However,  he  was  oblig’d  to  be  prefent  at  a 
Tre^t  that  Mr*  Nelfi»  ( the  Gentleman  I 


2 66  Some  Foya^es 

fpoke  of  in  my  2 5 Letter)  gave  to  the  two  Lovers,  as 
weil  as  the  Governour,  the  Intendant,  the  Bifliop, 
and  forae  other  Perfons  of  Note  : And  this  gene- 
rous English  Gentleman,  having  a kindnefs  for  the 
young  Ladies  Father,  and  her  Brethren,  upon  the 
fcoreof  their  trading  with  one  another,  made  an 
offer  of  a thoufand  Crowns  to  be  paid  on  the  Wed- 
ding Day,  which  added  to  a thoufand  that  the  Bi- 
fhop  offer’d,  and  a thoufand  mors  which  fhe  had 
of  her  own,  befides  feven  or  eight  thoufand  that 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  offer’d  in  Licences,  not  to  menti- 
on the  certain  profpeft  of  Preferment;  all  thefe 
Items,  I fay,  made  the  Marriage  very  advantageous  j 
to  the  Captain,  After  they  had  done  eating,  he  ; 
was  prefs’d  to  fign  the  Contrat,  but  made  anfwer,  ^ 
that  he  had  drunk  fome  bumpers  of  heady  Wine,and  < 
his  Head  was  not  clear  enough  for  weighing  the 
conditions  of  the  Contrail;  fo  that  they  were  forc’d 
to  put  off  the  matter  till  the  next  day.  Upon  this 
delay  he  kept  his  Chamber  till  Mr.  at 

whole  Table  he  us’d  to  eat,  fent  for  him  in  order  j 
to  know  his  Mind  immediately.  Then  there  was 
no  room  left  for  fhufHing  ; there  was  a neceffity  of  i 
giving  a pofitive  anfwer  to  the  Governour,  who  j 
fpoke  to  him  in  plain  and  precife  terms,  and  at  the  | 
fame  time  reminded  him  of  the  favour  they  had  I 
Ihewn  him,  in  allowing  him  fo  much  time  to  con- 
lider  of  the  propos’d  Marriage.  The  young  Offi-  J 
cer  reply’d  very  fairly,  that  any  Man  that  was  ca- 
pable of  Marrying  after  four  Months  deliberation, 
was  a fool  in  buckling  to.  ‘ I now  f=e,  fays  he, 

‘ what  I am  ; the  eager  dcfire  I had  of  going  to 
‘ Church  with  Mademoifelle  p. . . . has  now  con- 
‘ vinc’d  me  of  my  folly  ; if  you  have  a refpeâ:  for  ' 
* the  Lady,  pray  do  not  fuffer  her  to  marry  a z 
‘ young  Spark,  that  is  fo  apt  to  take  up  with  extra-  | 
‘ vagint  and  foolifn  things.  As  for  my  own  part.  Sir,  5 
^ I proteff  fincereiy,  that  the  little  reafon  and  free  r 

judg,.| 


to  North- America.  1 67 

^ judgment  that  is  left  me,  will  ferve  to  comfort 

* me  upon  the  lofs  of  her,  and  to  teach  me  to  re- 

* pent  of  having  defin’d  to  make  her  as  unhappy  as 

* my  felf.  This  Difeourfe  furpris’d  the  Bifhop,  the 
Governour,  the  Intendant,  and  in  general,  all  the 
other  Married  Officers,  who  defin’d  nothing  more 
than  that  he  ffiould  be  catch’d  in  the  noofe  as  well 
as  they;  Ib  true  it  is,  that  Solamen  mïferè  focios  ba^ 
buijje  àoïoris.  As  they  were  far  from  expeding  any 
fuch  retractation  ; fo  the  poor  reform’d  Captain  fuf^ 
fer’d  for’t  ; for  fome  time  after  Mr.  de  Frontenac  did 
Wm  a piece  of  Injuftice,  in  beftowing  a vacant 
Company  over  his  Head,  upon  Madam  de  Tonebar- 
trains  Nephew,  notwithftanding  that  the  Court  had 
f?nt  orders  on  his  behalf  ; and  this  oblig’d  him  to 
go  for  France  along  with  me  in  the  year  1692. 

To  refume  the  thread  of  my  Difeourfe  : You  muft 
know  that  the  Canadefe  or  Creoles,  are  a robufl  braw- 
ny well  made  People  ; they  are  ftrong,  vigorous, 
adtive,  brave  and  indefatigable;  in  a word,  they 
want  nothing  but  the  knowledge  of  polite  Letters. 
They  are  prefumptuous,  and  very  full  of  them- 
felves  ; they  value  themfelves  beyond  all  the  Nations 
of  the  Earth,  and,  which  is  to  be  regrated,  they 
have  not  that  veneration  for  their  Parents  that  is 
due.  Their  Complexion  is  wonderfully  pretty.  The 
Women  are  generally  handfom  ; few  of  them  are 
brown,  but  many  of  ’em  are  at  once  wife  and  lazy. 
They  love  Luxury  to  the  laft  degree,  and  firive  to 
out-do  one  another  in  catching  Husbands  in  the 
trap. 

There’s  an  infinity  of  diforders  in  Canada,  that 
want  to  be  reform’d.  The  firft  fiep  of  a true  Re- 
formation, muft  be  that  of  hindring  the  Ecclefii- 
afticks  to  vifit  the  Inhabitants  fo  often,  and  to  pry 
with  fuchimpercinence  into  the  minuteft  affairs  of 
the  Family  ; for  fuch  pradices  are  frequently  con- 
trary to  the  good  of  the  Society,  ^nd  that  for  rea- 

fons 


1 6%  Some  ^ew  Voyages 


fons  that  you  are  not  ignorant  of.  The  next  thing 
to  be  done,  is  to  prohibit  the  Officers  to  ftop  the 
Soldiers  pay,  and  to  injoyn  ’em  to  Dilcipline  their 
Men  every  Holy-day,  and  every  Sunday.  In  the 
third  place,  the  Commodities  ought  to  be  rated  at 
a reafonable  price,  fo  that  the  Merchant  may  have 
his  profit,  without  exading  upon  the  Inhabitants 
and  the  Savages.  A.  fourth  Article  of  Reformation, 
would  confift  in  prohibicirjg  the  exporting  from 
France  to  Canada,  of  Brocade’s,  Gold  and  Silver  Gal- 
loons or  Ribbands,  and  rich  Laces.  In  a fifth  place, 
the  Governour  General  ought  not  to  fell  Licen- 
ces for  trading  with  the  Savages  of  the  great 
Lakes.  Sixthly,  there  ought  to  be  fix’d  Courts, 
In  the  feventh  place,  they  want  to  have  their  Mi- 
litia modell’d  and  difciplin’d,  that  upon  occafion, 
they  may  be  as  ferviceable  as  the  Regular  Troops. 
For  an  eighth  Article,  the  fetting  up  Manufado- 
ries  for  Linnen,  Stuffs,  &c.  would  be  very  ufeful. 
But  the  moft  important  alteration  would  confift  in 
keeping  the  Governours,  the  Intendants,  the  fu- 
preme  Council,  the  Biffiops  and  the  Jefuits,  from 
(plitting  into  Fadions,  and  making  Clubs  one  a- 
gainft  another;  for  the  confequences  ot  fuch  Di- 
vifions  can’t  but  thwart  his  Majefty’s  Service,  and 
the  Peace  of  the  Publick.  Were  this  but  happily 
effeded,  that  Country  would  be  as  rich  again  as 
’tis  now. 

I wonder  that  inftead  of  banifhing  the  Protc- 
ftants  out  of  France,  who  in  removing  to  the  Coun- 
tries of  our  Enemies,  have  done  fo  much  damage 
to  the  Kingdom,  by  carrying  their  M ney  along 
with  ’em,  and  fetting  up  Manufaduries  in  thofç 
Countries  ; I wonder,  I fay,  that  the  Court  did  not 
think  it  more  proper  to  tranfport  ’em  to  Canada, 
I’m  convinc’d,  that  if  they  had  receiv’d  pofitive 
afturances  of  injoying  a liberty  of  Confcience,  a 
great  many  of  ’em  would  have  made  no  fcruple 


'i 


\ 

1 


'i 


tq 


to  Norf/j-Americâ.  léÿ 

to  go  thither.  Some  have  rcply’d  upon  this  Head, 
that  the  Remedy  had  been  worle  than  the  Difeafe; 
in  regard  that  fome  time  or  other  they  would  not 
have  fail ’d  to  expel  the  Catholkks  by  the  affiftance 
of  the  Engli^  : But  I reprefented  to  ’em,  that  the 
Greeks  and  Armenians^  who  are  fubjed  to  the  Grand 
Seignior,  and  at  the  fame  time  are  of  a Nation 
and  Religion  that’s  different  from  that  of  theTar^r; 
I reprefented,  I fay,  thatthefe  dilTenting  Subjeds 
did  fcarce  ever  implore  the  aid  of  foreign  Powers, 
in  order  to  rebel  and  fhake  off  the  Yoak.  In 
fine,  we  have  more  reafon  to  believe,  that  if  the 
Huguenots  had  been  tranfported  to  Canada,  they  had 
never  departed  from  the  fealty  they  ow’d  to  their 
natural  Soveraign.  But,  let  that  be  as  it  will  ; I do 
but  (peak  as  that  King  of  Arragon  did,  who  boaft- 
ed,  that  if  God  had  daign’d  to  confiait  him,  he 
could  have  given  him  feafonable  advice  with  refe- 
rence to  the  fymmetry  and  the  courfes  of  the  Stars  : 
For  in  like  manner,  I do  affirm,  that  if  the  Coun- 
cil of  State  had  follow’d  my  Scheme,  in  the  fpace 
of  thirty  or  forty  years,  Neov-France  would  have  be- 
come a finer  and  more  flourifhing  Kingdom,  than 
feveral  others  in  Europe. 


A Difcourfe  of  the  Interefi  of  the  French,  and  of  the 
Englifh,  in  Norré-America. 

Since  Neiv-France  and  Nevs-England  fubfiff  only 
upon  the  Cod-Fiffiery,  and  the  Fur-trade,  tis’ 
the  intereft  of  thefe  two  Colonies  to  inlarge  the 
number  of  the  Ships  imploy’d  in  the  Filhery,  and 
to  incourage  the  Savages  to  hunt  and  fhoot  Bea- 
vers, by  furniffiing  them  with  what  Arms  and  Am- 
munition theyhave  occafion  for.  ^’ïis  well  known, 
that  there’s  a great  confumption  of  .Codfilh  in  the 

Southern 


270  Some  T^ew  Voyages 

Southern  Countries  of  Europe,  and  that  few  Coifl- 
modities  meet  with  a better  and  readier  Market,  ef- 
pecially  if  they  are  good  and  well  cur’d. 

Thofe  who  alledge  that  the  deftrudion  of  the  Iro- 
quefe,  would  promote  the  intereft  of  the  Colonies 
of  Neiv-France,  are  ftrangers  to  the  true  intereft  of 
that  Country  ; for  if  that  were  once  accomplifti’d, 
the  Savages  who  are  now  the  French  Allies,  would 
turn  their  greateft  Enemies,  as  being  then  rid  of 
their  other  fears.  They  would  not  fail  to  call  in 
the  Englijh,  by  reafon  that  their  Commodities  are 
at  once  cheaper,  and  more  efteem’d  than  ours  ; 
and  by  that  means  the  whole  Commerce  of  that  wide 
Country,  would  be  wrefted  out  of  our  hands. 

1 conclude  therefore,  that  ’tis  the  intereft  of  the 
French  to  weaken  the  Iroquefe,  but  not  to  fee  ’em 
intirely  defeated.  1 own,  that  at  this  day  they  are 
too  ftroog,  infomuch  that  they  cut  the  Throats 
of  the  Savages  our  Allies  every  day.  They  have 
nothing  lefs  in  view,  than  to  cut  off  all  the  Nati- 
ons they  know,  let  their  Situation  be  never  fo  re- 
mote from  their  Country.  ’Tis  our  bufinefs  to  re- 
duce ’em  to  one  half  of  the  power  they  are  now 
polTefs'’d  of,  if  ’twere  poffible  ; but  we  do  not  go 
the  right  way  to  work.  Above  thefe  thirty 
years,  their  ancient  Counfellors  have  ftill  remon- 
ftrated  to  the  Warriours  of  the  five  Nations,  that 
’twas  expedient  to  cut  off  all  the  Savage  Nations 
of  Canada,  in  order  to  ruine  the  Commerce  of  the 
French,  and  after  that  to  diflodge  ’em  of  the  Conti- 
nent. With  this  view  they  have  carry’d  the  War 
above  four  or  five  hundred  Leagues  off  their  Coun- 
try, after  the  deftroying  of  feveral  different  Nations 
in  feveral  places,  as  I fhew’d  you  before. 

’T would  be  no  difficult  matter  for  the  French  to 
draw  the  Iroquefe  over  to  their  fide,  to  keep  ’em  from 
plaguing  the  French  Allies,  and  at  the  fame  time 
to  ingrofs  all  the  Commerce  with  the  five  Iroquefe 

Nations, 


to  North- hmcncz.  171 

Nations,  that  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the  Engliflj  ia 
New-Tork.  This  might  be  eafily  put  in  execution, 
provided  the  King  would  allow  ten  thoufand  Crowns 
a year,  for  that  end.  The  method  of  efFcding  it 
is  this.  In  the  firft  place,  the  Barques  that  were  for- 
merly made  ufe  of  about  Fort  Frontenac,  muft  be 
rebuilt, in  order  to  convey  to  the  Rivers  of  the  Tfonon- 
touans  and  the  Onontagues,  fuch  Commodities  as  are 
proper  for  ’em,  and  to  fell  ’em  for  the  prime  coft 
in  France.  Now  this  would  put  the  King  to  the 
cliarge  of  about  ten  thoufand  Crowns  for  fraight  ; 
and  I’m  perfwaded,  that  upon  that  foot  the  Irotjuefe 
would  not  be  fuch  fools  as  to  carry  fo  much  as  one 
Beaver  to  the  EngUfh  Colonies,  and  that  for  four 
Reafons.  The  firft  is,  that , whereas  they  muft 
tranfport  ’em  fixty  or  eighty  Leagues  upon  their 
backs  - to  they  have  not  above  feven  or 

eight  Leagues  travelling  from  their  own  Villages, 
to  the  banks  of  the  Lake  of  Frontenac.  For  a fé- 
cond reafon,  ’tis  manifeft  that  the  can’t  pof- 
fibly  let  ’em  have  their  Commodities  fo  cheap , 
without  being  confiderable  Infers,  and  that  there- 
upon every  Merchant  would  drop  that  fort  of  Trade. 
The  third  is  drawn  from  the  difficulty  of  having 
Subfiftance  upon  the  Road  between  the  Iroquefe  Vil- 
lages and  New-York  ; for  the  Irot^ucfe  go  thither 
in  great  Bodies,  for  tear  of  being  furpris’d,  and  I 
acquainted  you  before  lèverai  times,  that  there’s  no 
Venifon  in  that  fide  of  the  Country.  The  fourth 
reafon  is  this.  In  marching  fo  far  from  their  Villa- 
ges, they  expofe  their  Wives,  their  Children,  and 
their  fuperannuated  Men,  for  a prey  to  their  Ene- 
mies, who  upon  that  occafion  may  either  kill  ’em, 
or  carry  ’em  off  j and  of  this  we  have  two  Inftan- 
ces  already.  Over  and  above  the  cheapnefs  of  our 
Commodities,  ’twould  Hkewife  be  requifite  that  we 
made  ’em  Prefents  every  year,  and  at  the  fame 
time  intreated  ’em  not  to  difturb  the  repofe  of  our 

Con- 


171  Some  "Rew  Voyages 

Confederate  Savages , who  are  fuch  fools,  as  to 
wage  War  one  with  another,  inftead  of  entring  in- 
to a joint  League  in  oppofition  to  the  Iroeinefe,  the 
moft  redoubted  of  their  Enemies,  and  thofe  whom 
they  have  moft  reafon  to  fear.  In  a word,  if  we 
would  manage  our  affairs  with  ths' Iroquefe  to  the 
beft  advantage,  we  ought  to  put  in  execution  that 
Project  that  I mention’d  in  my  Letter. 

To  alledge  that  thefefi<ir^<*rwwi  have  a dépendance 
upon  the  EngUjh,  is  a foolilh  Plea  : For  they  are  fo 
far  from  owning  any  dépendance,  that  when  they 
go  to  Hav-Tork  to  truck  their  Skins,  they  have  the 
confidence  to  put  rates  upon  the  Goods  they  have 
occafion  for,  when  the  Merchants  offer  to  raife 
their  pricé.  I have  intimated  already  feveral  times, 
that  their  refpeâ  for  the  Englijh,  is  tack’d  to  the 
occafion  they  have  to  make  ufe  of  ’em  ; that  this  is 
the  only  motive  which  induces  ’em  to  treat  the 
Englijh  as  their  Brethren,  and  their  Friends;  and 
that  if  the  French  would  fell  ’em  the  Neceffaries  of 
Life,  as  well  as  Arms  and  Ammunition,  ateafier 
rates,  they  would  not  make  many  journeys  to  the 
Englijh  Colonies.  This  is  a confideration  that  ought 
to  be  chiefly  in  our  view  ; for  if  we  minded  it  to 
the  purpofe,  they  would  be  cautious  of  infulting 
our  Savage  Confederates,  as  well  as  our  felves.  The 
Governours  General  of  Canada  would  do  well  to 
imploy  the  fenfible  Men  of  the  Country  that  are 
acquainted  with  our  Confederates,  in  prefling  ’em 
to  live  in  a good  correfpondence  with  one  another, 
without  waging  War  among  themfelves  ; for  moft 
of  the  Southern  Nations  worm  out  one  another  in- 
fenfibly,  which  affords  matter  of  joy  to  the  Iro<juefe. 
Now,  ’twere  an  eafie  matter  to  prevent  this  fatal 
mouldering,  by  threatning  to  give  ’em  no  further 
fupplies  of  Commodities  in  their  Villages.  To  this 
precaution,  we  ought  to  add  that  of  indeavouring 
to  ingage  two  or  three  Nations  to  live  together  ; 


I to  North- Amnicâ»  275 

! the  Ontaouoff  for  inftance,  with  the  Hurons  ; tlie 
Sakü  with  the  Pouteouatamù,  alias  Vuattts.  if  all  thole 
Nations  who  are  imbarqued  in  a Confederacy  with 
us,  would  but  agree  one  with  another,  and  put  up 
their  quarrels,  they  would  give  thernfelves  w;hoily 
to  the  hunting  of  Beavers,  which  would  tend  to  the 
inlarging  of  our  Commerce  ; and  befides,  they 
would  be  in  a condition  of  making  one  joint  Body, 

. when  the  Irocjuefe  offer’d  to  attack  either  one  or  t’other. 

’Tis  the  intereft  of  the  Englijh  to  perfwade  thefe 
Nations,  that  the  French  have  nothing  lefs  in  view, 
than  to  deftroy  them  as  foon  as  they  meet  with  an 
opportunity  ; that  the  growing  populoufnefs  of  Ca- 
nada, is  a fufficient  ground  of  alarm  ; that  they 
I ought  to  avoid  all  Commerce  with  the  French,  for 
fear  of  being  betray’d  in  any  way  whatfoever  ; 
that  to  hinder  the  repairing  of  Fort  Frontenac,  and 
the  rebuilding  of  Barques  for  that  Lake,  is  to  them 
a thing  of  the  laft  Importance,  by  reafon  that  the 
j French  might  in  four  and  twenty  hours,  make  a Def- 
i cent  from  thence  to  their  Villages,  and  carry  off 
; their  ancient  Men,  their  Women  and  their  Chil- 
li dren,  at  a time  when  the  Warrionrs  might  be  en- 
gag’d in  the  hunting  of  Beavers  ; Tiîat  they  would 
promote  their  own  intereft  by  waging  War  with  the 
! French  from  time  to  time,  by  ravaging  the  Seignories 
and  Settlements  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Country, 

■ in  order  to  oblige  the  Inhabitants  to  abdicate  the 
Colony,  and  to  difcourage  thofe  who  would  other- 
' wife  remove  out  of  France,  and  fettle  in  Canada  j 
' and  in  fine.  That  in  time  of  Peace  ’twould  be  very 
1 proper  to  flop  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  at  the  Catarads  of 
; the  River, and  to  feize  the  Arms  an  Ammu- 

i nition  that  they  carry  to  the  Savages  upon  the  Lakes. 

Farther,  if  the  English  would  purfue  their  mea- 
i fures  to  the  beft  advantage,  they  ought  to  ingage 
the  Tfonontouans  or  Goyogaans  to  go  and  fettle 
upon  the  Banks  of  the  Lake  Errîè,  near  the  Mouth 

T of 


274  Voyages 

of  the  River  oî  Condè  ; and  at  the  fame  time  they 
ought  to  build  a Fort  there,  vvith  fome  long  Barques 
or  Brigantines  : For  this  is  the  moft  convenient  and 
advantageous  Port  of  all  that  Country,  and  that  for 
an  infinity  of  Reafons  which  I am  oblig’d  to  con- 
ceal. Befides  this  Fort,  they  fhould  build  another 
at  the  Mouth  of  the  River  des  François  ; and  then 
’twould  be  abfolutely  impoffible  for  the  Coureurs  de 
Bois  to  reach  the  Lakes. 

They  ought  likewife  to  ingage  the  Savages  of 
Acadia  in  their  intereft  ; which  they  may  do  with 
little  charge.  The  Planters  of  Nsw-E»gland  Ihould 
mind  this,  as  well  as  the  fortifying  of  the  Ports 
in  which  they  fifh  their  Cod.  As  for  the  fitting 
out  of  Fleets  to  deftroy  the  Colony,  I would  not 
adyife  the  Englijls  to  give  themlelves  that  trouble  ; 
for  fuppofing  they  were  aflur’d  of  Succefs,  ’tis  but 
fome  places  that  can  be  reckon’d  worth  the  while. 

To  conclude  ; I muft  fay  the  Englijh  in  thefe 
Colonies  are  too  carelefs  and  lazy  : The  French 
Coureurs  de  Bois , are  much  readier  for  Enterpri- 
fes , and  the  Canadefe  are  certainly  more  vigi- 
lant and  more  adive.  It  behov^es  the  Inhabi- 
tants of  fJew-Tork  ro  inlarge  their  Fur-trade  by 
well  concerted  Enterprifes  ; and  thofe  of  JVew- 
England,  to  render  the  Cod-fi(hing  more  benefici- 
al to  the  Colony,  by  raking  fuch  meafures  as 
many  other  People  would,  it  they  were  as  advan- 
tageoully  feared.  I do  not  intend  to  fpeak  of  the 
limits  of  New-France,  and  New-England,  for  they 
were  never  well  adjufted  ; though  indeed  ’twould 
feeni  that  in  feveral  I'reaties  of  Peace  between 
tlrefe  two  Kingdoms,  the  Boundaries  were  in  a 
manner  mark'd  out  in  fome  places.  Whatever 
is  in  that  matter,  the  decifion  of  it  is  too  nice  a 
point  for  one  that  can’t  ôpen  his  mind  without 
puUing  an  old  Iloufe  upon  his  Head. 

The  End  of  the  Firjl  Volume, 


271 


A TABLE  explaining  fome  Terms 
made  ufe  of  in  both  Volumes. 

A. 

Astrolabe  is  a Mathematical  Infirument  that  can 
fcarce  be  ufed  in  the  Ocean  by  reafonof  the  Waves, 
There  are  two  forts  of  them*  The  firfi  are  made 
ufe  of  by  Eaft- India  Mafiersy  at  a time  -when  the  Sea 
is  as  Jmjoth  as  the  face  of  a Looking-glajs,  This  j or t 
are  ferviceable  in  taking  the  heighth  of  the  Sun^  by  the 
means  of  two  little  Pins  y which  are  bor  d Jo  as  to  have 
two  dioptrick  Perforations^  that  ferv^e  to  condtsB  the 
rays  of  light  to  that  Luminary,  The  latter  are  fucb  as 
I the  Mathematicians  commonly  make  ufe  of  for  Ajironomi^ 

! cal  Obfervationsy  and  are  furbifdd  with  Az^imutbsy 

I AlmucantaraSy  Loxodromick  Tables  y and  the  Concentrick 
and  Excentrick  Tables  of  the  Sphere. 

B. 

Bank  of  New-founddand,  or  Bank  in  general,  is  a 
1 Ground  in  the  Sea,  which Jhoots  like  a Hat  beyond 

the  other  brims.  The  Bank  New-found  land  has 
; thirty  or  forty  Fathom  Water ,and  is  pav  d with  Cod  fijh. 

; Bafin^  is  a head  of  fiagnating  Water,  not  unlike  a Pool  or 
Lake- 

; fignifies  little  Nets  belagd  to  the  end  of  a Stick. 

I The  FJhermen  make  ufe  of  them  to  catch  Fijh  upon  a 

fandy  Ground,  and  efpecially  Eels,  upon  the  (ide  of  St. 
Laurence  River. 

; Bouts  de  Quievres^  are  Nets  not  unlike  Bouteux^  which 
fervefor  the  fame  ufe. 

Breaking  ground  fgnifies  the  weighing  Anchor  and  put- 
I ting  to  Sea. 

I Brigancine,  a fmaU  Veffel  one  Deck,  built  of  light  of 
I T z Wood, 

I 

1 


ï7<5  a T a b L E. 

Wood^  7vhhh  plies  both  iviîh  Oms  and  Sails.  ’Tis  e- 
ejmlly  jh.Mp  at  Frow  and  Poop,  and  is  built  for  a quick 


Calumet  in  general flgnifles  a Pipe, being  a Norman  Word, 
deriv'd  from  Chalumeau.  "The  Savages  do  not  under- 
fi and  this  Word,  for  ’twas  introduc’d  to  Canada  by  the 
Normans  when  they  firfi  fettled  there  ; and  has  [liücoti- 
tinued  in  ufe  atnongjl  the  French  Planters.  The  Calu- 
met or  Pipe  is  call’d  in  the  Iroquefe  Language  Ga- 
nondaoCj  and  by  the  other  Savage  Nations  Poagan. 

Canadcfe  or  Canadans,  are  the  Natives  ^.Canada 

■ fprung  from  a French  Father  and  Mother.  In  the 
IJlands  cjT South- America  the  Natives  born  of  French 
Parents  are  called  Creoles. 

Capa  y d’efpada,  A Gafcogne  Title  which  the  People  of 
that  Province  gave  in  former  times  by  way  of  Irony,  to 
the  Members  of  the  fupream  Council  of  Canada,  he- 
caufe  thefirf  Coun  fellers  wore  neither  Rohe  nor  Sword, 
butwalJid  very  gravely  with  a Cane  in  their  Hands, 
both  in  the  City  of  Quebeck,  and  in  the  Hall. 

Caffe- tête  a Club,  or  a Head-breaker.  , The  Sa- 

vages call  it  AlTan  Ouftick,  Ouftick  fgnifying  the 
Head,  and  Aflan,  to  break. 

ChanneWi  a fpace  of  pretty  deep  Water  between  two 
Banks,  or  between  two  Shears.  Commonly  the  Chan- 
nels are  inclofed  by  Flats,  and  for  that  reajon  Bouys  or 
Alafis  are  fixt  upon  ’em,  in  order  to  direPi  the  Pilots, 
who  fieer  either  by  thefe  Marks,  or  by  founding,  for 
they  would  run  the  rifque  of  loafing  their  Ships, if  they  did 
not  keep  exa^ly  to  the  Channel. 

Coaft  along,  fee  Sweep. 

Compafs  of  Variation.  ’Tis  larger  than  the  ordinary 
Compajfes,  and  ferves  to  point  out  the  inequal  Motions 
of  the  Needle, which  leans  always  to  the  North-Eafi  in  the 
other  Hemifphere,  whereas  it  fill  plies  to  the  North-Wefj 
in  this,  I mean  on  this  fide  the  EquinoPfial  line  : "ïhe 

Needle 


A T A BLE.  277 

Needle  toucJjd  with  the  Loadfione  departs  front  the  true 
North  a certain  number  of  Degrees  to  the  right  and  lefty 
and  Mariners  compute  the  Degrees  of  its  departure  by 
the  means  of  an  Alhidada^  and  a thread  which  divides 
the  Glafs  of  the  Compafs  into  two  eojual  parity  and  fo 
jhews  the  Variation  of  the  Needle  at  Sun-fet,  that  being 
the  true  proper  time  for  making  the  Obfer  vation  ; for 
at  Sun-rifngy  and  at  Noon  y one  may  be  deceivd  by 
RefraBionSy  &c. 

Coureurs  de  Bois,  i.  e.  Forejl  Ranger Sy  are  French  or 
Canadefe,  fo  call’d  from  employing  their  whole  Life  in 
the  rough  Exerci/e  of  tranfporting  Merchandix,e  Goods 
to  the  Lakes  o/Ganada,  and  to  all  the  other  Countries  of 
that  Continenty  in  order  to  Trade  with  the  Savages  : 
And  in  regard  that  they  run  in  Canows  a thoufand 
Leagues  up  the  Country  y notwit  hfianding  the  danger  of 
the  Sea  and  EnemieSy  I take  it  y they  Jhould  rather  be  cal- 
led Coureurs  de  Rifques,  than  Coureurs  de  Bois.  ' 

E. 

Eddy,  or  boyling  Plater  y is  little  Watery  Mountains  that 
rife  at  the  foot  of  Water -falls  or  CataraBsy  jufi  as 
we  fee  the  Water  flays  in  the  Cifierns  of  Water-works. 

Edge  of  a Banky  is  the  jhelving  part  of  it  that  runs  deep 
like  a Wall. 

F. 

Fathom,  among  the  French  is  the  meafure  of  fix  foot. 

Feaft  of  Union,  a Term  us’d  by  the  Iroquefe  to  fignify 
the  renewing  of  the  Alliance  between  the  five  Iroqueiè 
Nations. 

Flats  are  a ridge  of  Rocks  running  under  Water  from  one 
Station  to  another  y and  rifing  within  five  or  fix  foot  at 
leaf  of  the  Sttrf ace  of  that  Element  y fo  as  to  hinder  Ships  y 
Barquesy  &c.  to  float  upon  ’em. 

Fraight,  fignifles  in  this  Book  the  CargOy  tho’  in  other 
Cafes  it  pgnifies  likewife  the  Hire  or  Fare. 

Furl  the  Sails,  fignifles  the  drawing  them  up  to  a heap 

towards 


178  A TABLE. 

tov^ards  the  Top-mafi,  not  long  ways  as  we  do  the  Cur- 
tains of  a Bed,  hut  from  below  upwards.  This  is  done  by 
two  Ropes ^that  draw  up  the  Sail  as  a String  does  a Purfe. 

H. 

Head- Bars  are  two  round  pieces  of  PPoody  reaching  on  each 
fide  from  one  end  of  a Canow  to  the  other.  Tbeje  are 
the  Supporters  of  the  Canow  y for  the  Ribs  and  Spars  are 
made  faji  upon  them. 

K. 

Keel  of  a Ship,  is  a long  piece  of  the  flrongefi  Woody  or  at 
leaf  fever  al  pieces  joynd  together  y to  bear  the  great 
weight  of  all  the  other  Timber. 

Kitchi  OVims-yis  the  general  Name  for  tbeGovernour  Ge- 
neral of  Cântiâi  among  all  the  Savagesy  whofe  Langua- 
ges approach  to  that  of  the  Algonkins,  fignifes 

Grear,  and  Okima,  Captain.  The  Iroquefe  and 
Huronsc^^  the  Governor  General  Onnontxo. 

L. 

Latitude.  Every  Body  knows  that  it  imports  the  Ele- 
vation of  the  Pole,  or  the  difiame  from  a fix’d  Point  of 
the  iÆauator. 

Ijinà-CAtTUgs  fignifies  the  tranfporting  of  Canows  by  Land 
from  the  Foot  to  the  Head  of  a Qatar  ably  or  from  one 
River  to  another. 

Light  Ships  arefuch  as  are  empty  y without  any  Cargo. 

P. 

Poop  is  the  Stern  or  After-part  of  the  Ship  in  which  the 
Rudder  is  fix’d. 

Precipice  of  a Bank,  fee  Edge. 

Prow  is  the  Head  or  Fore-part  of  a Ship  y which  cuts  the 
Water  firfi, 

Q. 

Quarter.  Thd  the  Word  Quarter  in  a Maritime  Senjey 
is  not  well  explain  dz  I put  the  meaning  of  it  to  he  this. 

The 


A TABLÉ.  179 

Tljt  North  Quarter  comprehends  the  [pace  that  lies  be- 
tween North'Wefi  and  North- Eafi.  The  Eafi  Quarter 
runs  from  Nartb-Eafi  to  South-Eafi.  The  South  Quar- 
ter comprehends  that  part  of  the  Heavens  that  falls  be- 
tween South-Eafi  and  Souih-TVefi  : And  the  Wefi  Quar- 
ter extends  from  South-Wefi  to  North-Wefi. 

R. 

Refitting  of  a Ship,  fignifes  the  repairing  and  drejfing  of 
it,  and  putting  it  into  a Condition  to  fail,  by  putting  in 
new  Planks,  caulking  the  Seams,  8cc. 

Ribs  of  a Canow,  are  much  like  thofe  of  a Pink,  onlp 
there’s  this  dijference,  that  they  line  the  Canow  only  on 
the  in-fide  from  one  Head  Bar  to  another,  upon  which 
they  are  inchas’d.  They  have  the  thkknefs  of  three  Crowns, 
and  the  breadth  of  four  Inches. 

Ruche,  an  Infirumentfor  fijhing,  refembling  a Bee-hive. 

S. 

Scurvy,  is  a Corruption  of  the  Mafs  of  Blood.  There  are 
two  forts  of  it  ^ one  call’d  the  Land  Scurvy,  which  loads 
a Man  with  Infirmities  that  gradually  bring  him  to  his 
Grave  J the  other  is  the  Sea  Scurvy,  which  infallibly 
kills  a Man  in  8 days  unlefs  he  gets  a-Jhoar. 

Shieve,  i.  e.  Row  the  wrong  wayÿ.n  order  to  ajfifi  iheSteerf- 
man  to  fieer  the  Boat, and  to  keep  the  Boat  in  the  Channel. 
Shoot.  To  jhoot  a Water-fall  or  Catarabl,  implies  the  run- 
ning a Boat  down  theje  dangerous  Precipices,  following 
the  fiream  of  the  Water,  and  fieering  very  nicely. 

Sledges  are  a Conveniency  for  travelling,  built  in  an  ob- 
long quadrangular  form,  upon  two  pieces  of  Wood, 
which  are  4 foot  long,  and  6 foot  broad \ . upon  the  Wood 
there  are  feveral  pieces  of  Cloath  or  Hide  nail’d  to  keep 
the  Wind  of.  Thefe  two  piecés  of  Wood  are  very  hard, 
and  well  Jmooth’d,  that  they  may  Jlide  the  better  on  Snow 
or  Ice.  Such  are  the  Horfe  Sledges.  But  thofe  drawn  by 
Dogs  are  open,  and  made  of  two  little  pieces  of  hard 
fmooth,  and  pining  Wood,  which  are  half  an  Inch  thick, 
5 foot  long,  and  a foot  and  a half  broad. 


Spars, 


28o  A TABLE, 

Spars  are  little  pieces  of  Cedar  IVood,  of  the  thicknefs  of 
a Crown,  and  the  breadth  of  ; Inches,  and  as  long  as 
they  can  be  made.  "They  do  the fame  Service  to  a Ca- 
non), that  a good  lining  does  to  a Coat. 

Stand  in  for  Land,  fignifies  to  fail  direflly  towards  it. 

Steer  a Ship,  imports  the  managing  of  a Ship  by  the 
means  of  a Rudder,  (^as  we  do  a Horje  with  a Bridle^ 
when  there's  Wind  enough  to  work  her  j but  if  there  be  no 
Wind,  a Ship  is  more  unmoveable  than aGouty  Ferfonin 
an  Elbow  Chair. 

Stem  a Tide  or  the  Current  of  a River,  i.  e.  to  fail  againfi 
the  Current,  or  to  fleer for  the  place  from  whence  the  Tides 
or  Currents  come. 

Strike,  to  frike  the  Sails  or  Flag  flgnifles  the  lowering  of 
^em,  whether  it  be  to  fubmit  to  an  Enemy, or  by  reajon  if 
high  Winds. 

a Coafl,  fignifies  to  fail  along  theCoafl  fide  at  a rea- 
fonable  difiance. 

T. 

Top-gallant- Mails  are  two  little  Ma  fs  fet  upon  the  two 
Top-Mafs,  and  have  two  Sails  fitted  for  'em. 

'Top-Sails  are  two  Sails  fitted  for  the  twoTop-Mafis,  which 
fland  direBly  above  the  two  great  Mafls, 

Traverfe.  To  traverfe  fignifies  failing  Zigzag,  or  from 
fide  to  fide  as  a drunken  Man  reels,  when  the  Wind  is 
contrary,  for  then  they  are  obligd  to  tack  Jometimes  to 
the  right,  and  jometimes  to  the  left,  keeping  as  near  to 
the  Wind  as  they  can,  in  order  to  make  what  way  they 
can,  or  at  leafi  to  prevent  their  lofing  Ground. 

'IrçQ  of  Peace,  aSymbolick  Metaphor  for  Peace  it  felf 


THE 


U 

t 


.■J  \ 


J3. 


-è..^^  I 


cu^4^> 


