rB  d- 

J»vE.99...C.6C.8  ..!.85  I 


FROM  THE 

JOSEPH  H.  CENTER  FUND 


B.P.L.  PLATE  NO.  t<:  7,3.46:  2M. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Boston  Pubiic  Library 


https://archive.org/details/traditionalhistoOOcopw 


1 


THE 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY 


CHARACTERISTIC  SKETCHES 


OF  THE 

JIBWAY  NATION. 


BY  G.  COPWAY, 

> • 

OR,  KAH-OB-OA-GAH-BOWH,  CHIEF  OF  THE  OJIBWAY  NATIOM. 


ILLDSTRATEB  BY  DARLY, 


t- 

BOSTON: 

BENJAMIN  B.  MUSSEY  & CO. 

29  CORNHILL. 


^12 


,C^C2£ 

IlSif 

t.l 


\aI 


TO  AMOS  LAWRENCE,  ESft., 


©f  Soston,  flla30. 

THIS  VOLUME, 

WITH  FEELINGS  OF  DEEP  GRATITUDE, 

AIrt)  SENTIMENTS  OF  THE  HIGHEST  RESPECT, 

IS  AFFECTIONATELY  INSCRIBED 

% 

BY  ' 


THE  AUTHOR. 


1 


i 


PREFACE. 

In  compliance  with  the  oft-repeated  request  of  a 
number  of  literary  friends  I present  this  volume  to 
the  public.  In  doing  so  there  is  another  motive  that 
has  influenced  me,  and  I may  be  pardoned,  if  here,  at 
the  commencement  of  my  task,  I briefly  record  it. 

In  thus  giving  a sketch  of  my  nation’s  history,  de- 
scribing its  home,  its  country  and  its  peculiarities  and 
in  narrating  its  traditionary  legends  I may  awaken  in 
the  American  heart  a deeper  feeling  for  the  race  of  red- 
men  and  induce  the  pale-face  to  use  greater  effort  to 
effect  an  improvement  in  their  social  and  political  re- 
lations. 

You  must  know  that  my  advantages  have  not  been 
very  great  for  the  attainment  of  knowledge  ; that,  in 
common  with  my  forest  brethren  I have,  as  the  saying 
is,  “ been  brought  up  in  the  woods.”  I feel  incompe- 


Viii  PREFACE. 

tent  for  my  work,  but,  am  impelled  forward  by  the 
thought  that  the  nation  whose  history  I here  feebly 
sketch  seems  passing  away  and  that  unless  a work 
like  this  is  sent  forth,  much,  very  much  that  is  inter- 
esting and  instructive  in  that  nations  actions  will 
with  it  pass  away. 

Though  I cannot  wield  the  pen  of  a Macaulay  or 
the  graceful  wand  of  an  Irving  with  which  to  delin- 
eate an  Indian’s  life,  yet  I move  a pen  guided  by  an 
intimate  knowledge  of  the  subject  it  traces  out,  the 
joys  and  the  sorrows  it  records. 

It  is  not  many  years  since  I laid  aside  my  bow  and 
arrows,  and  the  love  for  the  wild  forest,  born  with  me, 
I yet  retain.  Twenty  months  passed  in  a school  in 
Illinois  has  been  the  sum-total  of  my  schooling,  save 
that  I have  received  in  the  wide  world,  During  my 
residence  of  six  years  among  the  pale-faces  I have 
acquired  a knowledge  of  men  and  things,  much,  very 
much  more  I have  yet  to  learn,  and  it  is  my  desire 
that  my  brethren  in  the  far  west  may  share  with  me 
my  crust  of  information ; for  this  end  I have  labored 
and  do  labor,  and  will  continue  to  labor,  till  success 
crowns  my  efforts  or  my  voice  and  hand  are  silent  in 
the  home  of  the  departed. 

To  the  Christian  and  the  Philanthropist,  I present 


PREFACE. 


ix 


in  these  pages  an  account  of  the  rise  and  progress  of 
events  which  have  greatly  advanced  the  moral  eleva- 
tion of  my  nation.  Should  they  see  in  it  anything  to 
stimulate  them  to  greater  action,  now  is  the  time,  the 
hour  to  act.  It  can  be  proved  that  the  introduction 
of  Christianity  into  the  Indian  tribes  has  been  produc- 
tive of  immense  good.  It  has  changed  customs  as  old 
as  any  on  the  earth.  It  has  dethroned  error,  and  has 
enthroned  truth.  This  fact  is  enough  to  convince  any 
one  of  the  unjustness  and  falsity  of  the  common  say- 
ing, that,  the  Indian  will  be  Indian  still.” 

Education  and  Christianity  are  to  the  Indian  what 
wings  are  to  the  eagle  that  soar  above  his  home. 
They  elevate  him  ; and  these  given  to  him  by  men  of 
right  views  of  existence  enable  him  to  rise  above  the 
soil  of  degradation  and  hover  about  the  high  mounts 
of  wisdom  and  truth. 

To  the  man  of  letters  I would  say,  that  in  compli- 
ance with  your  request  lam  aware  how  far  short  I 
have  fallen  from  satisfying  you  with  a recital  of  the 
Ojib ways’  history. 

Much  has  been  lost  to  the  world,  through  a neglect 
of  educating  the  red- men  who  have  lived  and  died  in 
the  midst  of  educationary  privileges  but  have  not  been 
allowed  to  enjoy  them.  They  hold  a key  which  will 


X 


PREFACE. 


unlock  a library  of  information,  the  like  of  which  is 
not.  It  is  for  the  present  generation  to  say,  whether 
the  last  remnants  of  a powerful  people  shall  perish 
through  neglect  and  as  they  depart  bear  with  them 
that  key. 

Give  the  Indian  the  means  of  education  and  he  will 
avail  himself  of  them.  Keep  them  from  him  and  let 
me  tell  you  he  is  not  the  only  loser. 

The  Indians  at  present  mingle  with  the  whites. 
The  intercourse  they  have  had  together  has  not  in  all 
instances  elevated  the  character  of  the  former.  The 
many  hundreds  of  rude  careless,  fearless  whites  who 
have  taken  up  their  abode  in  frontier  regions  have  in- 
duced the  red-men  to  associate  and  unite  with  them 
in  practices  of  dissipation.  To  the  Americans  at  home 
I look  for  an  antidote  for  this  evil,  which  they  as  well 
as  myself  must  most  sincerely  regret. 

Friends,  Christians,  your  love  for  mankind  extends 
beyond  the  border.  Your  love  for  mankind  has  pene- 
trated the  forests,  and  is  to-day  shedding  its  holy  influ- 
ence on  many  a happy  group  assembled  around  a 
birchen  fire.  May  you  not  tire  or  grow  faint. 

The  history  of  the  Ojibways  like  that  of  other  In- 
Jian  tribes  is  treasured  up  in  traditionary  lore.  It  has 
oeen  passed  down  from  age  to  age  on  the  tide  of  song. 


PREFACE. 


xi 


for  there  is  much  poetry  in  the  narrative  of  the  old 
sage  as  he  dispenses  his  facts  and  fancies  to  the  listen- 
ing group  that  throng  around  him. 

As  the  first  volume  of  Indian  history  written  by  an 
Indian,  with  a hope  that  it  may  in  some  degree  bene- 
fit his  nation,  and  be  the  means  of  awakening  an  inter- 
est for  the  red-men  of  America  in  those  whose  homes 
are  where  they  once  lived  and  loved,  this  work  is  sent 
forth  tremblingly,  yet  with  hope  by  its  Author. 


KAH-GE-GA-GAH-BOWH. 


New  York, 

4/?n7  25, 1850. 


CHAPTER  I. 


THEIR  COUNTRY. 

The  extent  of  territory  occupied  by  the  Ojibway 
nation,  is  the  largest  of  any  Indian  possessions  of  which 
there  is  any  definite  knowledge. 

When  the  Champlain  traders  met  them  in  1610,  its 
eastern  boundary  was  marked  by  the  waters  of  Lakes 
Huron  and  Michigan.  The  mountain  ridge,  lying 
between  Lake  Superior  and  the  frozen  Bay,  was  its 
northern  barrier.  On  the  west,  a forest,  beyond  which 
an  almost  boundless  prairie.  On  the  south,  a valley, 
by  Lake  Superior,  thence  to  the  southern  part  of 
Michigan.  The  land  within  these  boundaries  has 
always  been  known  as  the  country  of  the  Ojibways. 
It  comprises  some  of  the  most  romantic  and  beautiful 
scenery.  There  are  crystal  waters  flowing  over  rocky 
beds,  reflecting  the  mighty  trees  that  for  centuries 
have  reared  their  stout  branches  above  them.  There 
are  dense  forests  which  no  man  has  entered,  which 
have  never  waked  an  echo  to  the  woodman’s  axe,  or 


14 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


sounded  with  the  sharp  report  of  a sportsman’s  rifle. 
Here  are  miles  of  wild  flowers  whose  sweet  fragrance, 
is  borne  on  every  southern  breeze,  and  which  form  a 
carpet  of  colors  as  bright  and  beautiful  as  the  rainbow 
that  arches  Niagara. 

The  woodland  is  composed  of  a great  variety  of  trees, 
mostly  pine,  hemlock,  oak,  cedar,  and  maple.  As  the 
traveller  approaches  the  north,  he  will  meet  birch 
tamarach,  spruce,  and  evergreen. 

In  going  from  east  to  west,  along  the  borders  of  the 
lakes,  the  scenery  is  so  changing  and  of  such  kaleido- 
scope variety  and  beauty  that  description  is  impossible. 
There  is  room  and  opportunity  for  adventure  amonj 
the  bold,  broken,  rugged  rocks,  piled  up  one  upoL 
another  in  ‘‘  charming  confusion,”  on  the  shores,  along 
the  borders  of  the  silent  waters,  or  beneath  the  solid 
cliffs  against  which  the  waters  of  Superior  break  with 
a force  which  has  polished  their  rooky  surface. 

The  mountains,  rivers,  lakes,  cliffs,  and  caverns  of 
the  0 jib  way  country,  impress  one  with  the  thought 
that  Nature  has  there  built  a home  for  Nature’s 
children. 


THEIR  LAKES. 

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  describe  minutely  every 
lake  that  exists  in  the  Ojibway  territory.  I will  men- 
tion those  of  greatest  note,  and  which  the  traveller  as 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


15 


he  stood  upon  the  shore  has  viewed  with  an  admiration 
bordering  on  idolatry  ; for,  surely,  were  there  anything 
besides  the  Creator  worthy  of  worship  it  would  be  His 
works. 

At  one  time  the  easternmost  lake  of  the  Ojibways 
was  Huron.  But  they  have,  by  their  prowess,  gained 
the  waters  of  Ontario  and  Erie. 

Lake  Huron  is  of  great  depth.  Its  waters  are  known 
by  their  beautiful  clearness,  and  by  the  fact  of  their 
rise  and  fall  once  in  every  seven  years.  Its  shores 
were  lined  with  their  canoes  at  a period  shortly  subse- 
quent to  the  introduction  of  fire  arms  into  their  midst. 
Bock  abounds  in  great  quantities,  and  the  wood  con- 
sists mainly  of  cedar,  hemlock,  pine,  and  tamarach. 
The  hills  rising  in  the  south  and  in  the  north-east, 
present  to  the  observer  a very  imposing  appearance. 

From  the  main  there  juts  forth  a point  of  land,  on 
one  side  of  which  is  Georgian  Bay  or  Owen’s  Sound 
and  the  lake.  The  ledge  of  rocks  near  this  has  the 
appearance,  at  a distance,  of  a fortification.  When  the 
waters  are  calm  and  clear  these  rocks  can  be  seen  in 
huge  fragments  beneath  their  surface  as  if  thrown 
there  by  some  giant  in  other  days. 

The  great  depth  of  the  water  of  this  lake  has  in- 
duced the  belief  among  the  Indians  that  it  has  a con- 
nection with  other  lakes,  and  possibly  with  the  sea, 
and  it  has  been  supposed  that  such  is  the  cause  of  its 
rise  and  fall  once  in  a certain  number  of  years. 


16 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Many  stories  are  told  of  monsters  who  are  said  to 
inhabit  these  waters  and  of  the  cause  of  the  flowing 
of  the  water  in  the  channel  of  the  Manettoo  Islands  on 
the  coast. 

As  before  stated  the  water  of  this  lake  is  very  clear^ 
In  the  year  1834  while  journeying  upon  its  northern 
borders  I dropped  a small  silver  coin.  It  rapidly  de- 
scended till  it  was  lodged  upon  a rock.  I conld  see  it 
very  distinctly.  I attached  a cord  to  an  axe  and  low- 
ered it  till  it  touched  the  rock  on  which  the  money  lay. 
On  drawing  it  up  and  measuring  the  length  of  the 
cord  I found,  to  my  surprise,  that  the  coin  which  I 
could  see  so  distinctly  was  at  a distance  of  seventy 
three  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  water  and  about 
seventy  five  or  eighty  feet  from  where  I stood. 

The  bays  near  this  lake  are  the  Pantonogoshene, 
(Falling-Sand  Bay,)  and  the  Thunder  Bay.  The 
islands  are  numerous,  and  a three  days’  journey  among 
them  would  convince  any  one  that  they  are  numbered 
by  thousands.  They  are  very  similar  to  those  in  the 
St.  Lawrence,  known  as  the  thousand  islands,” 
masses  of  rock,  as  if  thrown  up  by  some  mighty 
convulsion  of  nature.  Many,  however,  are  covered 
with  low  cedars,  imparting  to  them  a somewhat  lovely 
and  attractive  appearance. 

The  north-west  and  easterly  winds  cause  an  ebb  and 
flow  of  water  in  the  lake.  The  wind  passes  to  one 
side  of  the  chain  of  islands,  which  runs  in  a line 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


17 


parallel  with  the  north  shore.  It  then  rushes  to  and 
from  the  other  extremity  of  these  islands,  and  thus 
causing  a continual  current.  But  other  causes  than 
this,  effect  the  rise  and  fall,  on  return  of  seven  years. 
These  have  been  differently  defined  by  different  indi- 
viduals. The  cause  assigned  by  H.  R.  Schoolcraft, 
Esq.,  has  been  most  generally  received  as  the  true 
one.  I am  not  prepared  to  state  here  in  full  my  own* 
reasons  for  this  singular  fact,  but  I am  in  hopes  to 
give  them  before  long. 

On  the  shores  of  Huron  have  been  fought  some  of 
the  most  severe  battles  between  the  Chippewas  and 
the  Iroquois.  French  River,  Saganaw  Bay,  and 
Sagueeng,  have  been  the  scenes  of  these  bloody  and 
disastrous  conflicts. 

Lake  Superior,  or,  as  it  is  named  in  the  Ojibway 
language,  Ke-che-gumme,  is  situated  in  the  centre  of 
the  nation,  and  is  not  only  the  largest  of  its  lakes,  but 
the  largest  lake  of  water  in  the  world.  It  has  been 
called  the  “ Great  Lake  of  the  Ojibways.” 

This  is  the  most  remarkable  of  all  lakes,  not  merely 
on  account  of  its  size,  but  on  account  of  the  pic- 
turesque scenery  around  it,  and  the  almost  innumera- 
ble traditions  related  of  it  and  its  borders.  Every 
point  of  land,  every  bay  of  water  has  its  legendary 
story  to  tell,  and  it  is  this  that  renders  Lake  Superior 
superior  to  all  others  in  point  of  interest.  This  lake 

extends  about  five  hundred  miles  from  east  to  west ; 

2 


18 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


the  distance  around  is  about  fourteen  hundred  miles. 
The  immense  body  of  water  within  these  limits  are 
at  times  calm  and  placid  ; at  others,  furious  and 
foaming,  and  as  the  waves  lash  the  shores,  the  thunder 
of  their  voice  echoes  and  re-echoes  amid  the  rocky 
caverns  which  their  constant  action  has  made. 

From  the  highlands  of  “ Grrand  Cape”  or  ‘‘Frog 
Hills”  can  be  obtained  one  of  the  grandest  views  to  be 
had  on  the  lakes.  Twenty-three  miles  from  these  are 
the  celebrated  “ Falls  of  St.  Mary’s.”  Many,  whose 
love  of  adventure  has  surmounted  their  fear  of  danger, 
have  gone  up  in  canoes  above  these  falls,  and  from  the 
summit  of  these  hills  have  been  doubly  paid  for  their 
journey  by  the  wide-extended  view  of  the  broad  lake 
spread  out  before  them. 

The  sandy  beach  extends  from  “ White  Fish  Point” 
southerly  towards  the  Pictured  Rocks,  a distance  of 
upwards  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  At  the  upper 
end  of  this  beach  are  the  Sand  Hills  rising  abruptly 
from  the  waters  edge  to  a height  of  over  three  hundred 
feet.  Next  to  these  in  point  of  interest  are  seen  “ the 
Pictured  Rocks  ” which  extend  fourteen  miles  beyond 
the  sandy  beach. 

All  of  the  southern  shore  presents  a bold  and  rugged 
appearance ; and  the  northern  is  for  the  most  part  of 
the  same  character. 

The  towering  cliffs  that  border  the  lake,  appear  like 
giant  sentinels ; particularly  at  night,  when  the  bright 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


19 


light  of  the  rising  moon  causes  them  to  cast  their  sha- 
dows, do  they  thus  appear,  standing  in  bold  relief  with 
trees  upon  their  sides,  whose  waving  branches  seem 
to  give  life  to  the  tail-guards. 

These  heights  are  connected  with  many  traditionary 
stories ; and,  according  to  the  superstition  of  our  fore- 
fathers, the  heroes  of  many  romances  loiter  upon  their 
sides. 

Red  Lake,  Leach  Lake,  Mill  Lake  and  Lake  Win- 
nipeg are  in  the  North. 

Leach  Lake  is  noted  as  being  the  resort  of  wild 
fowl.  They  are  there  found  in  great  numbers,  being 
attracted  to  the  spot  by  the  wild  rice  which  is  there 
met  with  in  vast  quantities. 

The  waters  of  Mill  Lake  flow  into  the  Mississippi 
River.  It  is  about  sixty  miles  in  circumference.  Its 
shores  abound  with  valuable  cornelian  stones,  and  its 
adjacent  woods  with  a great  variety  of  game. 


THEIR  RIVERS. 

Their  Rivers  are  the  largest  in  the  world.  First  in 
importance  and  magnitude  is  the  Mississippi,  on  whose 
banks  for  two  thousand  miles  can  be  seen  the  most 
enchanting  scenery.  The  St.  Lawrence  flowing  from 
the  source  of  the  St.  Louis  River,  at  the  head  of  Lake 
Superior,  from  lake  to  lake,  till  the  vast  body  precipi- 
tates itself  over  the  Falls  of  Niagara,  and  sweeping  by 


20 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


^‘the  Thousand  Islands  ” and  over  the  Lachiene  Ra- 
pids, mingles  with  that  of  the  Grulf  of  St  Lawrence. 
Another  stream  flows  from  near  the  head  of  the  Missis- 
sippi. Red  River  flows  from  the  edge  of  the  Prairie, 
first  westward,  but  soon  changes  its  course,  and  passes 
in  a northerly  direction  till  the  frozen  regions  stay  its 
farther  progress. 

These  mentioned,  are  the  principal  rivers  from 
which  they  drank  in  that  happy  time  when  they  knew 
not  of  that  insidious  foe, — ‘‘  the  fire  water.” 

In  addition  to  these  there  are  a number  of  rivers, 
which,  in  any'  other  country  would  be  considered 
“great.”  Those  flowing  into  the  Mississippi  are  the 
Crow-wing,  St.  Croix,  Chippeway,  and  Wisconsin. 
Those  flowing  into  the  St.  Lawrence  are  the  Montreal 
and  Burnt- wood.  I speak  of  those  in  the  Ojibway 
country.  Near  Huron  are  the  Mohawk,  Sagianaw, 
Tranti,  and  others  running  their  waters  into  the  Lakes. 

When  I look  upon  the  land  of  the  Ojibways  I can- 
not but  be  convinced  of  the  fact  that  in  no  other  por- 
tion of  the  world  can  there  be  a territory  more  favored 
by  Heaven.  The  waters  are  abundant  and  good ; the 
air  bracing  and  healthy : and  the  soil  admiringly  adapt- 
ed for  agricultural  purposes.  It  is  not  much  to  be 
wondered  at  that  in  such  a climate,  such  a strong,  ath- 
letic and  hardy  race  of  men  should  exist,  as  the  Ojib- 
ways are  generally  acknowledged  to  be.  In  fact,  they 
could  scarcely  be  otherwise.  There  is  as  much  differ- 


THE  0 JIB  WAY  NATION. 


21 


ence  between  them  and  many  tribes  of  the  South  as 
there  is  between  the  strong  wind  and  gentle  zephyr. 


THEIR  MOUNTIANS. 

The  mountains  are  few.  There  are,  however,  quite 
a number  of  eminences,  not  exactly  to  be  rated  under 
the  name  of  mountains  and  I am  sure  cannot  be  called 
level  earth.  There  are  many  heights  along  the  south- 
ern shore  of  Lake  Superior  and  some  in  the  north  to 
which  the  title  of  mountains  is  applied.  There  are 
numerous  lofty  peaks  of  granite,  a short  distance  back 
from  the  shore  of  Lake  Huron  and  the  northern  shore 
of  Lake  Ontario.  I have  walked  over  that  part  of  the 
country  for  many  days  in  succession  and  have  seen 
nothing  but  these  granite  hills,  most  of  which  are  des- 
titute of  wood.  There  was  a time  when  they  were 
well  covered  with  trees  that  took  root  in  the  clefts, 
but  they  were  all  destroyed  by  fire  and  the  peaks  to- 
day present  a very  barren  and  inattractive  appear- 
ance. 

The  Porcupine  Mountains  near  La  Point,  can  be 
seen,  in  a clear  day,  at  a distance  of  eighty  miles  from 
their  base.  One  of  the  grandest  sights  I have  ever 
witnessed,  was  a view  of  this  range  of  mountains,  at  a 
distance,  when  the  morning  sun  was  rising  above  their 


22 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


summits,  and  a fog  from  the  lake  enveloped  their  tops. 
It  was  indeed  worth  the  night’s  journey  to  behold. 

The  Missawhay  Heights  are  formed  of  ledges  of  rock, 
piled  one  upon  another,  and  lie  in  a line  parallel  with 
the  north-west  shore.  There  are  numerous  mountains 
and  hills  on  the  northern  shore  of  Lake  Superior.  The 
elevation  known  as  “the  Thunder  Mountains,”  have 
the  singular  appearance  of  a lion  crouching  for  its  prey. 
A curious  legend  is  told  of  this  range,  which  will  be 
related  in  a subsequent  chapter. 

The  Caraboo  Heights,  below  the  Thunder  Mountains, 
are  deserving  of  mention.  They  are  viewed  with  admi- 
ration by  all  tourists  who  approach  them.  Upon  these 
heights  are  to  be  seen  figures,  claiming  the  attention 
of  those  curious  in  ancient  lore,  which,  if  rightly  inter- 
preted, might  possibly  furnish  a clue  to  the  origin  of 
the  Chippeways. 

There  is  another  mountain,  the  only  one  in  fact, 
that  is  visible  from  the  lake  at  a great  distance.  Adja- 
cent to  the  mountains  are  numerous  hills,  thickly 
wooded  and  carpeted  with  rich  moss,  soft  as  velvet  and 
of  beautiful  variegated  colors. 

The  mountainous  edge,  near  the  source  of  Lake  Supe- 
rior on  one  side,  and  the  Mississippi  River  on  the  other, 
is  quite  high.  It  commences  on  the  south  shore  of 
Lake  Superior,  and  runs  in  a westerly  direction,  to  the 
head  of  the  river  St.  Croix. 

I have  now  given  an  imperfect  outline  of  the  lakes, 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


23 


rivers,  and  mountains  of  the  country  occupied  by  the 
Ojibways.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  such  that  they  now 
and  have  for  years  lived.  There  they  roamed  to  the 
chase  and  hastened  to  the  field  of  combat.  Their 
canoes  floated  by  the  shores  of  those  mighty  lakes,  or 
glided  smoothly  down  the  stream.  On  those  waters 
they  departed  at  early  dawn,  and  returned  at  dusk 
with  loads  of  venison. 

The  war-cry  resounded  among  those  cliffs  and  rocky 
passes,  and  the  merry  shout  and  song  of  children  glad- 
dened the  old  chieftain’s  heart. 

In  1610,  from  each  of  those  thousand  islands  the 
smoke  arose  from  the  wigwams  of  a numerous  tribe. 

That  was  the  day  of  their  glory  and  prosperity. 
Then  their  shouts  of  triumph  were  answered  from  peak 
to  peak,  for  a distance  of  two  thousand  miles  west, 
and  four  hundred  north. 

Review  what  has  been  said.  Look  at  their  country 
and  say  has  any  nation  possessed  a better.  The 
mountains  of  the  north  covered  with  evergreens,  shad- 
ing the  wide  lakes.  The  high  hills  on  the  south,  rising 
cliff  upon  cliff,  till  the  uppermost  is  concealed  by  the 
clouds.  The  Missaw  Bay  Heights  on  the  west,  stand- 
ing like  towers  in  naked  grandeur,  looking  down  with 
contempt,  as  it  were,  on  the  hundred  streams  whose 
roar  rises  with  the  mist  which  envelops  their  summits. 

Deep  ravines,  through  which  the  streams  as  they 
pass  sing  the  songs  of  nature  in  soft  strains,  till  gath- 


24 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


ering  strength,  the  waters  dash  over  rocks  in  deep 
caverns,  and  thunder  forth  in  heavier  tones. 

I have  stood  on  one  of  the  mountain  peaks  and  seen 
a column  of  snow  descending  upon  the  icy  waters  of 
Lake  Superior,  a distance  of  fifty  miles,  and  it  has 
taken  one  day  and  a-half  to  reach  the  edge  of  the  lake 
which  lay  at  the  base  of  the  mountain. 

The  sun  rises  and  sets  with  beautiful  effect.  Its 
rays  resting  upon  the  clouds  and  reflected  from  them, 
clothe  the  whole  extent  in  robes  of  fire ; every  hill 
seems  blazing  with  the  glory  of  the  sun.  In  every  ray 
is  seen  the  spirit  of  poetry. 

Suppose  yourself  standing  at  a distance,  and  behold 
ing  one  of  the  nation  going  up  the  mountain’s  side 
near  him  the  waters  of  Superior — 

“ Lay  weary  and  still  after  storm.” 

Over  his  head  the  forest  trees  waved  their  heavy 
branches.  Behold  him  I he  stands  there  ruler  of  the 
forest  world.  One  of  Nature’s  sons  standing  in  her 
own  battlements.  His  erect  and  manly  form,  his  easy, 
graceful  motion,  are  true  indications  of  the  exalted  soul 
that  lives  its  active  life  within.  Living  as  he  does, 
amid  the  happiest  creations  of  the  Oreat  Creator,  he 
cannot  but  adore  and  worship  Him.  His  devotion  is 
pure.  He 


“ Sees  God  in  storms  and  hears  Him  in  the  wind.” 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


25 


Nature  points  him  up  to  Nature’s  God.  I love  my 
country ; and  will  any  of  my  readers  condemn  a child 
of  the  forest  for  loving  his  country  and  his  nation  ? 

“ Land  of  the  forest  and  the  rock — 

Of  dark -blue  lake  and  mighty  river — 

Of  mountains  reared  aloft  to  mock 

The  storm’s  career,  the  lightning’s  shock — 

My  own  green  land  forever !” 

I cannot  better  close  this  chapter  than  by  subjoining 
the  following  graphic  description  of  “ The  Pictured 
Rocks,”  given  by  General  Lewis  Cass : 

‘‘  Upon  the  southern  coast  of  Lake  Superior,  about 
fifty  miles  from  the  Falls  of  St.  Mary,  are  immense, 
precipitous  cliffs,  called  by  the  voyageur  Le  Fottrail, 
the  Pictured  Rocks.  This  name  has  been  given  them 
in  consequence  of  the  different  appearances  which  they 
present  to  the  traveler,  as  he  passes  their  base  in  his 
canoe.  It  requires  little  aid  from  the  imagination  to 
discern  in  them  the  castellated  tower  and  lofty  dome, 
and  every  sublime,  grotesque,  or  fantastic  shape,  which 
the  genins  of  architecture  ever  invented.  These  cliffs 
are  an  unbroken  mass  of  rocks,  rising  to  the  elevation 
of  three  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  lake,  and 
stretching  along  the  eoast  for  fifteen  miles. 

“ The  voyagers  never  pass  this  coast  except  in  the 
most  profound  calm;  and  the  Indians,  before  they 
make  the  attempt,  offer  their  accustomed  oblation,  to 


26 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


propitiate  the  favor  of  their  Monitas.  The  eye  instantly 
searches  along  the  eternal  rampart,  for  a single  place 
of  security ; but  the  search  is  vain.  With  an  impas- 
sable barrier  of  rocks  on  one  side,  and  an  interminable 
expanse  of  water  on  the  other,  a sudden  storm  upon 
the  lake  would  as  inevitably  assure  destruction  of  the 
passenger  in  his  frail  canoe,  as  if  he  were  on  the  brink 
of  the  cataract  of  Niagara. 

“ The  rock  itself  is  a sand-stone,  which  is  disinte- 
grated by  the  continual  action  of  the  water  with  com- 
parative facility.  There  are  no  broken  masses  upon 
which  the  eye  can  rest  and  find  relief.  The  lake  is  so 
deep,  that  these  masses,  as  they  are  torn  from  the 
precipice,  are  concealed  beneath  its  waters  until  it  is 
-reduced  to  sand.  The  action  of  the  waves  has  removed 
every  projecting  point. 

‘‘When  we  passed  this  immense  fabric  of  nature, 
the  wind  was  still  and  the  lake  was  calm.  But  even 
the  slightest  motion  of  the  waves,  which  in  the  most 
profound  calm  agitates  these  eternal  seas,  swept 
through  the  deep  caverns  with  the  noise  of  the  distant 
thunder,  and  died  away  upon  the  ear,  as  it  rolled 
forward  in  the  dark  recesses  inaccessible  to  human 
observation. 

“No  sound  more  melancholy  or  more  awful  ever 
vibrated  upon  human  nerves.  It  has  left  an  impres- 
sion which  neither  time  nor  distance  can  ever  efface. 

“ Resting  in  a frail  bark  canoe,  upon  the  limpid 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


27 


waters  of  the  lake,  we  seemed  almost  suspended  in  the 
air,  so  pellucid  is  the  element  upon  which  we  floated. 
In  gazing  upon  the  towering  battlements  which  im- 
pended over  us,  and  from  which  the  smallest  fragments 
would  have  destroyed  us,  we  felt,  and  felt  intensely 
our  own  insignificance.  No  situation  can  be  imagined 
more  appalling  to  the  courage,  or  more  humbling  to 
the  pride  of  man.  We  appeared  like  a small  speck 
upon  the  broad  face  of  creation. 

“ Our  whole  party,  Indians,  voyagers,  soldiers,  offi- 
cers, and  servants,  contemplated  in  mute  astonishment 
the  awful  display  of  creative  power,  at  whose  base  we 
hung ; and  no  sound  broke  upon  the  ear  to  interrupt 
the  careless  roaring  of  the  waters.  No  cathedral,  no 
temple  built  with  human  hands,  no  pomp  of  worship 
could  ever  impress  the  spectator  with  such  humilityj) 
and  so  strong  a conviction  of  the  immense  distance 
between  him  and  the  Almighty  Architect.’’ 


CHAPTER  11. 


THEIR  ORIGIN,  OR  COURSE  OF  MIGRATION  ACCORDING  TO 
THEIR  TRADITIONS. 

In  listening  to  the  traditions  of  the  Indians  in  their 
wigwams,  the  traveller  will  learn  that  the  chiefs  are 
the  repositories  of  the  history  of  their  ancestors.  With 
these  traditions  there  are  rules  to  follow  by  which  to 
determine  whether  they  are  true  or  false.  By  these 
rules  I have  been  governed  in  my  researches. 

The  first  is  to  inquire  particularly  into  the  leading 
points  of  every  tradition  narrated. 

The  second  is  to  notice  whether  the  traditions  are 
approved  by  the  oldest  chiefs  and  wise  men.  Such  are 
most  likely  to  be  true,  and  if  places  or  persons  are 
mentioned,  additional  clue  is  given  to  their  origin  and 
proof  obtained  of  their  truth  or  falsity. 

The  chiefs  have  generally  been  those  who  have  at 
all  times  retained  a general  history  of  their  nation. 

From  the  year  1834,  to  the  present  time,  I have 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


29 


been  in  communication  with  our  nation,  with  every 
portion  of  it.  All  appear  to  adopt  the  belief  that  most 
of  the  Indians  came  from  the  west.  The  present  Ojib- 
ways,  or  those  now  called  Messamgans,  settled  in 
Canada  West  after  the  years  1634  and  ’35.  They 
came  over  from  St.  Marie’s  River  to  Lake  Huron,  and 
relate  in  their  traditions  an  account  of  those  who  came 
to  the  Falls  of  St.  Mario  from  Pe-quah-qua-ivav-ming^ 
near  the  Avee  Bay,  on  the  south  shore  of  Lake  Supe- 
rior. Others,  no  doubt,  in  the  year  1642,  came  to  this 
northern  shore  of  the  lake.  I have  heard  that  these 
came  from  La  Point,  or  8hah-gah-ioah-nick.  In  this 
place  the  Indians  lived  a long  time.  Still  they  trace 
their  own  trail  to  the  waters  of  Red  and  Sandy  Lakes, 
which  places  they  all,  or  nearly  all,  look  back  to  as 
the  home  of  their  forefathers.  War  came,  and  in  their 
exercise  of  it  against  other  nations,  they  moved  east- 
ward from  I^a  Point  and  towards  the  south  against 
the  Sioux. 

When  they  moved  from  Red  and  Sandy  Lakes,  it 
was  the  fisheries  of  Lake  Superior  that  attracted  them 
from  their  old  haunts  and  induced  them  to  leave  the 
scenes  to  which,  for  so  many  years,  they  had  been 
accustomed. 

The  same  attraction  is  supposed  to  have  drawn  the 
Sioux  to  the  south-west  end  of  Lake  Superior  and  to 
the  land  bordering  all  along  below  SJia-gah~wab-nick. 
In  a short  time  contentions  arose  between  the  Ojibways 


30 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


and  the  Sioux  about  the  right  of  occupancy.  The 
game  of  the  land  and  the  fish  of  the  waters  was 
probably  the  first  cause  of  hostility  between  the  two 
powerful  nations, — a hostility  which  has  been  marked 
by  many  acts  of  cruelty  on  both  sides.  "War  com- 
menced for  the  retention  of  the  hunting-lands,  and  a 
neutral  ground  having  been  between  them  ever  since, 
the  first  cause  of  other  wars  has  been  forgotten,  and 
the  repeated  ravages  of  death  made  upon  each  party 
have  obliterated  the  remembrance  of  the  cause  of  the 
early  contention. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LAND. 

I HAVE  heard  a tradition  related  to  the  effect  that  a 
general  council  was  once  held  at  some  point  above  the 
Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  and  that  when  the  Ojibways 
came  to  this  general  council  they  wore  a peculiar  shoe 
or  moccasin,  which  was  gathered  on  the  top  from  the 
tip  of  the  toe,  and  at  the  ancle.  No  other  Indians 
wore  this  style  of  foot-gear,  and  it  was  on  account  of 
this  peculiarity  that  they  were  called  Ojibway^  the 
signification  of  which,  is  gathering. 

At  this  council  the  land  was  distributed.  That 
part  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  Ojibways  is  said  to 
have  been  the  surrounding  country  of  Red  Lake,  and 
afterwards  Sandy  and  Leach  Lakes,  which  statement 
coincides  with  that  of  the  chiefs  of  the  village  of  La 
Point,  or  the  Shah-gah-wah-nick. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


31 


The  Sauks  were  once  a part  of  the  Chippeway 
family,  as  also  were  the  Menomenies  and  the  Ottawas. 
About  the  year  1613  the  latter  began  to  leave  the 
main  body  near  Lake  Superior.  When  the  traders  of 
Champlain  began  their  operations  with  the  Chippeways, 
the  French  called  them  ‘‘  the  trading  Indians,”  (Otta- 
was.) The  Sauks  fought  with  the  Sioux  on  the  upper 
waters  of  those  lakes  which  run  down  from  the 
southern  shores  of  Lake  Superior.  They  also  engaged 
in  combat  with  the  Shawnees  of  southern  Illinois. 

Though  the  Ojibways  occupied  but  a small  piece  of 
territory  at  first,  they  soon  extended  their  dominions 
to  the  very  borders  of  the  snow-clad  hills  of  the  north, 
and  in  the  streams  of  that  cold  region  watched  for  the 
beaver,  whose  furs  were  wrought  by  them  into  warm 
clothing. 

It  was  at  a date  just  prior  to  Pontiac’s  time,  that 
the  Ojibways  met  the  Shawnees  on  the  waters  of  Erie 
and  united  with  them  in  a successful  war  against  the 
Iroquois  in  Canada  West,  after  which  the  two,  Ojibways 
and  Shawnees,  settled  down  in  the  country  of  the 
Hurons. 

The  battle-grounds  are  yet  to  be  seen,  and  many 
marks  of  the  savage  warfare  are  now  visible. 

1634  and  1635  were  years  of  glorious  triumph. 
The  nation  had  sought  intercourse  with  the  French  in 
Montreal,  and  their  communication  was  carried  on  by 
journeys  through  the  lands  of  an  intermediate  nation. 


32 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


The  intercession  resulted  in  a long  and  disastrous 
war,  in  which  the  Ojibways  were  victorious.  After 
this  they  enjoyed  a free  communication  with  the 
French,  with  whom  they  have  had  friendly  intercourse 
from  that  time  to  the  present. 

They  fought  their  way  through  the  lands  of  hostile 
nations  from  the  west  end  of  Lake  Superior  along 
the  entire  lake  country.  The  shores  of  Lake  Supe- 
rior, Lake  Huron,  and  the  River  St.  Lawrence, 
abound  with  their  battle  fields.  The  dust  of  many  a 
brave  now  lies  there,  friend  and  foe  in  one  common 
resting-place. 

Exciting  stories  of  the  doings  of  those  days  have 
been  passed  down  from  mouth  to  mouth.  So  the  old 
man  related  them  the  blood  of  the  young  Ojibways 
ran  swiftly  through  his  veins,  and  his  eye  shone  with 
the  fire  of  enthusiasm. 

The  war-whoop’s  shrill  notes  have  now  died  away. 
Now  the  wigwam  stands  undisturbed,  and  the  hymn 
of  peace  is  chanted  within  their  thatched  walls. 

Behold  the  change ! Commerce  urged  on  by  the 
pale-face,  strides  rapidly  and  withlessly  into  their 
midst,  and  orders  them  back,  back,  back,  to  make  way 
for  its  houses  and  its  merchandize.  Scarce  is  he 
camped,  ere  once  again  he  is  told  to  go  farther  west. 
When  will  the  last  order  be  given  ? When  will  the 
red-man  have  a home  ? 


CHAPTER  III. 


THEIR  WILD  GAME. 

There  is,  doubtless,  a greater  variety  of  game  to  be 
found  in  the  Ojibway  Country  than  in  any  other  equal 
extent  of  Western  territory.  The  northern  part  is  not 
so  well  supplied  with  large  game  as  that  district  near 
the  head  waters  of  the  Wisconsin,  Chippeway,  St.  Croix, 
Mississippi  and  Red  Rivers. 

Small  game  is  to  be  found  on  the  Northern  shores  of 
the  Lakes  with  the  hardy  Reindeer,  such  as  the  Rabbit, 
Lynx,  Martin,  and  Fisher.  The  three  latter  have  been 
a source  of  much  profit  on  account  of  their  furs.  The 
rabbit  has  been  the  principal  game  for  the  Northern 
Indians,  who  snare  them  for  their  food  and  skins.  These 
latter  are  made  into  strings  and  woven  into  blankets. — 
They  also  make  their  garments  of  these  skins,  and  are 
dressed  in  them  from  head  to  foot.  The  eyes  of  a pale 

face  would  considerably  extend  on  beholding  a fellow 
3 


34 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


in  such  accoutrement.  These  Indians  reside  in  the  in- 
terior of  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior,  in  the  North.  We 
call  them  (Nopeming  Tah-she-e-ne-neh)  Backwoodmen. 
The  deer  are  found  in  almost  all  parts  of  the  country, 
though  not  as  much  in  the  North  as  in  the  South.  In 
the  spring  they  migrate  to  the  North,  and  return  to  the 
South  in  the  fall,  few  ever  wintering  in  the  North  on 
account  of  the  great  depth  of  snow  in  that  quarter. 

This  animal  was  killed  in  four  different  ways  before 
the  introduction  of  fire-arms.  The  first  was  by  a snare 
formed  of  a rope  of  wild  hemp,  and  so  placed  that  when 
the  deer’s  neck  was  caught,  the  more  stir  he  made  the 
more  he  could’nt  stir.  At  every  movement  the  cord 
would  wind  about  the  neck  tighter  and  tighter,  until  he 
was  choked,  for  at  one  end  of  the  rope  would  be  fixed  a 
small  rail,  which  the  large  end  slips  off,  and  in  falling 
it  prys  upon  the  deer,  who  in  a short  time  dies.  "When 
they  wished  to  get  through  soon,  they  placed  these 
snares  all  around  for  half  a day,  then  drive  the  deer  all 
over  the  snares  until  some  are  caught. 

The  second  was  by  driving  sharp  spikes  of  wood  into 
the  ground  on  the  deer  path,  just  the  other  side  of  a log 
over  which  they  would  be  expected  to  jump.  In  jump- 
ing the  logs,  they  must  fall  upon  these  sharp  spikes, 
which  would  pierce  them  through,  and  thus  kill  them. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


35 


The  third  way  was  to  drive  the  deer  with  dogs  into 
the  water,  when,  being  out  of  their  element,  they  could 
be  captured.  In  winter,  instead  of  driving  them  into 
water,  a short  chase  in  the  deep  snow  would  soon  tire 
them,  and  they  were  soon  at  the  disposal  of  the  hunter. 

The  fourth  and  last  manner  of  killing  them  was  by 
means  of  bow  and  arrow.  Bows  were  made  of  a power 
to  enable  them  to  shoot  through  the  side  of  a deer  with- 
out any  difficulty.  The  Indian  watched  at  the  “ Salt 
Licks,”  or  at  the  borders  of  lakes  or  rivers,  to  which  the 
deer  often  go  to  feed  on  the  grass.  An  Indian  can  shoot 
a deer  in  the  woods  at  a distance  of  fifty  paces. 

The  bow  was  generally  made  of  iron-wood  or  red 
cedar;  sometimes  of  hickory,  well  seasoned.  The 
arrows  were  made  like  spikes  at  the  end.  Before  they 
had  iron,  they  used  bone  and  shell  for  the  ends  : the 
shells  were  carved  in  such  a manner  as  to  admit  of  be- 
ing pointed  at  the  end  of  the  arrow.  I have  no  recol- 
lection of  killing  but  one  deer  with  an  arrow,  as  fire 
arms  came  into  the  field  of  action  as  soon  as  I did.  I 
remember  being  at  the  foot  of  Rice  Lake,  Canada  West, 
with  others  on  a hunting  tour  in  the  night.  Soon  after 
nine  o’clock,  we  heard  the  animal  feeding  in  the  grass 
by  the  shore.  Having  a lighted  candle,  we  placed  it  in 
a three-sided  lantern ; opening  one  side,  the  light  was 


36 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


thrown  upon  the  deer  only.  By  this  contrivance  we 
were  enabled  to  approach  so  near  it  in  our  canoe,  that  it 
appeared  to  be  but  ten  or  fifteen  paces  from  us.  I drew 
my  bow-string — the  arrow  winged  its  way — the  deer 
made  a few  short  leaps,  and  died. 

During  my  travels  in  the  East,  I have  met  with  indi- 
viduals whom  I found  it  difficult  to  convince  that  the 
Indian’s  arrow  could  execute  so  much,  and  doubted  me 
when  I told  them  that  wfith  it  they  killed  deer,  bears, 
and  such  like. 

Several  years  ago,  in  the  State  of  New-York,  an  elderly 
gentleman,  a farmer  and  myself  were  entertained  by  a 
kind  family  to  tea.  The  gentleman  monopolized  all  the 
time  for  conversation  with  questions  about  the  Indian 
mode  of  life.  I answered  them  all  as  well  as  I could, 
though  some  of  them  were  so  very  odd,  that  it  was  with 
the  exercise  of  the  greatest  muscular  strength  that  I 
could  refrain  from  laughing  in  the  inquisitive  person’s 
face.  He  seemed  satisfied  with  all  my  answers  except 
those  in  relation  to  killing  deer  with  bow  and  arrow. — 
He  doubted.  He  could’nt  bring  his  mind  to  believe  such 
a thing  possible.  After  laboring  half  an  hour  to  con- 
vince him  of  the  fact  that  we  could,  he  turned  aside, 
firmly  resolved  not  to  believe  me.  I held  my  tongue, 
half  mad  ; and  made  the  proposition  that  the  next  day 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


37 


I would  make  a bow  and  a couple  of  arrows,  and  as  I 
miderstood  he  was  a farmer,  I should  get  him  to  furnish 
a yearling  calf,  and  if  in  shooting  I did  not  hit  it,  I 
would  pay  him  the  price  of  the  calf  if  he  desired  it ; 
but  if,  on  the  contrary,  I should  hit  it,  and  kill  it,  then 
it  should  be  mine  ! IVliile  our  friends  at  the  table  could 
not  wait  till  the  morrow  to  know  the  result,  my  friend, 
the  doubting  gentleman,  coolly  declined,  saying  he  be- 
lieved we  could  kill  deer  at  sixty  paces  if  we  hit  it  at 
all.  I and  my  friends  endeavored  to  provoke  him  to 
accept  my  proposition,  but  failed  to  accomplish  our  pur- 
pose, his  avarice  overcoming  his  unbounded  curiosity  ! 

Bears  are  also  taken  by  means  of  bow  and  arrow. — 
They  are  very  easily  captured  in  winter,  for  then  they 
are  found  in  hollow  logs  and  in  the  ground  enjoying 
their  winter  quarters.  The  black  bear  is  to  be  found  all 
over  the  Ojibway  country.  They  are  more  numerous 
in  years  when  fruit  and  acorns  are  abundant.  Some  of 
the  Ojibway  people  believe  the  bear  to  be  a transformed 
being  ; in  other  words,  that  it  was  once  a more  intelli- 
gent creation,  and  for  this  reason  they  profess  a great 
veneration  for  its  head  and  paws,  but  not  so  much  fol- 
ios meatj  for  they  relish  that  very  highly,  and  seem  to 
forget  its  former  intelligence  when  indulging  their  appe- 
tites with  a savory  steak.  The  head  and  paws  are 


38 


traditional  history  op 


festooned  with  colored  cloth  and  ribbons,  and  suspended 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  Indian’s  lodge.  At  the  nose 
they  bestow  a very  liberal  quantity  of  tobacco,  as  a sort 
of  peace-offering  to  the  dead  animal. 

In  early  life  I received  a lecture  from  my  father  upon 
hmrting.  He  related  many  cunning  stories  of  the  bear, 
and  I remember  I got  so  courageous  that  the  next  day 
I was  all  the  time  in  a perfect  fright,  thinking  every 
brush  heap  I met  the  hiding  place  of  some  old  Brum. 

In  the  year  1832,  I made  my  first  appearance  as  a 
bear  hunter.  It  was  in  the  fall  of  the  year  that  I with 
others  left  our  homes  with  the  intention  of  being  absent 
for  three  or  four  weeks.  We  went  down  Crook’s  Rapids 
below  Rice  Lake,  to  hunt.  I remember  how  skittish  I 
felt  at  first,  as  I shouldered  my  gun  and  followed  the 
six  hunters  before  me  into  the  woods,  for  just  then  all 
the  cunning  stories  I had  heard  were  fresh  in  my  mind. 
We  came  to  a halt  about  three  miles  distant  from  our 
starting  place,  and  the  head  hunter,  my  father,  gave  his 
companions  a brief  description  of  the  face  of  the  comrtry 
and  of  the  places  to  which  the  bear  would  be  most  likely 
to  resort,  for  then  they  were  eating  acorns.  Around  us 
we  could  see  newly-made  tracks  of  the  deer  and  bear  ; 
my  lips  parched,  and  my  whole  body  fevered  with 
anxiety.  When  my  father  had  finished  his  account,  he 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


39 


turned  to  me,  and  said  : — “ My  son,  don’t  go  very  far  ; 
keep  behind  the  rest  as  you  hear  the  firing  of  guns,  and 
when  you  think  it  is  time  to  return,  you  can  come  round 
this  way  and  go  towards  home then,  waving  his 
hand,  otf  the  party  started  in  every  direction.  I,  too, 
went  one  way. 

When  I lost  sight  of  the  others  of  my  party,  all  the 
“ cunning  stories”  about  the  bear — of  its  hiding  under 
rotten  logs,  of  its  pretending  to  die,  and  its  sudden  at- 
tacks, rushed  upon  my  mind.  I was  soon  roused  from 
my  reverie,  for  in  less  than  twenty  minutes  I heard  the 
reports  of  guns  from  all  directions  ; but  for  all  this  I 
walked  along  as  well  as  I could,  looking  out  for  a bear 
which  I was  afraid  of  seeing,  and  yet  hunting  for. 

I would  walk  along  in  the  open  space,  so  that  I might 
see  my  bear  at  a distance,  and  not  come  suddenly  upon 
him  or  he  upon  me.  The  guns  were  fired  every  few 
minutes.  I could  see,  occasionally,  deer  at  a distance 
running  at  full  speed.  'While  I was  passing  along  at 
the  foot  of  the  hills  on  which  the  thick  foliage  concealed 
the  logs,  which  lay  piled  one  upon  another,  I heard  a 
tremendous  crash  near  the  top.  I stood,  as  if  transfixed 
to  the  spot,  and  sure  enough,  I could  see  the  branches 
of  the  young  trees  waving,  and  thought  I could  see  ob- 
jects approaching  me.  I scarce  dare  to  wink,  and  trem- 


40 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


bled  in  my  scarlet  leggins,  when  to  my  dread  astonish- 
ment I saw  a large  hear  coming  down  towards  me,  like 
a hogshead  rolling  down  a hill ! I jumped  behind  a 
pine  tree,  and  prepared  for  the  combat.  He  came  at  me 
at  a full  gallop,  and  I feared  the  worst.  When  he  had 
approached  to  within  five  paces  from  me,  I thought  it 
time  to  define  my  position,  and  make  some  demonstra- 
tion of  war.  I sprang  from  my  hiding  place,  and  alighted 
upon  the  ground.  I hallooed  at  the  top  of  my  voice, 
“ Yah  !”  and  at  the  same  time  pointed  the  muzzle  of  my 
gun  to  the  white  spot  on  the  breast  of  the  animal.  I 
fired,  and  the  smoke  enveloped  myself  and  the  bear. — 
As  I did  so,  I fell  to  the  ground,  and  a bundle  of  leaves 
which  the  bear  had  scratched  up  in  his  “ exercises”  fell 
upon  my  face.  This  I thought  to  be  the  bear,  and  fall- 
ing backward,  I expected  the  fellow  would  get  to  be 
quite  loving  of  his  new-found  companion,  and  in  the 
transports  of  his  joy,  hug  me  to  death.  But  when  I 
raised  my  head,  I learned  my  mistake,  and  beheld  a 
tremendous  animal  apparently  in  the  agonies  of  depart- 
ing life.  I arose,  picked  up  my  gun,  which  had  fallen 
from  my  hand,  and  immediatety  reloaded  it,  in  order  to 
be  prepared  if  his  actions  proved  to  be  a farce  instead  of 
a tragedy.  I took  a long  pole  and  poked  him  consider- 
ably. He  did  not  show  any  signs  of  life.  Yet  so  doubt- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


41 


fill  was  I of  his  death,  that  I left  him.  Thus  ended  my 
first  adventure  on  a bear-hunting  excursion. 

In  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Lake  Superior,  Indians  trap 
bears  in  large  “ dead  falls.”  Near  Red  and  Lead  Lakes, 
they  take  them  when  crossing  the  water.  Some  years  ago, 
they  were  thus  captured  at  the  head  of  Lake  Superior. 

The  Moose  and  Deer  are  also  taken,  chiefly  however 
in  the  Northern  parts  of  Lake  Superior  and  in  the 
vicinity  of  Red  Lake.  The  Moose  is  one  of  the  largest 
animals  found,  and  the  hunters  have  quite  a merry  time 
when  three  or  four  are  taken  at  one  time.  It  is  consid- 
ered best  to  take  them  before  they  leave  their  yard  in 
the  winter.  If  they  are  not  thus  taken,  it  is  very  diffi- 
cult to  secure  them,  as  they  are  very  fleet. 

The  Reindeer  is  taken  in  all  parts  of  the  North  West. 
It  is  the  hardiest  animal  in  the  country.  They  are 
often  chased  for  days  in  succession  by  the  Indians,  and 
a coat  of  ice  is  seen  to  cover  them,  caused  by  their  per- 
spiration ; at  the  same  time  a thick  steam  arises  from 
them.  They  go  in  droves,  and  when  they  are  on  the 
run,  the  light  snow  rises  in  clouds  in  every  direction. — 
The  skin  of  the  deer,  as  well  as  the  skins  of  all  the  ani- 
mals I have  mentioned,  are  manufactured  into  clothing, 
and  are  oftentimes  dressed  in  a beautiful  manner  and 
highly  ornamented. 


42 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


The  Elk  is  to  be  found  in  the  West,  on  the  neutral 
ground  lying  between  the  Sioux  and  Ojibway  nations  ; 
at  the  head  waters  of  the  Wisconsin  ; in  the  Northern 
parts  of  Michigan,  and  near  the  Chippeway,  St.  Croix, 
Rum  and  Red  Rivers.  This  is  one  of  the  noblest  look- 
ing animals  in  our  coimtry.  When  on  the  run  its  head 
is  held  high,  its  back  curved,  on  which  its  large  horns 
appear  to  rest.  At  one  time,  in  1837,  I saw  a drove  of 
five  hundred  ; and  a more  animating  sight  I never  be- 
held. I shot  one,  and  being  at  that  time  a prisoner  at 
the  foot  of  Lake  Pepin,  and  wishing  to  be  generous  to 
my  enemies,  I took  it  to  the  chief  of  the  tribe  that  held 
me.  Soon  after  I was  liberated,  and  with  my  cousin 
Johnson  was  permitted  to  depart. 

The  Buffalo  is  taken  only  at  the  head  of  Red  River, 
where  the  Chippeways  and  the  half-breeds  kill  between 
eight  and  ten  thousand  every  year.  The  Indians  form 
into  companies  and  take  their  wagons  with  them  when 
they  go  on  a Buffalo  hunt.  The  drove  of  Buffalo  is 
very  large,  and  grazing  they  blacken  the  prairie  as  far 
as  the  eye  can  reach. 

The  tread  of  the  Buffalo  makes  the  earth  to  tremble. 
The  hunters  are  mounted  on  ponys,  who  are  so  taught 
that  when  a wounded  animal  falls  they  immediately 
start  for  an  encounter  with  another.  The  Indian  gath- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


43 


ers  his  arrows  from  the  grass  while  he  is  riding  at 
full  speed — a feat  which  is  considered  very  dexter- 
ous, but  which  is  quite  common  on  the  western  prai- 
ries. 

Before  leaving  this  noble  animal,  I must  indulge  my 
readers  with  what  a recent  writer  says  respecting  it : 
prefacing  it  with  the  remark  that  the  Bison  and  the 
Buffalo  are  one  and  the  same. 

“ From  the  species  of  the  ox  kind  the  Bison  is  well 
distinguished  by  the  following  peculiarities.  A long 
shaggy  hair,  clothes  the  fore  parts  of  the  body,  forming 
a well  marked  beard,  beneath  the  lower  jaw,  and  de- 
scending behind  the  knee  in  a taft ; this  hair  rises  on 
the  top  of  the  head  in  a dense  mass  nearly  as  high  as 
the  extremities  of  the  horns.  Over  the  forehead  it  is 
closely  curled  and  matted  so  thickly  as  to  deaden  the 
power  of  a rifle  ball,  which  either  rebounds  or  lodges  in 
the  hair,  merely  causing  the  animal  to  shake  his  head 
a^he  heavily  bounds  along.  The  head  of  the  Bison  is 
large  and  ponderous,  compared  to  the  size  of  the  body : 
so  that  the  muscles  for  its  support,  necessarily  of  great 
size,  give  great  thickness  to  the  neck,  and  by  their  origin 
from  the  prolonged  dorsal  vertebraB  processes,  form 
the  peculiar  projection  called  the  hump.  This  hmnp  is 
of  an  oblong  form,  diminishing  in  height  as  it  recedes. 


44 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


SO  as  to  give  considerable  obliquity  to  the  line  of  the 
neck. 

The  eye  of  the  Bison  is  small,  black  and  brilliant ; 
the  horns  are  black,  and  very  thick  near  the  head, 
where  they  curve  upwards  and  outwards,  rapidly  taper- 
ing towards  their  points. 

The  outward  line  of  the  face  is  convexly  curved,  and 
the  upper  lip,  on  each  side  being  papillons  within,  di- 
lates and  extends  downwards,  giving  a very  oblique 
appearance  to  the  lateral  gap  of  the  mouth,  in  this  par- 
ticular resembling  hhe  ancient  architectural  bas-relief, 
representing  the  heads  of  oxen.  The  physiognomy  of 
the  Bison  is  menacing  and  ferocious,  and  no  one  can 
see  this  animal  in  his  native  wilds  without  feeling  in- 
clined to  attend  to  his  personal  safety. 

The  summer  coat  of  the  Bison  differs  from  his  winter 
dress  rather  by  difference  of  length  than  by  any  other 
particulars. 

In  summer  from  the  shoulders  backward,  Ifte 
hinder  parts  of  the  animal  are  all  covered  with*  a very 
fine  short  hair  that  is  as  smooth  and  soft  to  the  touch 
as  velvet. 

The  tail  is  quite  short  and  tufted  at  the  end,  and  its 
utility  as  a fly  brush  is  very  limited.  The  color  of  the 
hair  is  uniformly  dim  ; but  the  long  hair  on  the  anterior 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


45 


parts  of  the  body  is,  to  a certain  extent,  tinged  with  yel- 
lowish or  rust  color.  These  animals,  however,  present 
so  little  variety  in  regard  to  color,  that  the  natives  con- 
sider any  remarkable  difference  from  the  common  ap- 
pearance as  resulting  from  the  immediate  interference 
of  the  Great  Spirit. 

Some  varieties  of  color  have  been  observed,  though 
the  instances  are  rare. 

A Missouri  trader  informed  the  members  of  Long’s 
exploring  party,  that  he  had  seen  a greyish  white  Bison, 
and  a yearling  calf,  that  was  distinguished  by  several 
white  spots  on  the  side,  a star  or  blaze  in  the  forehead, 
and  white  fore-feet.  Mr.  I.  Doughty,  an  interpreter  to 
the  expedition,  saw  in  an  Indian  hut  a very  well  pre- 
pared Bison’s  head  with  a star  on  the  front.  This  was 
highly  prized  by  the  proprietor,  who  called  it  his  great 
medicine ; for,  said  he,  the  herds  come  every  season  to 
the  vicinity  to  seek  their  white  companion. 

In  appearance,  the  Bison  cow  bears  the  same  relation 
to  the  bull  as  is  borne  by  the  domestic  cow  to  her  mate. 
Her  size  is  much  smaller,  and  she  has  much  less  hair 
on  the  fore-part  of  her  body.  The  horns  of  the  cow  are 
much  less  than  those  of  the  bull,  nor  are  they  so  much 
connected  by  the  hair. 

The  cow  is  by  no  means  destitute  of  beard ; but 


46 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


though  she  possesses  the  conspicuous  appendage,  it 
is  quite  short  when  compared  with  that  of  her  com- 
panion. 

From  July  to  the  latter  part  of  December  the  Bison 
cow  continues  fat. 

Their  breeding  season  commences  towards  the  lat- 
ter part  of  July,  and  continues  until  the  beginning  of 
September,  and  often  the  cows  separate  from  the 

bulls  in  distinct  herds,  and  bring  forth  their  calves  in 
April. 

The  calves  rarely  separate  from  the  mother  before 
they  are  a year  old,  and  cows  are  often  seen  accompa- 
nied by  calves  of  three  seasons. 

The  flesh  of  the  Bison  is  somewhat  coarser  in  its 
fibres  than  that  of  the  domestic  ox,  yet  travellers  are 
unanimous  in  considering  it  equally  savory  as  an  arti- 
cle of  food ; we  must  however  receive  the  opinions  of 
travellers  on  this  subject  with  allowance  for  their  pecu- 
liar situation,  being  frequently  at  a distance  from  all 
other  food,  and  having  their  relish  improved  by  the  best 
of  recommendations  in  favor  of  the  present  viands, — 
hunger. 

It  is  with  reason,  however,  that  the  flesh  is  said  to  be 
more  agreeable,  or  the  grass  on  which  these  animals 
feed  is  short,  firm  and  nutritious,  being  very  diflerent 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


47 


from  the  luxurious  and  less  saline  grass  produced  on  a 
more  fertile  soil. 

The  fat  of  the  Bison  is  said  to  he  far  sweeter  and 
richer,  and  generally  preferable  to  that  of  the  common 
ox. 

The  observations  made  in  relation  to  the  Bison’s  flesh 
when  compared  to  the  flesh  of  the  domestic  ox,  may  he 
extended  to  almost  all  wild  meat,  which  has  a peculiar 
flavor  and  raciness,  which  renders  it  decidedly  more 
agreeable  than  that  of  tame  animals,  although  much 
coarser,  and  the  fibre  by  no  means  so  delicate. 

Of  all  the  parts  of  the  Bison  that  are  eaten,  the  hump 
is  most  famed  for  its  peculiar  richness  and  delicacy,  be- 
cause when  cooked  ’tis  said  very  much  to  resemble 
marrow. 

The  tongue  and  marrow  bones  are  also  highly 
esteemed  by  the  hunters.” 

Before  dismissing  the  subject  of  game,  I must  men- 
tion those  animals  that  are  taken  principally  for  their 
fur.  I cannot  enter  into  a detailed  account  of  these. 
The  furs  brought  into  the  market  by  the  Ojibways,  have 
ever  been  considered  the  best.  They  consist  for  the 
most  part  of  Beaver,  Otter,  Martin,  Fisher  and  Lynx. 

The  interior  of  the  Canadian  country,  between  the 
shores  of  Ontario^  Huron  and  Lake  Superior,  was  once 


48 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


well  hunted  for  the  beaver,  but  its  pelt  being  here  val- 
ueless, they  are  increasing  in  numbers. 

These  are  some  of  the  animals  caught  by  the  Ojib- 
ways  on  land.  There  is  an  abundance  of  fish  in  all 
their  waters.  The  best  of  these  is  the  sweet  fish  of  the 
lakes,  Sis-ka-way^  which  is  esteemed  a very  great  deli- 
cacy ; and  many  others  which  I will  not  mention,  lest 
I should  weary  my  readers,  but  will  allow  them  to 
swim  from  my  sight. 


CHAPTER  lY. 

PLAYS  AND  EXERCISES. 

“ Fantastic,  frolicksome  and  wild, 

With  all  the  trinkets  of  a child  ” 

Cotton. 

I believe  all  the  Indian  nations  of  this  Continent  have 
amusements  among  them.  Those  of  the  Prairie  nations 
are  different  from  those  of  the  Ojibways,  suitable  to  their 
wide,  open  fields.  The  plays  I am  about  to  describe  are 
the  principal  games  practised  by  the  people  of  my  nation. 
There  are  others  ; and  chance  games  are  considerably 
in  vogue  among  them. 

One  of  the  most  popular  games  is  that  of  ball-play- 
ing, which  oftentimes  engages  an  entire  village.  Par- 
ties are  formed  of  from  ten  to  several  hundred.  Before 
they  commence,  those  who  are  to  take  a part  in  the 
play  must  provide  each  his  share  of  staking,  or  things 

which  are  set  apart ; and  one  leader  for  each  party. 
4 


50 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Each  leader  then  appoints  one  of  each  company  to  be 
stake-holder. 

Each  man  and  each  woman  (women  sometimes  en- 
gage in  the  sport)  is  anned  with  a stick,  one  end  of 
which  bends  somewhat  like  a small  hoop,  about  four 
inches  in  circumference,  to  which  is  attached  a net 
work  of  raw-hide,  two  inches  deep,  just  large  enough  to 
admit  the  ball  which  is  to  be  used  on  the  occasion. — 
Two  poles  are  driven  in  the  ground  at  a distance  of 
four  hundred  paces  from  each  other,  which  serves  as 
goals  for  the  two  parties.  It  is  the  endeavor  of  each  to 
take  the  ball  to  his  hole.  The  party  which  carries  the 
ball  and  strikes  its  pole  wins  the  game. 

The  warriors,  very  scantily  attired,  young  and  brave 
fantastically  painted — and  women,  decorated  with 
feathers,  assemble  around  their  commanders,  who  are 
generally  men  swift  on  the  race.  They  are  to  take  the 
ball  either  by  running  with  it  or  throwing  it  in  the  air. 
As  the  ball  falls  in  the  crowd  the  excitement  begins. — 
The  clubs  swing  and  roll  from  side  to  side,  the  players 
run  and  shout,  fall  upon  and  tread  upon  each  other,  and  in 
the  struggle  some  get  rather  rough  treatment. 

When  the  ball  is  thrown  some  distance  on  each  side, 
the  party  standing  near  instantly  pick  it  up,  and  run  at 
full  speed  with  three  or  four  after  him  at  full  speed. — 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


51 


The  others  send  their  shouts  of  encouragement  to  their 
own  party.  “ Ha  ! ha  ! yah  !”  “ A-ne-gook  !”  and 

these  shouts  are  heard  even  from  the  distant  lodges,  for 
children  and  all  are  deeply  interested  in  the  exciting 
scene.  The  spoils  are  not  all  on  which  their  interest  is 
fixed,  but  is  directed  to  the  falling  and  rolling  of  the 
crowds  over  and  under  each  other.  The  loud  and 
merry  shouts  of  the  spectators,  who  crowd  the  doors  of 
the  wigwams,  go  forth  in  one  continued  peal,  and  tes- 
tify to  their  happy  state  of  feeling. 

The  players  are  clothed  in  fur.  They  receive  blows 
whose  marks  are  plainly  visible  after  the  scuffle.  The 
hands  and  feet  are  unincumbered,  and  they  exercise 
them  to  the  extent  of  their  power  ; and  with  such  dex- 
terity do  they  strike  the  ball  that  it  is  sent  out  of  sight. 
Another  strikes  it  on  its  descent,  and  for  ten  minutes  at 
a time  the  play  is  so  adroitly  managed  that  the  ball 
does  not  touch  the  ground. 

No  one  is  heard  to  complain,  though  he  be  bruised 
severely,  or  his  nose  come  in  close  communion  with  a 
club.  If  the  last  mentioned  catastrophe  befell  him,  he 
is  up  in  a trice,  and  sends  his  laugh  forth  as  loud  as  the 
rest,  though  it  be  floated  at  first  on  a tide  of  blood. 

It  is  very  seldom,  if  ever,  that  one  is  seen  to  be  angry 
because  he  has  been  hurt.  If  he  should  get  so,  they 


52 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


would  call  him  a “ coward,”  which  proves  a sufficient 
check  to  many  evils  which  might  result  from  many 
seemingly  intended  injuries. 

While  I was  in  La  Point,  Lake  Superior,  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1836,  when  the  interior  band  of  Chippeways, 
with  those  of  Sandy  Lake,  Lac  Counterville,  Lac  De 
Frambou,  encamped  in  the  Island,  the  interior  bands 
proposed  to  play  against  the  Lake  Indians.  As  it  would 
be  thought  a cowardly  act  to  refuse,  the  Lake  Indians 
were  ready  at  an  early  hour  the  next  day,  when  about 
two  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  best  and  swiftest  feet  as- 
sembled on  a level  green,  opposite  the  mansion  house 
of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hall. 

On  our  side  was  a thicket  of  thorns  ; on  the  other 
the  lake  shore,  with  a sandy  beach  of  half  a mile.  Eve- 
ry kind  of  business  was  suspended,  not  only  by  the  In- 
dians, but  by  the  whites  of  all  classes. 

There  were  but  two  rivals  in  this  group  of  players. 
One  of  these  was  a small  man  from  Cedar  Lake,  on  the 
Chippeway  river,  whose  name  was  “ Nai-nah-aun-gaih^^^ 
(adjusted  feathers,)  who  admitted  no  rival  in  bravery, 
daring,  or  adventure,  making  the  contest  more  inter- 
esting. 

The  name  of  the  other  competitor  was  ‘‘  Mah-koonce^^^ 
(young-bear,)  of  the  shore  bands. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


53 


The  first,  as  I said  before,  was  a small  man.  His 
body  was  a model  for  sculpture ; well  proportioned.  His 
hands  and  feet  tapered  with  all  the  grace  and  delicacy 
of  a lady’s.  His  long  black  hair  flowed  carelessly  upon 
his  shoulders.  On  the  top  of  his  raven  locks  waved  in 
profusion  seventeen  signals  (with  their  pointed  fingers) 
of  the  feathers  of  that  rare  bird,  the  western  Eagle,  be- 
ing the  number  of  the  enemy  he  had  taken  with  his 
own  hand.  A Roman  nose  with  a classic  lip,  which 
wore  at  all  times  a pleasing  smile.  Such  was  Nai-nah- 
aun-gaib.  That  day  he  had  not  the  appearance  of 
having  used  paint  of  any  kind.  Before  and  after  the 
play  I counted  five  bullet  marks  around  his  breast. — 
Three  had  passed  through ; two  were  yet  in  his  body. 
Besides  these,  there  were  iimumerable  marks  of  small- 
shot  upon  his  shoulders,  and  the  graze  of  a bullet  on 
his  temple. 

His  rival  on  this  occasion  was  a tall  muscular  man. 
His  person  was  formed  with  perfect  symmetry.  He  walk- 
ed with  ease  and  grace.  On  his  arms  were  bracelets 
composed  of  the  claws  of  grizzly  bears.  He  had  been 
in  the  field  of  battle  but  five  times  ; yet  on  his  head 
were  three  signals  of  trophies. 

The  parties  passed  to  the  field  ; a beautiful  green,  as 
even  as  a floor.  Here  they  exhibited  all  the  agility 


54 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


and  graceful  motions.  The  one  was  as  stately  as  the 
proud  Elk  of  the  plains ; while  the  other  possessed  all 
the  gracefulness  of  the  Antelope  of  the  western  moun- 
tains. 

Shout  after  shout  arose  from  each  party,  and  from 
the  crowds  of  spectators.  “ Yah-hah — yah-hah,”  were 
all  the  words  that  could  be  distinguished.  After  a short 
contest  the  Antelope  struck  the  post,  and  at  that  mo- 
ment the  applause  was  absolutely  deafening.  Thus 
ended  the  first  day  of  the  play,  which  was  continued 
for  some  length  of  time. 

After  this  day’s  game  was  over,  the  two  champions 
met  and  indulged  in  a sort  of  personal  encounter  with 
the  ball.  This  they  continued  a short  time,  then 
parted  company,  in  good  humor,  and  mingled  with  the 
crowd. 

The  Moccasin  play  is  simple,  and  can  be  played  by 
two  or  three.  Three  moccasins  are  used  for  the  purpose 
of  hiding  the  bullets  which  are  employed  in  the  game. 
So  deeply  interesting  does  this  play  sometimes  become, 
that  an  Indian  will  stake  first  his  gun ; next  his  steel- 
traps  ; then  his  implements  of  war ; then  his  clothing  ; 
and  lastly,  his  tobacco  and  pipe,  leaving  him,  as  we 
say,  “ Nah-hah-wan~yah-ze-yaid  a piece  of  cloth  with 
a string  aroung  his  waist. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


65 


The  “ Tossing  Play”  is  a game  seldom  seen  among 
the  whites.  It  is  played  in  the  wigwam.  There  is 
used  in  it  an  oblong  knot,  made  of  cedar  boughs,  of 
length,  say  about  seven  mches.  On  the  top  is  fastened 
a string,  about  fifteen  mches  long,  by  which  the  knot 
is  swmrg.  On  the  other  end  of  this  string  is  another 
stick,  two  and  a half  mches  long,  and  sharply  pomted. 
This  is  held  m the  hand,  and  if  the  player  can  hit  the 
large  stick  every  time  it  falls  on  the  sharp  one  he  wins. 

Bone  Play,”  is  another  m-door  amusement,  so  call- 
ed, because  the  articles  used  are  made  of  the  hoof-joint 
bones  of  the  deer.  The  ends  are  hollowed  out,  and 
from  three  to  ten  are  strimg  together.  In  playing  it 
they  use  the  same  kmd  of  sharp  stick,  the  end  of  which 
is  thro\vn  into  the  bones. 

Doubtless  the  most  interesting  of  all  games  is  the 
Maiden’s  Ball  Play,”  in  the  Ojibway  language,  Pah- 
pah-se-Kah-w  ay. 

The  majority  of  those  who  take  part  in  this  play  are 
young  damsels,  though  man'ied  women  are  not  excluded. 
The  ball  is  made  of  two  deer  skin  bags,  each  about  five 
inches  long  and  one  in  diameter.  These  are  so  fastened 
together  as  to  oe  at  a distance  of  seven  mches  each  from 
the  other.  It  is  thro^vn  with  a stick  five  feet  long. 

This  play  is  practiced  in  summer  beneath  the  shade 


56 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


of  wide-spreading  trees,  beneath  which  each  strives  to 
find  their  homes,  tahwin,  and  to  run  home  with  it.  These 
having'been  appointed  in  the  morning,  the  young  women 
of  the  village  decorate  themselves  for  the  day  by  paint- 
ing their  cheeks  with  vermillion,  (how  civilized,  eh  ?) 
and  disrobe  themselves  of  as  much  unnecessary  clothing 
as  possible,  braiding  their  hair  with  colored  feathers, 
which  hang  profusely  down  to  the  feet. 

At  the  set  time  the  whole  village  assemble,  and  the 
young  men,  whose  loved  ones  are  seen  in  the  crowd, 
twist  and  turn  to  send  sly  glances  to  them,  and  receive 
their  bright  smiles  in  return. 

The  same  confusion  exists  as  in  the  game  of  ball 
played  by  the  men.  Crowds  rush  to  a given  point  as 
the  ball  is  sent  flying  through  the  air.  None  stop  to 
narrate  the  accidents  that  befal  them,  though  they  tum- 
ble about  to  their  no  little  discomfiture  ; they  rise  mak- 
ing a loud  noise,  something  between  a laugh  and  a cry, 
some  limping  behind  the  others,  as  the  women  shout. 
“ Ain  god’’’  is  heard  sounding  like  the  notes  of  a dove,  of 
which  it  is  no  bad  imitation.  Worked  garters,  mocca- 
sins, leggins  and  vermillion  are  generally  the  articles  at 
stake.  Sometimes  the  Chief  of  the  village  sends  a par- 
cel before  they  commence,  the  contents  of  which  are  to 
be  distributed  among  the  maidens  when  the  play  is  over. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


67 


I remember  that  some  winters  before  the  teachers  from 
the  pale  faces  came  to  the  lodge  of  my  father,  my  mo- 
ther  was  very  sick.  Many  thought  she  would  not  re- 
cover her  health.  At  this  critical  juncture,  she  told  my 
father  that  it  was  her  wish  to  see  the  “ Maiden’s  Ball 
Play,”  and  gave  as  a reason  for  her  request  that  were 
she  to  see  the  girls  at  play,  it  would  so  enliven  her 
spirits  with  the  reminiscences  of  early  days  as  to  tend 
to  her  recovery. 

Our  family  then  resided  at  the  upper  end  of  Belmount 
Lake,  above  Crow  River.  The  next  day,  at  early  dawn, 
the  crier  of  my  father  was  sent  around  to  inform  the  vil- 
lage damsels  that  the  Ball  Game  was  to  be  played  at 
the  request  of  the  Chiefs  wife. 

Two  large  spruce  trees  were  transplanted  from  the 
woods,  to  holes  in  the  ice  ; and  in  the  afternoon  the  peo- 
ple from  the  villages  were  on  the  shore  of  the  Lake. — 
Among  them  was  my  mother,  wrapt  up  in  furs  and 
blankets  to  protect  her  from  the  cold.  There  was  just 
enough  snow  upon  the  ground  to  make  the  footing  very 
uncertain.  I scarcely  recollect  any  thing  equal  to  the 
sport  of  that  day.  The  crowds  would  fall  and  roll 
about,  some  laughing  most  heartily  at  themselves  and 
at  the  distorted  countenances  of  their  companions, whose 
pain  could  not  be  concealed.  When  it  was  over,  they 


58 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


all  stood  in  a circle,  and  received  the  rewards  allotted 
to  each,  consisting  of  beads,  ribbons,  scarlet  cloths,  &c. 
In  a few  moments  more  I heard  them  in  their  wigwams 
jesting  and  laughing  at  their  day’s  sport. 

Jumping  is  an  exercise  in  which  my  countrymen  have 
always  engaged  with  considerable  interest.  Trials  are 
made  of  jumping  over  a raised  stick,  or  in  the  sand. — 
This  sport,  as  well  as  the  use  of  the  bow  and  arrow, 
young  women  are  prohibited  from  engaging  in. 

Foot  Racing  is  much  practised,  mostly  however  by 
the  young  people.  Thus  in  early  life  they  acquire  an 
elasticity  of  limb  as  well  as  health  of  body,  which  are 
of  priceless  value  to  them  in  subsequent  years. 

The  first  mortification  my  pride  ever  received  was  on 
a certain  occasion  when  I engaged  in  one  of  these  races 
in  the  presence  of  a crowd  of  warriors.  The  prize  was 
a piece  of  scarlet  cloth.  As  I reached  forth  my  hand 
to  grasp  the  prize,  a rope  that  lay  hid  in  the  grass  upset 
me  so  completely,  that  I turned  half  a dozen  sommersets 
and  finally  tumbled  into  a pool  of  water.  When  I got 
out  I had  the  extreme  pleasure  of  seeing  my  rival  take 
the  cloth,  and  of  hearing  him  brag  that  he  had  actually 
beaten  the  Chiefs  son.  I wiped  my  drenched  head  as 
best  I could,  and  my  eyes  of  the  dirt  which  adhered  to 
them  with  all  the  tenacity  of  a leach,  amid  the  shouts 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


59 


of  laughter  which  was  all  the  consolation  I received  in 
my  misfortune.  Since  then  I have  walked  seventy-five 
miles  a day  in  the  spring  of  the  year,  so  that  I can  boast 
of  this,  if  not  of  my  first  pedestrian  feat. 

I need  not  say  in  concluding  this  chapter,  what  every 
one  probably  knows,  that  the  plays  and  exercises  of  the 
Indians  have  contributed  much  towards  the  formation 
and  preservation  of  that  noble,  erect,  and  manly  figure 
for  which  they  are  so  remarkable. 

Growing  up  in  the  daily  practice  of  these  has  been 
and  is  now  a sure  preventive  of  disease.  Not  imtil  re- 
cently has  the  rude  and  brutish  system  of  wrestling  been 
in  vogue  among  them. 

The  law  of  the  Nation,  like  that  of  ancient  Greece, 
has  been  enacted  with  a view  to  the  health  of  its  sub- 
jects. It  obliged  the  people  to  engage  in  these  exercises 
that  they  might  inherit  strong  constitutions,  and  he  pre- 
pared for  the  cold  storms,  and  the  piercing  blasts  that 
sweep  around  the  lake  shores. 

The  mildness  added  to  the  coldness  of  the  climate 
conduce  to  the  expansion  of  the  ingenuity  of  my  people. 
The  old  saying,  “ Necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention,” 
finds  a verification  in  them.  Did  they  possess  the  ad- 
vantages of  education  possessed  by  the  whites,''many  a 
bright  star  would  shine  forth  in  their  ranks  to  bless  and 


60 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


improve  mankind.  What  they  want  is  education. — 
They  have  mind,  but  it  requires  culture. 

A short  time  since,  while  on  a steamboat  on  the  wa- 
ters of  the  upper  Mississippi,  a gentleman  speaking  of 
the  Chippeway’s,  said  that  they  were  a manly,  noble 
race,  that  their  motto  seemed  to  be,  “ Suffering  before 
treachery — death  before  dishonor.”  It  was  gratifying 
to  my  national  pride  to  hear  such  an  assertion  made  by 
an  enlightened  American. 


CHAPTER  V. 


THEIR  WARS  WITH  THE  SIOUXS. 

“ ’Twas  blow  for  blow,  disputing  inch  by  inch, 

For  one  would  not  retreat,  nor  t’other  flinch.” 

For  centuries  have  the  Ojibways  and  Siouxs  been  at 
enmity  with  each  other.  Cessation  of  hostilities  for  a 
few  years  has  only  served  to  strengthen  for  renewed, 
conflict.  These  wars  first  originated,  as  I have  before 
stated,  in  the  question  of  the  right  of  occupancy  of  the 
fisheries  at  the  upper  end  of  Lake  Superior,  and  the 
right  to  the  game  of  the  adjacent  woods.  Subsequently 
they  were  carried  on  for  conquest,  until  at  length  re- 
venge has  been  the  cry  of  both  parties. 

The  waters  of  Menesotah  have  been  crimsoned  with 
the  blood  of  both  nations,  and  the  upper  Mississippi  has 
witnessed  their  unrewarded  contest ; and  their  shouts 
and  groans  have  alike  resounded  among  the  mountain 
passes,  and  echoed  from  cliff  to  cliff  on  the  rock-walled 
shore. 


Q2  traditional  history  of 

The  livers  which  flow  into  the  Mississippi  have  float- 
ed hundreds  of  the  canoes  of  the  Ojihways,  freighted 
with  resolute  warriors  against  the  Siouxs.  While  the 
Siouxs  have  passed  up  the  same  streams,  and  finding 
the  smoke  of  the  “ M^-ah-to-wm"  rising  from  the  wig- 
wam, have  suddenly  startled  them  with  their  war-cry. 

The  heights  of  Lake  Superior  have  been  used  as  towers 
by  the  Siouxs,  from  which  to  watch  the  sky  across  the 
Lake,  while  the  harrier  ridges  of  the  North  were  used 
by  the  Ojihways  for  the  same  purpose.  Thus  Nature 
furnished  her  children  with  watch-towers  and  fortresses. 

The  quarrels  have  been  kept  alive,  and  the  war-fires 
fanned  hy  the  songs  of  each  nation.  As  soon  as  child- 
ren were  old  enough  to  handle  a how  and  arrow,  repre- 
sentations of  the  enemy  were  made,  and  the  youngsters 
taught  to  shoot  at  them,  for  exercise  and  practice.  The 
old  men  narrated  to  them  deeds  of  bravery,  and  thus 
were  they  inspired  with  a desire  to  grow  up,  and  when 
men,  act  like  their  fathers,  and  scout  the  wide  forests 
for  each  other.  Even  the  mothers  have  taught  their 
offspring,  before  they  leave  their  breast,  to  hate  then- 

enemies.  The  Siouxs  have,  in  some  instances,  acknow-  , 

ledged  that  our  forefathers  drove  them  from  the  North  ^ 
West  of  St.  Paul,  a lake  they  call  ^‘E-sab-yah-mah-da;’ 
and  the  upper  part  of  Leach  Lake. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


63 


Several  years  ago,  while  strolling  by  the  Chippeway 
River,  with  one  of  the  most  intelligent  Indian  Chiefs, 
whose  name  was  “ Moose  Tail,”  he  pointed  out  to  me 
numerous  battle-grounds  of  days  past,  and  all  day 
sketched  to  me  in  his  own  graphic  language  the  con- 
flicts that  had  occurred  upon  them. 

I counted  twenty-nine  battle-grounds  on  the  shores  of 
the  Menomenee  river,  along  which  is  a small  branch  of 
the  Chippeway,  on  the  western  side,  where  trees  were 
notched  according  to  the  number  of  warriors  who  fell. 
The  border  of  the  St.  Croix  contains  more,  and  the  upper 
Mississippi  can  furnish  traditional  records  of  battles  at 
every  mile  of  its  course. 

Above  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  just  above  the  “great 
bend,”  one  of  the  deadliest  battles  was  fought ; and  an- 
other near  the  mouth  of  the  Chippeway. 

The  Chippeways  have  gone  to  war  in  bands  of  from 
two  to  five,  while  the  Siouxs,  in  nearly  every  instance, 
have  had  as  many  hundreds. 

Of  the  recent  war,  an  account  of  which  has  been  pub- 
lished, on  Lake  St.  Croix  and  Rum  River,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  repeat  what  others  have  said,  that  it  was 
brought  on  by  the  treachery  and  cruelty  of  those  in 
whose  power  it  was  to  have  prevented  the  sad  occur- 
rence. I was  on  the  battle-field  of  Lake  St.  Croix  soon 


64 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


after  the  conflict,  and  saw  the  remains  of  the  slaugh- 
tered Chippeways  scattered  in  all  directions.  The 
marks  of  bullets  were  upon  all  the  trees,  and  the  shrub- 
very  was  all  trodden  down.  Some  of  the  dead  were 
suspended  upon  the  branches  of  the  trees.  The  Siouxs 
may  have  killed  a large  number  of  Chippeways,  but  the 
warfare  was  not  an  honorable  one.  The  day  previous, 
a pipe  of  peace  was  received  from  the  Sioux  Nation  by 
the  Ojibways,  who  had  a desire  for  peace. 

The  pipe  was  expected  that  day,  and  was  smoked  in 
good  faith,  but  the  next  day  the  Siouxs  followed  the 
Ojibways  up  the  river,  then  followed  those  of  St.  Croix. 
The  day  following  they  availed  themselves  of  every 
advantage,  and  killed  over  one  hundred  Chippeways 
and  upwards  of  ninety  Siouxs.  Since  this  conflict, 
many  Americans  have  settled  among  them,  whose  pre- 
sence has  in  a great  degree  prevented  a repetition  of  the 
same  disastrous  scenes. 

It  is  by  the  good  influence  of  the  whites  that  they 
will  eventually  abandon  their  war  life,  and  betake  them- 
selves to  the  employments  of  peace.  I was  glad,  during 
my  short  stay  at  Minisota,  to  see  the  beneficial  results 
of  Gov.  Ramsay’s  efforts  among  the  Indians.  They 
must  be  induced  to  give  up  war  and  petty  strifes  before 
they  can  be  benefitted,  morally  or  physically. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


65 


I cannot  close  this  chapter  without  giving  my  readers 
an  account  of  the  wars  I have  referred  to.  It  is  written 
by  William  Warren,  a writer  in  the  “ Minisota  Pioneer.” 
He  has  made  himself  well  acquainted  with  the  histoiy 
of  the  Ojibways,  and  is  himself  by  birth,  partly,  one  of 
the  Nation.  Writing  from  Crow  Wing  River  he  says  : 

“ A party  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  once  laid  an  am- 
buscade at  the  extreme  point  of  Shagiihioaumik.  The 
Ojibway  lads,  crossing  over  early  in  the  morning  to  kill 
ducks,  were  set  upon,  but  the  point  being  well  adapted 
to  defence  by  numerou  s sand  hills,  they  fought  till  the 
village  opposite  bemg  alarmed,  the  warriors  began  to 
swarm  foilln ; and  crossing  over,  landed  a mile  below 
\he  extreme  point,  cutting  the  Siouxs  entirely  otf  from 
escape  ; all  were  killed  but  two,  who  jumped  into  the 
lake,  and  were  never  heard  of  or  seen  after.  The  bones 
of  the  slain  warriors  are  still  visible  in  particles,through- 
out  the  entire  point. 

The  Chippeways  tell  of  a large  war  party  that  was 
raised  to  march  against  the  then  Sioux  village  of  Sandy 
Lake,  The  party  was  so  numerous,  that  the  string  of 
warriors  reached  a great  distance  as  they  marched  in 
single  file,  against  the  devoted  village ; which  was 
taken  after  a bloody  slaughter.  This  event  happened 

or  took  place,  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  ago. 

5 


66 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


The  leader’s  name  was  Bauswush^  grand-father  of  the 
present  Chief  of  Sandy  Lake,  now  aged  about  sixty 
years.  The  party  started  from  Fond  du  Lac. 

Some  years  after  Sandy  Lake  had  been  taken  by  this 
chief,  sixty  Ojibway  warriors  started  down  the  Mississippi 
on  a war  party.  At  the  confluence  of  the  Crow  Wing  and 
Mississippi  rivers,  they  found  on  their  way  back,  traces 
of  a large  Sioux  war  party  that  hud  gone  up,  and  pro- 
bably killed  their  defenceless  wives  and  children.  Too 
late  to  arrive  to  their  rescue  by  the  signs  left,  they  dug 
holes  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  a.nd  laid  an  ambuscade 
for  their  enemies.  The  Sioux  soon  came  floating  down, 
singing  songs  of  triumph  and  beating  the'vdrum.  Their 
canoes  were  laden  with  prisoners,  and  the  scalps  of  t'At? 
slain  dangled  on  poles  erected  in  them.  The  Siouxs 
numbered  three  hundred;  the  party  in  ambush,  but 
sixty.  But  when  they  recognized  wives  and  children 
as  prisoners,  and  beheld  the  bleeding  scalps  of  their  re- 
latives, the  blood  boiled  in  their  veins,  and,  in  perfect 
desperation,  they  sounded  the  war-whoop  and  discharged 
a flight  of  arrows  on  their  triumphant  and  confident 
enemies. 

Many  canoes  were  upset,  and  a few  prisoners  swam 
ashore  at  the  first  surprise ; but  the  Siouxs  rallying,  soon 
efiected  a landing,  and  tying  their  remaining  prisoners 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION, 


67 


to  trees,  a regular  ludian  fight  commenced.  When 
arrows  and  amimmition  had  failed,  they  dug  them  hid- 
ing holes  close  to  one  another,  and  pelted  each  other 
with  stones.  The  bravest  fought  hand  to  hand  with 
knives  and  clubs.  This  fight  lasted  three  days,  till  at 
last,  the  Siouxs  retreated,  leaving  many  dead,  and  most 
of  them  prisoners.  The  Ojibways,  satisfied  with  their 
revenge,  returned  to  their  desolated  village. 

The  marks  of  this  battle  and  the  hiding  holes  on  the 
bank  are  still  visible,  within  a few  rods  from  where  I 
am  writing. 

The  Siouxs  and  Ojibways  have  met  three  different 
times  at  the  confluence  of  these  rivers.  The  village  of 
Sandy  Lake,  since  the  Ojibways  have  resided  there,  has 
twice  been  nearly  depopulated  ; once  as  I have  just  re- 
lated, and  another  time,  this  band  was  attacked  at  Cross 
Lake,  forty  miles  north  of  Crow  Wing,  while  in  theii 
spring  encampment,  and  all  killed  and  taken  prisoners 
but  seven  men,  four  women  and  three  children  ; this 
event  occurred  about  fifty  years  ago  ; and  some  men 
are  living,  who  were  at  that  time  taken  prisoners  by  the 
Siouxs,  and  afterwards  returned. 

Many  battles  occurred  about  Leech  Lake  and  Red 
Lake  of  the  North.  The  whole  of  that  region  between 
the  Crow  Wing  and  British  line,  has  been  conquered 


68 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


fi:om  the  Siouxs.  Many  engagements  and  massacres 
took  place  on  the  St.  Croix  and  Chippeway  rivers.  Two 
considerable  fights  occurred  at  Elk  river,  emptying  in 
the  Mississippi  at  a place  called  to  this  day  by  the  ‘In- 
dians, ‘ the  battle-ground.’ 

The  marks  of  these  battles  are  still  visible ; at  the 
last,  was  killed  a renowned  war  chief  of  the  Ojibways, 
who  was,  in  his  time,  the  terror  of  the  Siouxs  ; and  died 

i 

much  regretted  by  his  tribe.  The  name  of  this  chief 
was  Ke-che-wauh-e-shash  ; Big  Martin.  The  Ojibways 
of  this  district,  often  speak  of  him  as  the  one,  whose 
valor  and  prowess  conduced  to  drive  their  enemies  from 
the  country.  Many  exploits  are  told  of  him,  and  he 
died  covered  with  scars  received  in  a hundred  fights. 

About  forty  years  ago,  a party  of  two  hundred  warriors 
under  Flat  Mouth,  Chief  of  Leech  Lake,  fell  on  a camp 
of  Siouxs  at  Long  Prairie,  numbering  forty  lodges  ; all 
were  killed  but  six  men  of  the  Siouxs.  The  Ojibways 
captured  many  horses,  but  being  unable  to  manage 
them,  killed  them ; and  the  hones  of  man  and  horse  are 
still  bleaching  on  the  plain. 

About  the  same  time,  the  Black  Duck^  of  Red  Lake, 
was  surrounded  after  destroying  a large  camp  of  Siouxs, 
and  he,  with  forty  braves,  killed  to  a man,  on  the  far 
western  plains.  He  was  a renowned  warrior  and  a 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


69 


brave  man.  It  is  unnecessary  to  mention  their  differ- 
ent hostile  meetings  of  late  years  ; for  the  past  ten 
yearSj  not  less  than  four  hundred  Ojibways  have  been 
killed  in  this  war,  and  we  can  judge  by  this,  what  a 
sacrifice  of  life  there  has  been  for  the  past  two  centuries. 

As  many  fights,  surprises,  massacres  and  single  ex- 
ploits can  be  told  of  this  endless  feud  as  would  fill  a 
book  ; all  through  the  country,  from  Selkirk’s  Settlement 
to  Wisconsin  River  south,  and  from  Lake  Superior  to 
the  Mississippi,  spots  are  shown  where  the  blood  of 
these  two  tribes  has  been  freely  spilt.  Even  at  this  day, 
in  spite  of  the  white  man’s  interference,  it  is  no  strange 
thing  to  hear  of  surprises  and  murders  on  either  side, 
and  to  see  a warrior  with  his  head  stuck  full  of  eagles’ 
plumes,  denoting  the  number  of  enemies  he  has  killed 
in  his  time. 

One  hundred  years  ago,  the  Ojibways  were  hemmed 
in  along  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior  ; the  war  path  of 
their  enemies  terminated  at  many  of  their  lake  shore 
villages.  But  now  they  are  masters  of  all  the  country 
to  the  Mississippi ; and  had  it  not  been  for  the  partition 
of  lands  among  the  Indian  tribes,  by  the  United  States, 
Hole  in  the  day^  their  late  noted  war  chief,  used  often 
to  confidently  aifirm  that  he  would  have  made  his  vil- 
lage at  St.  Peters,  and  the  hunting  grounds  of  his  young 


70 


traditional  history  of 


men  would  have  extended  far  into  the  western  plains  of 
the  Siouxs.  All  this  proves  much  for  their  prowess  m 
war  ; hut  they  lay  the  main  cause  of  their  success  to 
their  first  intercourse  with  whites ; they  became  pos- 
sessed of  fire  arms  long  before  their  enemies,  and  made 
good  use  of  them.” 

The  continuation  of  these  wars,  up  the  first  of  April, 
1850,  as  given  by  the  Minesota  Chronicle,  is  here 

'related: — 

o Our  community  has  just  been  startled  with  the  in- 
telligence of  another  of  those  sanguine  scenes  so  common 
in  the  annals  of  the  two  powerful  tribes  of  the  North- 
west—the  Siouxs  and  the  Chippewas.  On  Wednesday 
morning  last,  about  sunrise,  a war  party  of  Siouxs  from 
the  village  of  Little  Crow  and  Red  Wing,  surprised  a 
small  encampment  of  Chippewas,  on  Apple  River,  Wis- 
consin, and  killed  aud  scalped  fourteen  of  them,  with- 
out loss  or  injury  to  the  attacking  party.  They  also 
took  one  boy  prisoner.  Few  men  were  with  the  party 
of  Chippewas— it  being  mostly  composed  of  women  and 
children,  engaged  in  making  sugar.  The  fourteen  kill- 
ed comprised  three  men,  three  nearly  grown  boys,  six 
females,  women  and  children,  and  two  male  children. 
The  attack  was  upon  ground  heretofore  ceded  by  the 
Siouxs  to  the  Government,  but  upon  which,  by  treaty 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


71 


' stipulation,  they  still  have  the  privilege  of  hunting.  The 
place  is  20  or  25  miles  north-east  of  Stillwater. 

On  Thursday,  the  Sioux  wamors  appeared  in  the 
streets  of  Stillwater,  and  went  through  the  scalp  dance, 
in  celebration  of  their  victory — forming  a circle  roimd 
the  Chippewa  boy — their  prisoner — and  occasionally 
striking  him  on  the  face  with  their  reeking  trophies. — 
The  boy,  we  understand,  has  already  been  adopted  into 
one  of  the  families  at  Little  Crow  Village. 

It  is  with  pain  we  record  the  occurrence  of  a scene  so 
truly  revolting  to  the  better  feelings  of  humanity.  This 
aggression  of  the  Siouxs  ^vill  doubtless  lead  to  retalia- 
tion on  the  part  of  the  Chippewas  ; and  we  may  expect 
to  hear  of  more  bloodshed,  unless  the  civil  and  military 
authorities  succeed  in  putting  a stop  to  it.  This  can 
hardly  be  expected  with  the  present  meagre  force  on  our 
frontiers.  The  murder  of  the  Chippewa  on  Crow  River 
by  the  Siouxs  a few  weeks  ago,  (who  was  the  son  of  the 
Chief  White  Fisher)  had  caused  much  revengeful  feel- 
ing to  break  out  anew  among  that  tribe,  previous  to  the 
occurrence  we  now  relate. 

It  is  proper  to  remark,  that  the  better  disposed  men 
among  the  Siouxs  entirely  disapprove  of  this  renewal 
of  their  old  feud  against  the  Chippewas.  The  leader  of 
the  party  in  this  tragedy  is  a graceless  scamp,  who  last 


72 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


fall  scalped  his  own  wife.  He  was  arrested  for  the  act, 
and  confined  in  the  prison  at  Fort  Snelling  for  several 
weeks.  Having  signed  the  temperance  pledge,  and 
promised  a refonn  for  the  future,  he  was  finally  released. 
It  were  better  had  he  been  kept  there  till  this  time.  It 
is  said  the  main  reason  that  induced  him  to  lead  his 
comrades  to  slay  the  defenceless  Chippewas,  was  to 
wipe  off  the  disgrace  of  his  former  cruelty  to  his  own 
family,  and  the  punishment  which  followed  it.  Such 
are  the  Indian’s  ideas  of  honor  ! 

Measures  will  be  taken  by  Gov.  Ramsey  to  bring  the 
offenders  connected  with  this  outrage  to  justice.  The 
Chippewa  boy  will  be  sent  back  to  his  people  as  soon 
as  he  can  he  reclaimed  from  the  Siouxs.” 


CHAPTER  VI. 


THE  WAR  BETWEEN  THE  IROaUIS  AND  WESTERN 

HURONSj  TERMINATING  IN  THE  WARS  BETWEEN 
THE  OJIBWAYS  & IROQ.UIS  IN  CANADA  WEST. 

“ The  death  shot  hissing  from  afar, 

The  shock,  the  shout,  the  groan  of  war.” 

More  than  two  hundred  winters  have  clothed  the 
mountains  of  the  North  with  snow,  which  as  many 
summer  suns  have  melted,  since  the  battle  shout  of  the 
Hurons,  in  their  once  happy  and  peaceful  homes,  died 
away,  and  the  Iroquois  shouted  their  note  of  triumph. 

Long  and  bloody  had  been  the  struggle  between  the 
Hurons  and  Iroquois  when  they  were  heard  of  by  Cham- 
plain in  the  year  1608.  The  one  nation  occupied  the 
whole  tract  of  land  about  the  three  lakes  Ontario,  Erie, 
and  that  which  still  bears  the  name  of  the  Nation. 

They  formed  a confederation  of  five  Nations,  as  did 
their  brethren  the  Iroquois,  who  occupied  at  that  time 


74 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


the  principal  part  of  what  is  now  the  State  of  New- York 
Few  Indian  wars  have  been  more  sanguinary  than  those 
between  the  Hurons  and  the  Iroquois.  The  forces  on 
each  side  were  equal,  and  from  childhood  they  had 
gradually -acquired  great  expertness  in  the  use  of  arms, 
the  bow  and  the  arrow  : both  were  innured  to  climate 
and  fatigue.  The  whole  Huron  countiy  was  kept  in 
constant  commotion,  for  the  Hurons  had  made  depreda- 
tions upon  the  Algonquin  tribes  in  the  South,  North, 
and  West. 

When  they  fell  out  with  their  own  brethren,  the  war 
became  a series  of  sanguinary  single  combats.  The 
hands  of  friends  become  those  of  enemies,  sending  forth 
a declaration  of  war  from  the  Hurons  upon  their  allies, 
who  had  assisted  against  the  Algonquin  tribes,  and 
upon  whose  children  they  had  committed  most  barba- 
rous acts — acts  which  could  not  be  forgotten. 

The  Ottaways,  Ojibways  and  Nenomenees,  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  their  cries,  and  listened  not  when  they  came 
and  related  their  misfortimes.  It  was  heart-rending  to 
see  the  Huron  warrior  suppressing  his  sobs  and  tears — 
and  many  a warrior  shouted  vengeance  on  the  Hurons 
with  whom  they  had  till  then  been  on  peaceable  terms. 
They  had  not  forgotten  their  former*  treaties,  or  that 
their  faith  in  the  sacredness  of  them,  confirmed  by  the 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


75 


pipe  -of  peace,  had  been  violated.  The  allies  of  the 
Ojibways  had  been  trifled  with  ; they  must  now  re- 
ceive the  reward  of  their  perfidy,  for  the  frown  of  that 
Monedoo  before  whom  they  had  consented  to  smoke  the 
pipe  of  peace,  rested  on  them. 

The  struggle  went  on — each  alternately  rent  the  skies 
with  shouts  of  victory,  which  were  but  momentary. — 
The  wails  of  the  wounded  and  suffering  were  heard  on 
the  shores  of  the  broad  Niagara,  and  on  the  banks  of 
the  St.  Lawrence.  The  Hurons  had  penetrated  to  the 
North,  along  the  shores  of  Mah-ah-moo-see-he  (Ottaway 
river.)  Their  canoes  floated  by  the  banlis  of  the  On- 
tario, Erie  and  Huron.  The  inland  seas  in  the  northern 
part  of  the  peninsula  were  thronged  by  them.  The 
rivers,  mountains,  and  vallies  were  all  theirs.  In  such  a 
delightful  country  were  their  game  and  wigwams,  and  it 
was  for  these  they  fought  with  a desperation  seldom 
equalled,  never  excelled — till  conquered  by  their  own 
brethren,  they  yielded  what  they  had  so  bravely  strug- 
gled to  retain.  Since  then,  tradition  informs  us,  they 
were  called  “ the  Elder  Brothers,”  on  account  of  their 
conquest  of  the  Hurons.  The  dispersion  which  took 
place  in  the  year  1648,  gave  the  victors  possession  of 
all  (now)  Canada  West. 

The  Iroquois  overcame  their  brethren  soon  after  the 


76 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


introduction  of  European  fire  arms,  and  it  was  the  dread 
of  these  weapons  which  in  part  induced  them  to  seek 
shelter  amid  the  tribes  on  the  south-west  shores  of  Lake 
Huron.  The  first  Nation  fled  to  the  South  of  Lake 
Huron,  about  Saganaw — subsequently  it  moved  further 
South  on  the  St.  Clair.  The  second  Nation  went  to 
the  North-west,  at  the  foot  of  the  great  lake  called 
Kechegunij  now  called  Lake  Superior.  Of  the  third, 
a great  number  were  adopted  by  their  conquerors 
in  perfect  amity.  The  remaining  two  Nations  joined 
with  western  tribes,  and  in  the  course  of  time  have 
nearly  lost  their  nationality. 

The  exultation  of  the  Iroquois  was  almost  beyond 
bounds.  They  pursued  their  retreating  brethren  over 
the  St.  Clair,  and  along  the  Northern  shores  of  Lake 
Huron.  They  were  the  possessors  of  the  whole  terri- 
tory; the  valley  of  the  Ottawa  yielded  them  their 
game,  which  a few  years  before  was  the  right  and  sup- 
port of  their  exiled  brethren. 

Dejected,  disheartened,  the  Hurons  presented  them- 
selves at  the  doors  of  the  Great  Council  Wigwams  of 
different  Nations,  whom  they  had  made  enemies  by  their 
former  repeated  depredations,  but  rather  than  submit  to 
be  led  by  their  own  brethren,  as  a conquered  race 
throughout  their  former  possessions,  those  who  went  to 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


77 


the  north-west  called  a council  among  themselves,  in 
which  it  was  determined  upon  what  should  be  done. 

This  council,  according  to  ancient  tradition,  must 
have  been  held  at  the  outlet  of  French  River,  and  on 
the  Northern  shore  of  Lake  Huron. 

The  Hurons  assembled  themselves  in  council,  and  in 
the  course  of  their  deliberations,  they  desired  several  of 
their  Chiefs  to  visit  the  great  Ojibway  family  on  Lake 
Superior,  and  see  whether  that  people  would  forgive 
them  the  wrongs  they  had  done  them,  and  admit  them 
as  their  allies. 

The  war  canoes  of  the  Hurons  were  manned  and 
paddled  on  the  bosom  of  the  great  lake  in  search  of  a 
place  of  refuge.  They  arrived  quite  late  in  the  autumn 
at  the  eastermost  village  of  the  Ojibways,  a situation 
they  named  Pe-quak-qica-wah-ming,  (Round  Point,) 
near  the  fork  of  a bay  called  by  the  French  Aunce  Bay, 
now  known  as  Ke-wa-o-non. 

It  was  the  policy  of  the  Hurons  to  present  themselves 
in  a pitiable  condition  before  their  superiors,  the  Ojibway 
family  of  the  great  lake,  that  they  might  the  more  easily 
obtain  their  favor  and  sympathy.  Tradition  informs 
us  that  they  came  and  presented  themselves  before  the 
Council-door  of  that  Nation,  and  begged  them  to  spare 
their  own  children’s  lives.  They  had  painted  their 


78 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


faces  black,  rent  their  clothes,  and  with  emaciated  and 
haggard  frames,  came  to  implore  their  aid.  They  nar- 
rated their  misfortunes,  to  incite  the  pity  of  the  nation. 
The  Ojibways  saw  them,  and  yielded  to  pity  and  com- 
passion. The  Hurons  were  received  as  friends ; they 
overcame  the  war  spirit  of  the  Ojibways,  who  kindly 
seated  them  at  their  side. 

The  Huron  Chief  detailed  the  barbarous  acts  of  their 
brethren,  and  narrated  in  glowing  language  their  cruelty. 
That  their  allies  had  driven  them  from  their  lands  ; that 
their  children  had  been  thrown  on  the  blaze  of  their  own 
fires  in  their  own  wigwams,  and  the  wigwams  beneath 
which  they  had  resided  for  years,  reduced  to  ashes  ! — 
Some  were  compelled  to  drink  the  blood  of  their  own 
children,  while  those  who  were  carried  away  into  their 
own  brethren’s  country,  were  denied  food,  and  were 
offered  their  own  children’s  flesh  in  its  stead. 

That  country  was  covered  with  blood,  and  with  the 
mangled  remains  of  their  fathers  who  had  fought  for 
their  lands.  The  exulting  cry  of  the  Oneida,  mingled 
with  the  shouts  of  the  Mohawk,  was  heard  in  the  land 
where  once  they  lived.  They  said  that  the  graves  of 
their  people  were  desecrated,  and  that  the  bodies  of 
many  of  their  women  and  children  lay  unburied  on 
their  battle-fields,  from  the  waters  of  Erie  to  the  valley 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


79 


of  Ottawa  in  the  North.  The  Hurons  related  the 
account  of  their  children’s  massacre  with  tears  and  sobs, 
and  by  such  means  moved  those  who  had  been  their 
enemies  to  pity  them,  and  kindled  in  the  hearts  of  some 
a feeling  of  revenge  upon  the  Iroquois,  who  had  so  reck- 
lessly overstepped  the  barrier  which  Nature  hath  raised 
in  the  hearts  of  all  men.  If  thus  the  fugitive  Hurons 
had  gone  to  solicit  aid  in  the  midst  of  the  Ojibway 
country,  they  could  have  aroused  the  bravery  of  the 
Nation  to  have  gone  in  anus  in  their  favor,  and  carried 
on  war  still  longer. 

■At  this  time  there  lived  the  greatest  of  renowned  war- 
riors, who  dwelt  dXPequakqua-wah-ming. 

His  name  has  been  handed  down  from  generation  to 
generation,  and  his  bravery  and  fame  been  envied  by 
all  yoimg  warriors. 

It  is  said  that  this  Wah-hoo-geeg  arose  in  the  council 
with  a club  in  his  hand,  and  remembering  the  Hurons 
and  their  many  barbarous  acts,  shook  the  war  club  over 
their  heads,  and  said  that  it  was  not  fear  which  had  led 
them  to  give  them  such  a reception,  but  it  was  pity  for 
their  innocent  children,  that  induced  them  to  open  their 
arms  and  receive  them.  He  told  them  that  hencefor- 
ward none  should  molest — that  their  children  and  the 
children  of  his  own  people  should  sport  together — that 


80 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY 


the  war  club  of  the  Ojibways  should  protect  them — and 
that  they  were  as  numerous  as  the  leaves  of  the  forest 
trees,  towards  the  setting  sun. 

A situation  was  assigned  them  near  by  where  they 
and  their  children  could  reside,  and  be  near  the  villages 
of  the  Ojibways.  It  was  adjacent  to  a bay  about  fifteen 
miles  eastward  of  Alluce  Bay,  and  a river  whose 
name  has  been  Huron  from  that  day  to  this. 

I have  been  thus  particular  in  naming  the  events 
which  led  to  the  subjugation  of  the  Huron  Iroquois  by 
their  own  brethren,  the  Iroquois  of  the  East,  that  the 
reader  may  be  informed  of  the  chief  cause  of  their  sub- 
sequent success,  which  was  the  fact  of  their  having 
enlisted  in  their  favor  the  Ojibway  Nation.  The  West- 
ern Iroquois,  finding  a refuge  in  the  midst  of  Western 
tribes,  endeavored  to  stop  the  commerce  which  had  been 
commenced  by  the  great  Ottawa  river,  and  profitably 
carried  on  between  the  French  and  the  Ojibways  of 
Lake  Superior.  This  rash  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
Iroquois  brought  on  the  disastrous  war  between  that 
Nation  and  the  Ojibways,  an  account  of  which  is  re- 
served for  the  next  chapter. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  WAR  BETWEEN  THE  OJIBWAYS  AND  THE 
EASTERN  IROQ.UOIS. 

“ In  peace  there’s  nothing  so  becomes  a man 
As  modest  stillness  and  humanity  ; 

But  when  the  blast  of  war  blows  in  his  ears, 

Then  imitates  the  action  of  the  tiger.” 

Before  the  dispersion  of  the  Hurons  no  difficulty  exist- 
ed between  the  Ojibways  and  the  Eastern  Iroquois, 
but  the  Western  Hurons  often  waylaid  the  hunters  of 
the  Ojibway  Nation,  and  continuing  so  to  do  eventually 
aroused  the  war-whoop  of  revenge  far  and  near. 

After  the  year  1608,  Champlain  traders  began  to  carry 
on  their  commercial  transactions  on  the  waters  of  the 
Mahahmoo  iSebee,  (Trading  River,)  which  introduced 
among  the  Indians  fire-arms  woollen-goods,  and  steel 
for  weapons  of  war. 

The  next  year  (1609,)  Champlain  made  a treaty  with 
6 


82 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


the  Northern  tribes,  an  examination  of  which  will 
show  in  what  manner  they  were  to  aid  them  in 
their  wars  with  the  Iroquois.  History  exhibits  the 
disastrous  results  following  this  connection  with 
them. 

* During  a period  of  thirty-five  years  the  Ojibways  on 
Lake  Superior,  had  been  obtaining  fire-arms  from  the 
French  of  (Quebec.  They  carried  on  a peaceful  traffic 
with  the  French  of  Lake  Superior  until  the  year  1652, 
when  the  troubles  between  the  Iroquois  and  the  Ojib- 
ways commenced.  The  commerce  which  for  thirty-five 
years  had  received  no  interruption,  either  from  quarrels 
without  or  dissentions  within  their  midst,  was  attacked 
by  the  Iroquois,  who  barbarously  plundered  and  mas- 
sacred the  Ojibway  warriors,  who  had  been  out  for  Mon- 
treal to  barter  furs  for  domestic  goods,  as  also  for  wea- 
pons of  war  and  fire-water.  At  the  entrance  of  French 
River,  two  of  this  company  escaped  from  the  Iroquois, 
and  conveyed  an  account  of  the  fate  of  their  comrades 
to  the  Ojibways  at  Amice  Bay.  This  so  incensed  the 
Algonquin  tribe  that  they  sent  the  invaders  a message 
to  this  effect,  that  if  they  ever  perpetrated  the  like  again, 
they  would  send  a few  of  their  warriors  in  pursuit,  to 
exterminate  them.  The  proud  Iroquois  laughed  in 
scorn  at  the  threat  of  the  Ojibways,  and  sent  to  learn 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


83 


whether  the  Ojibways  included  their  women  in  their 
proposed  extermination. 

A Coimcil  of  Peace  was  called  by  the  Ojibways,  which 
was  held,  according  to  tradition,  below  Sault  St.  Marie, 
at  a place  called  in  the  Algonquin  tongue,  Massessanga, 
This  council  received  the  deputies  of  the  Iroquois,  who 
concluded  a treaty,  which  they  secretly  intended  not  to 
preserve. 

During  the  summer  all  lived  in  peace.  They  met  as 
friends  on  the  shores  of  the  Huron,  and  as  friends  hmited 
in  the  valley  of  the  Ottawa. 

A second  offence  was  committed  on  the  Ojibways, 
above  the  Falls,  near  where  Bytown  now  stands,  on  the 
Ottawa  River.  The  Iroquois  fell  upon  a party  of  the 
Ojibways,  who  were  hauling  their  canoes  over  the  car- 
rying place.  These  they  took  from  them,  as  also  their 
“ fire-water,”  which  they  had  obtained  from  the  French. 
About  twenty  were  slain  ; the  remaining  swam  across 
the  river  before  their  enemies  could  reach  them.  Of 
these,  two  died  on  their  way  home,  from  hunger  and 
exposure.  The  rest,  three  in  number,  only  survived  to 
reach  the  South  shore  of  Lake  Superior,  and  give  infor- 
mation of  the  attack.  The  Ojibways  were  highly  ex- 
asperated. They  were  excited  to  fury,  and  a desire  for 
revenge  reigned  in  every  heart. 


84 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


The  Hurons  availed  themselves  of  this  favorable  op- 
portmiity  to  remind  them  that  they  had  suffered  like 
cruelties  from  their  brethren.  Another  Council  was  to 
be  called.  The  Chiefs  of  the  Ojibways  were  to  go  to 
Nahtooway,  ISahgeeny,  the  principal  village  of  the  Iro- 
quois, on  the  eastermost  shore  of  Lake  Huron. 

They  arrived  during  an  Iroquois  scalp  dance  of  tri- 
umph. It  was  over  the  scalps  of  people  of  their  own 
nation.  For  several  days  they  knew  not  whether  they 
would  be  massacred  or  allowed  to  return  j they  could 
get  no  satisfaction.  The  sages  of  the  Iroquois  knowing 
however  that  their  people  had  aggrieved  the  feelings  of 
the  Ojibways,  wisely  concluded  to  reflect  seriously  upon 
the  importance  of  pressing  peace  with  so  powerful  a 
Nation  as  the  Ojibways  were  universally  acknowledged 
to  be.  They  met  the  Ojibway  Chief  in  council,  who 
demanded  of  them  as  many  packs  of  furs  as  warriors  i 
they  had  slain,  which  the  Iroquois  Chiefs  granted  amid 
the  manifest  dissatisfaction  of  the  people. 

The  council  agreed  that  the  treaty  should  never  be 
infringed  upon,  and  that  it  should  be  held  inviolate  and 
permanent.  It  was  a fair,  impartial,  and  open  treaty,  ' 
and  it  was  distinctly  understood  that  the  first  breach  of  < 

it  should  be  a signal  for  war  between  the  offenders  and  ' 

the  offended. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


85 


They  scmtinized  the  features  of  one  and  another — 
shook  hands,  and  bade  each  other  farewell. — (a  final 
farewell.) 

The  Chiefs  of  the  Ojibways  returned  to  their  own 
country.  Trade  was  again  prosecuted  with  renewed 
energy  and  enterprise,  and  several  valuable  loads  of 
furs  were  sent  to  the  whites  of  Montreal.  No  shock  of 
discord  was  heard, — the  shrill  war-whoop  was  hushed. 
Peace  dwelt  among  the  mountains  of  the  North. 

Without  fear  the  Ojibway  and  Iroquois  hunters  met, 
and  spent  their  evenings  together,  relating  each  his  ad- 
ventm-es  and  exploits.  The  Ottawa  river  was  thickly 
dotted  with  canoes  heavily  freighted  with  furs  from  the 
North  and  West.  Blankets  were  bought  with  these, 
and  fire-water,  which  was  carried  to  the  extreme  end  of 
Lake  Superior,  and  to  its  Northern  shores. 

The  Hurons  became  so  forgetful  of  their  late  wars, 
that  they  even  ventured  to  accompany  the  trading  In- 
dians (now  called  Ottawas)  down  to  Montreal,  and  for 
one  year  and  a summer  they  suffered  no  molestation — 
all  was  quiet.  The  Iroquois  saw  that  the  French  were 
more  friendly  to  the  Indians  of  Lake  Superior  than  they 
were  to  them  ; and  that  the  Ojibways  Avere  a protection 
to  those  by  whom  they  were  formerly  molested. 

The  treaty  had  remained  unbroken  nearly  three  years, 


86 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


when  bands  of  the  Iroquois  waylaid  the  Ojibways 
simultaneously  at  various  points  on  the  Mah~ah-moo-sehee, 
The  news  of  these  improvoked  attacks  reached  the 
shores  of  Lake  Superior,  but  as  it  was  late  in  the  fall, 
they  deemed  it  imprudent  to  proceed  against  the  Iroquois, 
and  delayed  their  expedition  until  the  ensuing  spring. 

Runners  were  sent  during  the  winter  to  the  different 
allies  of  the  Ojibways,  the  Sacs  and  Foxes,  Menomones, 
Kinnestenoes,  Pottawatamies,  and  the  Hurons  of  San- 
dusky, each  of  whom  were  informed  of  the  movements 
of  the  great  Ojibway  family  in  the  West. 

Strings  of  wampum  were  sent  from  village  to  village 
by  fleet  rmmers  from  the  extreme  end  of  Lake  Superior 
to  the  South,  far  over  the  prairies  of  Illinois.  The  bays 
of  Michigan  resounded  with  the  war  cry  of  the  Sacs, 
while  the  Menomones  trained  their  young  warriors  for 
the  approaching  conflict. 

The  war  dance  became  a constant  exercise,  and  in 
fact,  the  chief  amusement  of  the  Indians.  The  Hurons 
excited  the  revengeful  feelings  of  the  Ojibways  by  tell- 
ing them  of  the  outrages  the  Iroquois  had  committed  on 
their  children.  They  shook  their  war  clubs  towards 
the  rising  sun,  and  a signal  was  given  that  betokened  a 
terrific  onslaught.  Their  hunting  grounds  were  aban- 
doned, and  their  women  who  had  attended  the  corn- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


87 


fields  were  obliged  to  fish  during  the  summer,  in  order 
to  obtain  a subsistence. 

By  previous  arrangement,  the  warriors  of  the  Nations 
were  to  meet  below  Sault  St.  Marie,  at  the  first  chang- 
ing of  the  flower  moon  (May). 

The  time  arrived.  Wah-boo-jeeg’s  son  mustered  the 
war  canoes  before  the  point  of  Peguahquawom^  near  the 
outlet  of  a deep  bay  on  the  South  shore  of  Lake  Superior. 
When  the  voices  of  the  war  chiefs  announced  the  time 
of  preparation  to  an  eager  multitude,  a deafening  shout 
arose  to  heaven,  and  awoke  the  echoing  spirit  of  the 
forest.  The  rattling  of  the  mysterious  Waskeinzke 
(Deer’s  Whoof),  and  the  beating  of  the  drirni  were 
heard.  The  tramp  of  the  furious  Ojibways  and  Hurons 
shook  the  earth  as  they  danced  around  the  blaze  of 
their  council  fires. 

In  the  morning,  at  dawn,  the  war  canoes  from  Shah- 
gahwahmik  (the  point)  were  in  sight ; near  Kewaowort 
two  hundred  of  them  approached  ! • 

The  Sahsahquon  (war  cry)  and  song  were  heard  in 
the  distance  from  over  the  waters.  Never  had  the  wa- 
ters been  agitated  by  so  great  a fleet  of  canoes.  The 
muscular  arm  of  the  warriors  propelled  the  canoes  with 
rapid  speed  on  their  way. 

In  former  times  the  old  Chief,  Wah-boo-jeeg,  led  the 


88 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


warrior  bands  in  person,  but  being  quite  aged,  he  com- 
mitted the  charge  to  his  son,  Naiquod.  The  old  Chief 
expressed  his  approbation  of  the  expedition  against  the 
'Iroquois,  by  standing  near  the  edge  of  a rock  which 
was  partially  suspended  over  the  waters — from  which 
commanding  position  he  addressed  the  warriors  who 
were  in  their  canoes  ready  to  go  eastward. 

I propose  in  the  following  chapter  to  give  you  the 
speech  of  Wah-boo-jeeg  to  the  assembled  warriors,  and 
an  account  of  those  battles  which  terminated  in  the 
subjugation  of  the  Eastern  Iroquois,  and  of  the  places 
at  which  they  were  fought. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


In  the  last  chapter  we  left  Wah-boo-jeeg  standing 
upon  an  overhanging  cliif.  For  a moment  he  gazed 
around  upon  the  war-clad  throng  in  canoes  before  him, 
then  spoke  to  them  as  follows : — 

“ When  I was  young,  the  Nahtoowassee  of  the  West 
was  heard  from  hill  to  hill.  They  were  as  many  as  the 
forest  trees,  but  because  they  had  smoked  the  pipe  of 
peace  when  their  hearts  were  not  right,  the  Monedoo  they 
disobeyed,  sent  our  fathers  to  drive  them  from  our 
lands,  near  a lake  in  the  West  they  called  Esahyah- 
mahday  (Knife  Lake),  and  they  fled  West  of  the  father 
of  rivers  to  dwell  in  the  habitations  of  strangers.  I was 
the  assistant  of  my  father  during  these  bloody  wars. — 
Go,  now,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.  The  Iroquois  have 
filled  the  land  with  blood,  and  the  same  Monedoo  who 
was  with  me  on  the  Western  plains  will  be  with  you  to 
prosper  and  preserve  you.”  A shout  arose.  ‘‘  Go,”  he 


90 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


added,  “ with  your  war  clubs — ^make  a straight  path  to 
the  wigwam  of  the  pale  face,  and  demand  the  land  of 
the  weeping  Huron.  I will  sit  upon  the  edge  of  this 
rock,  and  await  your  return.” 

The  old  man  sat  down,  and  the  canoes  moved  East- 
ward, in  search  of  the  foe.  The  Western  shore  of 
Michigan  was  also  thronged  by  the  canoes  of  the  Men- 
omonies,  Pottawatamies,  Sacks  and  Foxes, — the  South- 
ern Hurons  came  with  other  tribes  across  the  St.  Clair, 
and  overran  the  South. 

Tradition  informs  us  that  seven  hundred  canoes  met 
at  Kewetawahonning,  one  party  of  whom  was  to  take 
the  route  to  Mahamooseebee,  the  second  towards  Wah- 
weyagahmah,  (now  Lake  Simcoe),  the  third  was  to 
take  the  route  towards  the  river  St.  Clair,  and  meet  the 
Southern  Hurons.  I will  here  remark  that  they  had 
several  reasons  for  waging  war  against  the  Iroquois. — 
First,  for  having  broke  the  last  treaty  of  peace  by  the 
murder  of  some  of  their  warriors  ; second,  to  clear  the 
way  of  trade  between  the  Ojibways  and  the  French, 
(the  Iroquois  then  lived  along  the  Ottawa  river),  and 
third,  to  regain  the  land  of  the  Western  Hurons,  and,  if 
possible,  drive  the  Iroquois  wholly  from  the  peninsula. 

The  warriors  who  took  the  Mahamooseebee,  had 
several  engagements  with  them,  but  outnumbering 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


91 


them,  they  easily  routed  the  Iroquois.  Those  who  had 
gone  to  the  St.  Clair  had  likewise  a fierce  battle  at  the 
mouth  of  a river  called  by  the  Algonquins,  Sahgeeng, 
and  afterwards  being  joined  by  the  Southern  Hurons, 
overran  the  whole  of  the  South  of  the  peninsula. 

The  most  bloody  battles  were  fought  on  Lake  Simcoe, 
at  a place  called  Ramma,  at  Mud  Lake,  Pigeon  Lake, 
and  Rice  Lake  : the  last  that  was  fought  took  place  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river  Trent. 

Forty  years  had  nearly  elapsed  since  the  Hurons  had 
been  routed,  but  they  had  not  forgotten  the  land  of  their 
birth — the  places  that  were  once  so  dear  to  them.  The 
thought  of  regaining  their  former  possessions  inspired 
them  with  a courage  that  faced  every  danger.  They 
fought  like  tigers. 

The  first  battle  between  the  Ojibways  and  the  East- 
ern Iroquois  or  Mohawks,  was  fought  at  a place  near 
where  Orillea  is  now  situated,  about  one-quarter  of  a 
mile  Northward.  The  Mohawks  collected  in  greai 
numbers  here,  and  awaited  the  attack  of  the  Western 
Hurons  and  Ojibways.  They  resisted  stoutly  for  three 
days — at  the  close  of  which,  tradition  informs  us,  they 
sued  for  mercy,  which  was  granted,  and  the  few  survi- 
vors were  allowed  to  go  to  Lake  Huron,  where  they  re- 
mained during  the  rest  of  the  war. 


92 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


The  second  battle  of  any  account  was  fought  at 
Pigeon  Lake,  where  the  Iroquois  had  - made  a strong 
fort,  remains  of  which  are  to  be  seen  at  this  day.  At 
this  place  great  numbers  of  the  Ojibways  were  killed. 
For  a time  the  result  was  doubtful,  but  finally  the  Ojib- 
ways took  the  fort  by  storm,  and  but  few  of  the  Iroquois 
were  spared. 

The  third  battle  was  fought  near  Mud  Lake,  about 
twelve  miles  North  of  Peterboro.  Not  a male  person 
was  spared,  and  the  next  day  another  village  that  stood 
on  the  present  site  of  Peterboro  and  Smithtown,  was 
attacked,  and  an  immense  number  slaughtered. 

I will  not  attempt  to  narrate  the  many  barbarous  acts 
which  took  place  on  both  sides,  for  humanity  shudders 
at  the  bare  thought  of  them.  They  spared  none.  It  is 
said  that  they  fought  the  last  few  who  resisted,  on  a 
shoal  in  the  river  with  arrows,  strings  and  other  mis- 
siles ; that  their  blood  dyed  the  water,  and  their  bodies 
filled  the  stream. 

From  both  banks  of  the  river  the  wail  of  woe  and 
grief  arose  from  the  orphan  children,  whose  loud  cries 
and  sobs  were  heard  far  distant.  Here  side  by  side  the 
hostile  warriors  rolled  in  blood  and  agony,  while  the 
eagles,  buzzards,  and  crows,  flying  round  and  round, 
added  their  screech  to  the  noise  of  the  combatants,  and 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


93 


by  their  actions  testified  their  joy  that  a day  of  general 
feasting  had  arrived.  Their 

“Slaughter  heaped  on  high  its  weltering  ranks.” 

Death  made  a throne  of  the  bodies  of  the  slain,  and 
arm  in  arm  with  his  hand  in  hand,  friend  Despair  as- 
cended and  ruled  the  day. 

The  fourth  village  which  they  attacked  was  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Otonabee,  on  Rice  Lake,  where  several 
hundreds  were  slain.  The  bodies  were  in  two  heaps  : 
one  of  which  was  the  slain  of  the  Iroquois  ; the  other  of 
the  Ojibways. 

Panic-struck  the  Iroquois  collected  their  remaining 
forces  in  Percy,  now  Lewis’s  Farm,  where  for  two  days 
and  nights  they  fought  like  wild  beasts.  Their  shrieks 
and  shouts  were  heard  on  each  side  of  the  river  Trent, 
so  madly  did  they  rush  upon  destruction. 

Of  this  band  of  warriors,  one  alone  was  saved.  The 
women  and  children  were  spared  to  wander  in  solitary 
anguish,  and  mourn  over  husbands  and  fathers  whose 
bones  were  before  them, — sad  memorials  of  desolating 
war.  At  this  day  arms  of  various  descriptions  are  to 
be  found,  such  as  war-clubs,  axes,  spears,  knives,  arrow- 
heads and  tomahawks  scattered  with  human  bones. 

The  fifth  and  last  battle  was  fought  on  an  island 


94 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


near  the  mouth  of  the  river  Trent,  where  most  of  the 
canoes  had  collected.  At  early  dawn  the  warriors 
landed,  and  with  one  wild,  fierce  rush,  commenced  their 
work  of  havoc  and  extermination. 

Yells  and  groans  were  heard  on  every  side, — ^hand  to 
hand  they  fought,  and  those  who  attempted  to  fly 
were  pursued  into  the  water  and  there  slain  and 
scalped. 

When  the  news  of  these  victories  reached  the  Mo- 
hawks, they  were  incredulous,  but  soon  learned  that 
the  Iroquois  were  entirely  broken  up  and  the  country 
subdued. 

The  war-whoop  of  the  trading  Indians  and  their  host 
abounded.  Reveling  and  feasting  celebrated  the  down- 
fall of  the  Iroquois.  In  vain  the  Iroquois,  who  remained, 
sent  to  the  French,  suing  for  peace.  The  petitions  were 
not  heeded,  and  they  vainly  attempted  to  regain  by 
scattered  skirmishes  a foot-hold  on  the  land  they  were 
destined  soon  after  to  abandon  forever. 

They  returned  from  Canada,  and  their  conquerors 
allotted  them  places  of  habitation.  The  Shawnees  oc- 
cupied the  Southern,  and  the  Ottaways  and  Ojibv/ays 
the  Northern  parts. 

PeacdNvas  then  restored,  and  the  confines  of  Niagara 
and  St.  Lawrence  reaped  its  benefits. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


95 


This  took  place  about  1666,  and  continued  for  six 
years,  when  the  French  undertook  to  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  a fort  near  the  foot  of  Lake  Ontario,  called  in 
the  Algonquin  language,  Kah-tah-nah-queng,  (Catara- 
que). 

Several  attempts  have  since  been  made  by  the  elder 
brethren  to  renew  their  vengeance  against  the  French, 
Ottaways  and  Ojibways,  also  to  regain  their  former 
possessions,  but  they  weie  unable  to  succeed,  for  the 
whole  of  the  western  tribes  had  combined  against  them, 
and  they  were  utterly  subdued  by  overpowering  num- 
bers. 

Recently  the  Mohawks,  a part  of  the  Six  Nations, 
have  settled  in  Grand  River,  and  others  in  Bay  Ouinty, 
back  of  Adolphustown,  from  the  American  side,  they 
having  been  engaged  with  the  British  in  the  wars  of 
that  nation. 

It  is  somewhat  remarkable  that  those  who  now 
live  near  Adolphustown,  Canada  West,  still  adhere  to 
old  customs  and  usages,  though  the  Rev.  Mr.  Givins 
has  done  a great  deal  towards  introducing  among  them 
the  arts  of  civilized  life. 

These  nations  used  to  send  their  warriors  on  the  wa- 
ters of  the  JSa-ga-naw  of  the  north,  Ottawa  river.  Lake 
Huron  and  Sandusky,  away  west  to  the  prairies  of  Illi- 


96 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


nois  and  the  waters  of  Green  Bay,  as  also  to  the  shores 
of  Lake  Superior.  On  the  east  to  the  White  Mountains 
of  Vermont, — down  the  Delaware  river  and  the  upper 
branches  of  the  Ohio. 

Their  war  path  was  drenched  with  the  blood  of  their 
enemies  all  around  them.  They  were,  in  fact,  the 
Turks  of  the  American  Forest.  By  degrees  they  have 
fallen  before  the  rapidly  increasing  numbers  of  their 
enemies.  What  war  has  not  done,  strong  drink  has, 
until  now  they  are  a weak  and  puny  race. 

The  pale  face  says  that  there  is  a fate  hanging  over 
the  Indian  bent  on  his  destruction.  Preposterous ! — 
They  give  him  liquors  to  destroy  himself  withj  and  then 
charge  the  great  Good  Spirit  as  the  author  of  their  mis- 
ery and  mortality. 

The  arm  of  the  Iroquois  warrior  wields  the  war-club 
no  more.  A few  of  his  children  are  now  peacefully 
following  the  plough  in  Canada  and  in  Western  New- 
York,  while  others  of  them  mingle  with  those  tribes 
against  whom  the  war-cry  of  their  Nation  was  once 
raised.  They  now  live  in  amity  and  peace,  and  hail 
the  dawning  of  a better  day. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


THEIR  LEGENDARY  STORIES  AND  HISTORICAL 
TALES. 

“ ’Tis  a story, 

Handed  from  ages  down  ; a nurse’s  tale, 

Whicli  cilhdren  open-eyed  and  mouthed  devour, 

And  thus  as  garrulous  ignorance  relates, 

We  learn  it  and  believe 

The  Ojibways  have  a great  number  of  legends,  sto- 
ries, and  historical  tales,  the  relating  and  hearing  of 
which,  form  a vast  fund  of  winter  evening  instruction 
and  amusement. 

There  is  not  a lake  or  mountain  that  has  not  connect- 
ed with  it  some  story  of  delight  or  wonder,  and  nearly 
every  beast  and  bird  is  the  subject  of  the  story-teller, 
being  said  to  have  transformed  itself  at  some  prior  time 
into  some  mysterious  formation — of  men  going  to  live 
in  the  stars,  and  of  imaginary  beings  in  the  air,  whose 
rushing  passage  roars  in  the  distant  whirlwinds. 


98 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


I have  known  some  Indians  who  would  commence 
to  narrate  legends  and  stories  in  the  month  of  October 
and  not  end  until  quite  late  in  the  spring,  sometimes 
not  till  quite  late  in  the  month  of  May,  and  on  every 
evening  of  this  long  term  tell  a new  story. 

* Some  of  these  stories  are  most  exciting,  and  so  intense- 
ly interesting,  that  I have  seen  children  during  their 
relation,  whose  tears  would  flow  quite  plentifully,  and 
their  breasts  heave  with  thoughts  too  big  for  utterance. 

Night  after  night  for  weeks  have  I sat  and  eagerly 
listened  to  these  stories.  The  days  following,  the  char- 
acters would  haunt  me  at  every  step,  and  every  moving 
leaf  would  seem  to  be  a voice  of  a spirit.  To  those 
days  I look  back  with  pleasurable  emotions.  Many  of 
these  fanciful  stories  have  been  collected  by  H.  R. 
Schoolcraft,  Esq. 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  mmecessarily  extend  this 
work  with  a large  number  of  these.  I will,  however, 
in  this  connection  narrate  a few,  in  order  to  give  you 
some  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  my  people  amuse 
themselves  in  their  wigwams,  and  promise  to  send  you, 
at  some  future  day,  a good  handfull  from  the  forest. 

These  legends  have  an  important  bearing  on  the 
character  of  the  children  of  our  Nation.  The  fire-blaze 
is  endeared  to  them  in  after  years  by  a thousand  happy 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


99 


recollections.  By  mingling  thus,  social  habits  are  form- 
ed and  strengthened.  When  the  hour  for  this  recrea- 
tion arrives,  they  lay  down  the  how  and  the  arrow  and 
joyously  repair  to  the  wigwam  of  the  aged  man  of  the 
village,  who  is  always  ready  to  accommodate  the 
young. 

Legends  are  of  three  distinct  classes,  namely,  the 
Amusing,  the  Historical,  and  the  Moral.  In  the  Fall 
we  have  one  class,  in  the  Winter  another,  and  in  the 
Spring  a third.  I can  at  present  have  only  time  and 
space  to  give  specimens  of  the  second  of  these. 


LEGEND  FIRST. 

THE  STAR  AND  THE  LILY. 

An  old  chieftain  sat  in  his  wigwam  quietly  smoking 
his  favorite  pipe,  when  a crowd  of  Indian  hoys  and  girls 
suddenly  entered,  and  with  numerous  offerings  of  to- 
bacco, begged  him  to  tell  them  a story.  Then  the  old 
man  began : — 

There  was  once  a time  when  this  world  was  filled 
with  happy  people,  when  all  nations  were  as  one,  and 
the  crimson  tide  of  war  had  not  begun  to  roll.  Plenty 
of  game  was  in  the  forest  and  on  the  plains.  None 


100 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


were  in  want,  for  a full  supply  was  at  hand.  Sickness 
was  unknown.  The  beasts  of  the  field  were  tame,  they 
came  and  went  at  the  bidding  of  man.  One  unending 
spring  gave  no  place  for  winter — for  its  cold  blasts  or 
its  unhealthy  chills.  Every  tree  and  bush  yielded 
fruit. 

Flowers  carpeted  the  earth  ; the  air  was  laden  with 
their  fragrance,  and  redolent  with  the  songs  of  married 
warblers,  that  flew  from  branch  to  branch,  fearing  none, 
for  there  were  none  to  harm  them.  There  were  birds 
then  of  more  beautiful  song  and  plumage  than  now. 

It  was  at  such  a time,  when  earth  was  a paradise  and 
man  worthily  its  possessor,  that  the  Indians  were  the 
lone  inhabitants  of  the  American  wilderness. 

They  numbered  millions,  and  living  as  Nature  de- 
signed them  to  live,  enjoyed  its  many  blessings.  In- 
stead of  amusements  in  close  rooms,  the  sports  of  the 
fields  were  theirs.  At  night  they  met  on  the  wide  green 
fields.  They  watched  the  stars  ; they  loved  to  gaze  at 
them,  for  they  believed  them  to  be  the  residences  of  the 
good  who  had  been  taken  home  by  the  Great  Spirit. 

One  night  they  saw  one  star  that  shone  brighter  than 
all  others.  Its  location  was  far  away  in  the  South  near 
a mountain  peak.  For  many  nights  it  was  seen,  till  at 
length  it  was  doubted  by  many  that  the  star  was  as  far 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


101 


distant  in  the  Southern  skies  as  it  seemed  to  be.  This 
doubt  led  to  an  examination,  which  proved  the  star  to 
be  only  a short  distance,  and  near  the  tops  of  some 
trees. 

A number  of  warriors  were  deputed  to  go  and  see 
what  it  was.  They  went,  and  on  their  return  said  it 
appeared  strange  and  somewhat  like  a bird.  A com- 
mittee of  the  wise  men  were  called  to  inquire  into,  and 
if  possible  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the  strange  phe- 
nomena. 

They  feared  that  it  might  be  the  omen  of  some  disas- 
ter. Some  thought  it  precursor  of  good,  others  of  evil, 
and  some  supposed  it  to  be  the  star  spoken  of  by  their 
forefathers,  as  the  forerunner  of  a dreadful  war. 

One  moon  had  nearly  gone  by,  and  yet  the  mystery 
remained  unsolved. 

One  night  a young  warrior  had  a dream,  in  which  a 
beautiful  maiden  came  and  stood  at  his  side,  and  thus 
addressed  him : 

^ Young  brave  ! charmed  with  the  land  of  thy  fore- 
fathers, its  flowers,  its  birds,  its  rivers,  its  beautiful  lakes, 
and  its  mountains  clothed  with  green,  I have  left  my 
sisters  in  yonder  world  to  dwell  among  you.  Young 
brave ! ask  your  wise  and  your  great  men  where 
I can  live  and  see  the  happy  race  continually ; 


102 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


ask  them  what  form  I shall  assume  in  order  to  be 
loved-’ 

Thus  discoursed  the  bright  stranger.  The  young 
man  awoke.  On  stepping  out  of  his  lodge  he  saw  the 
star  yet  blazing  in  its  accustomed  place. 

At  early  dawn  the  Chiers  crier  was  sent  round  the 
camp  to  call  every  warrior  to  the  Council  Lodge.  When 
they  had  met.  the  young  warrior  related  his  dream. — 
They  concluded  that  the  star  that  had  been  seen  in  the 
South  had  fallen  in  love  with  mankind,  and  that  it  was 
desirous  to  dwell  with  them. 

The  next  night  five  talk  noble-looking,  adventurous 
braves  were  sent  to  welcome  the  stranger  to  earth. — 
They  went  and  presented  to  it  a pipe  of  peace,  filled 
with  sweet  scented  herbs,  and  were  rejoiced  to  find  that 
it  took  it  from  them.  As  they  returned  to  the  village, 
the  star  with  expanded  wing  followed,  and  hovered  over 
their  homes  till  the  dawn  of  day. 

Again  it  came  to  the  young  man  in  a dream,  and  de- 
sired to  know  where  it  should  live,  and  what  form  it 
should  take. 

Places  were  named.  On  the  top  of  giant  trees,  or  in 
flowers.  At  length  it  Wcis  told  to  choose  a place  itself, 
and  it  did  so. 

At  first,  it  dwelt  in  the  white  rose  of  the  mountains ; 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


103 


but  there  it  was  so  buried  that  it  could  not  be  seen.  It 
went  to  the  prairie,  but  it  feared  the  hoof  of  the  bufialo. 
It  next  sought  the  rocky  clilf,  but  there  it  was  so  high, 
that  the  children  whom  it  loved  most  could  not  see  it. 

‘ I know  where  I shall  live,’  said  the  bright  fugitive, 
“ where  I can  see  the  gliding  canoe  of  the  race  I most 
admire.  Children  ! yes,  they  shall  be  my  playmates, 
and  I will  kiss  their  brows  when  they  slumber  by  the 
side  of  cool  lakes.  The  nations  shall  love  me  wherever 
I am.’ 

These  words  having  been  said,  she  alighted  on  the 
waters  where  she  saw  herself  reflected.  The  next 
morning,  thousands  of  white  flowers  were  seen  on  the 
surface  of  the  lakes,  and  the  Indians  gave  them  this 
name — Wah-he-gwon-nee^  (White  Lily.)  Now,” 
continued  the  old  man,  “ this  star  lived  in  the  Southern 
skies.  Its  brethren  can  be  seen  far  off  in  the  cold  North, 
hunting  the  great  bear,  whilst  its  sisters  watch  her  in 
the  East  and  West. 

“ Children  ! when  you  see  the  lily  on  the  waters,  take 
it  in  your  hands,  and  hold  it  to  the  skies,  that  it  may  be 
happy  on  earth  as  its  two  sisters,  the  morning  and  even- 
ing stars,  are  happy  in  heaven.” 

While  tears  fell  fast  from  the  eyes  of  all,  the  old  man 
laid  dovm  and  was  soon  silent  in  sleep. 


104 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Since  that,  I have  often  plucked  the  white  lily,  and 
garlanded  it  around  my  head — have  dipped  it  in  its 
watery  bed — hut  never  have  I seen  it  without  remem- 
bering the  legend  of  the  descending  star. 


LEGEND  SECOND, 

HISTORICAL — THE  LONG  CHASE. 

The  Indian  warrior  of  days  long  past,  thought  that 
distance  should  never  be  considered  when  he  went  forth 
to  war,  provided  he  was  certain  of  winning  the  applause 
of  his  fellows.  Fatigue  and  hunger  were  alike  looked 
upon  as  minor  matters,  and  were  endured  without  a 
murmur. 

The  long  continued  wars  which  once  existed  between 
the  Ojibways  and  the  Iroquois,  gave  rise  to  the  follow- 
ing legend,  which  was  originally  related  to  me  by  an 
Ojibway  Chief,  whose  name  was  Na-nah-boo-sho. 

A party  of  six  Iroquois  runners  had  been  sent  by  their 
leading  Chiefs  from  Ke-wa-we-won,  on  the  Southern 
shore  of  Lake  Superior,  to  examine  the  position  of  the 
Ojibways,  who  were  supposed  to  be  on  the  island  called 
Moo-ne-quah-na-kaung-ning.  The  spies  having  arrived 
opposite  the  island  on  which  their  enemies  had  encamp^ 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


105 


ed,  (which  was  about  three  miles  from  the  main  shore) 
built  a war  canoe  with  the  bark  of  an  elm  tree,  launched 
it  at  the  hour  of  midnight,  and  having  implored  the  god 
of  war  to  smile  upon  them  and  keep  the  lake  in  peace, 
landed  on  the  island,  and  were  soon  prowling  through 
the  village  of  the  unconscious  Ojihway.  They  were  so 
cautious  in  all  their  movements,  that  their  footsteps  did 
not  even  awaken  the  sleeping  dogs. 

It  happened,  however,  that  they  were  discovered,  and 
that  too  by  a young  woman,  who  according  to  an  an- 
cient custom  was  leading  a solitary  life  previous  to  be- 
coming a mother.  In  her  wakefulness,  she  saw  them 
pass  near  her  lodge,  and  heard  them  speak,  yet  could 
not  understand  their  words,  .though  she  thought  them 
to  he  of  the  Na-do-way  tribe. 

When  they  had  passed,  she  stole  out  of  her  own  wig- 
wam to  that  of  her  aged  grand-mother,  to  whom  she  re- 
lated what  she  had  seen  and  heard.  The  aged  woman 
only  reprimanded  her  daughter  for  her  imprudence  and 
did  not  heed  her  words. 

“ But,  mother,”  replied  the  girl,  “ I speak  the  truth  ; 
the  dreaded  Na-do-way s are  in  our  village,  and  if  the 
warriors  of  the  Buffalo  race  do  not  heed  the  story  of  a 
foolish  girl,  their  women  and  their  children  must  perish.” 

The  words  of  the  girl  were  finally  believed,  and  the 


106 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


warriors  of  the  Crane  and  Buifalo  tribes  prepared  them- 
selves for  a conflict. 

The  war-whoop  echoed  to  the  sky — and  the  rattling 
of  bows  and  arrows  was  heard  in  every  part  of  the  island. 
In  about  one  hour  the  main  shore  was  lined  with  about 
eight  hundred  canoes,  the  occupants  of  which  were 
anxiously  awaiting  the  appearance  of  the  spies.  These 
desperate  men,  however,  had  made  up  their  mind  to  ply 
their  oars  to  the  utmost,  and  as  the  day  was  breaking, 
they  launched  their  canoes  from  a woody  cove,  shot 
round  the  island,  and  started  in  the  direction  of  the 
Porcupine  Mountains,  which  were  about  sixty  miles 
distant.  As  soon  as  they  came  in  sight  of  the  Ojib- 
ways,  the  latter  became  quite  frantic,  and  giving  their 
accustomed  yell,  the  whole  multitude  started  after  them 
as  swift  as  the  flight  of  birds. 

The  waters  of  the  mighty  lake  were  without  a ripple, 
other  than  that  made  by  the  swiftly  gliding  canoe,  and 
the  beautiful  fish  moved  among  their  rocky  haunts  in 
perfect  peace,  unconscious  of  the  chase  above. 

The  Iroquois  were  some  two  miles  ahead,  and  while 
they  strained  every  nerve  for  life,  one  voice  rose  high 
in  the  air,  bearing  an  invocation  to  the  spirits  of  their 
race  for  protection.  In  answer  to  their  prayer,  a thick 
fog  fell  upon  the  water  and  caused  great  confusion. — 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


107 


One  of  the  Ojibway  warriors  laid  down  his  paddle, 
seized  his  mysterious  rattle  (made  of  deer’s  hoof)  and  in 
a strange,  wild  song,  implored  the  spirits  of  his  race  to 
clear  away  the  fog,  that  they  might  pursue  their  ene- 
mies. The  burden  of  their  song  was — 

“ Mon-e-doo  ne  bah  bah  me  tah  wah 
Ke  shig  ne  bah  bah  me  tah  goon, 

Ne  bee  ne  wah  wah  goom  me  goon, 

Ne  ke  che  dah — awas,  awas.” 

Which  may  be  translated  as  follows  : — 

“ Spirits  ! whom  we  have  always  obeyed. 

Here  cause  the  sky  now  to  obey ; 

Place  now  the  waters  all  in  our  power, 

We  are  warriors— away,  away.” 

As  the  last  strain  of  music  departed,  the  fog  rolled 
away,  and  the  Iroquois  spies  were  seen  hastening  to  the 
shore,  near  Montreal  River.  Then  came  the  fog  again 
and  then  departed,  in  answer  to  the  conflicting  prayers 
of  the  two  nations.  Long  and  exciting  was  the  race. 
But  the  Great  Spirit  was  the  friend  of  the  Ojibways — 
and  just  as  the  Iroquois  were  landing  on  the  beach,  four 
of  them  were  pierced  with  arrows,  and  the  remaining 
two  taken  prisoners.  A council  was  then  called  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  what  should  be  done  with  them. 


108 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


and  it  was  determined  that  they  should  be  tortured  at 
the  stake.  They  were,  accordingly,  fastened  to  a tree, 
and  surrounded  with  wood,  when  just  as  the  flaming 
torch  was  to  be  applied,  an  aged  warrior  stepped  forth 
from  the  crowd  of  spectators,  and  thus  addressed  the 
assembly : — 

“Why  are  you  to  destroy  these  men?  They  are 
brave  warriors,  but  not  more  distinguished  than  we  are. 
We  can  gain  no  benefit  from  their  death.  Why  not  let 
them  live,  that  they  may  go  and  tell  their  people  of  our 
power,  and  that  our  warriors  are  as  numerous  as  the 
stars  of  the  Northern  sky  ?” 

The  Council  pondered  upon  the  old  man’s  advice, 
and  in  the  breasts  of  each  there  was  a struggle  between 
their  love  of  revenge  and  their  love  of  glory.  Both 
were  victorious. 

One  of  the  spies  was  released,  and  as  he  ascended  a 
narrow  valley,  leading  to  the  Porcupine  Mountains,  the 
fire  was  applied  to  the  dry  wood  piled  around  the  form 
of  the  other,  and  in  the  darkness  of  midnight  and  amid 
the  shouting  of  his  cruel  enemies,  the  body  of  the  Iro- 
quois prisoner  was  reduced  to  ashes. 

The  spot  where  the  sacrifice  took  place  has  been 
riven  by  many  a thunderbolt  since  that  eventful  hour, 
for  the  god  of  war  was  displeased  with  the  faint-heart- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


109 


edness  of  the  Ojibways  for  valuing  a man  more  highly 
than  the  privilege  of  revenge  ; and  the  summer  of  the 
next  year  that  saw  the  remains  of  the  hiunane  Ojibway 
buried  on  the  shore  of  Lake  Superior,  saw  also  the  re- 
mains of  the  pardoned  spy  consigned  to  the  earth  on 
the  shore  of  Michigan. 

Thus  ends  the  legion  of  Shah-gah-wah-mik,  one  of 
the  Apostle  Islands,  which  the  French  named  La  Pomte, 
and  which  was  originally  known  as  Mo-ne-quon-a-kon- 
ing.  The  village  stood  where  the  old  trading  estab- 
lishment was  located,  and  among  the  greenest  of  the 
graves  now  seen  in  the  hamlet  of  La  Pointe  is  that  of 
the  Indian  girl  who  exposed  herself  to  reproach  for  the 
purpose  of  saving  her  people. 


TALES. 

LEGEND  THIRD. 

THE  thunder’s  NEST. 

The  following  legend  will  impart  some  instruction 
relative  to  the  Indian  idea  of  thunder. 

Once  upon  a time  when  no  wars  existed  among  men, 
the  only  thing  they  feared  was  a great  bird  seen  flying 
through  the  air  during  moonlight  nights.  When  it  was 
seen  in  the  day  time  its  presence  was  usually  followed 


no 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


by  the  visitation  of  some  great  misfortune  upon  any  one 
who  should  chance  to  see  it. 

These  monstrous  birds  were  supposed  to  have  their 
nests  somewhere,  and  great  curiosity  existed  to  know  its 
location,  as  well  as  to  know  somewhat  of  the  nature  of 
the  bird ; but  no  one  seemed  fortunate  enough  to  dis- 
cover the  resort  of  these  great  birds  which  were  called 
Ah-ne-me-keeg^  (Thunders.) 

There  lived  on  the  northern  shore  of  Lake  Superior 
an  Indian  warrior  who  from  his  childhood  had  been 
noted  for  being  a wise  and  sedate  man  ; it  was  suppo- 
sed by  many  that  he  would  some  day  go  on  a great  ex- 
ploit, as  none  was  like  him  for  courage,  wisdom  and  pru- 
dence. As  he  was  returning  from  one  of  his  hunting 
expeditions,  the  night  came  on  sooner  than  he  expected 
it  would,  and  darkness  gathered  around  him  while  he 
was  a great  distance  from  his  home.  On  his  way  he 
was  obliged  to  traverse  the  ice  on  lake  and  river.  The 
moon  shone  as  elear  and  perfect  as  it  had  ever  shone  to 
light  a traveller’s  path.  On  the  warrior’s  back  was  a 
beaver,  and  in  his  hand  the  tried  and  trusted  spear,  with 
which  he  had  captured  it.  As  he  was  crossing  the  last 
lake  the  shadow  of  some  great  objeet  passed  before  him, 
and  he  soon  saw  approaching  ,a  great  bird,  which  in  a 
moment  caught  him  and  all  he  had,  and  arose.  The 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


Ill 


bird  carried  him  westward,  far  above  the  earth,  yet  not 
so  far  as  to  prevent  him  from  seeing  it,  and  the  doings 
upon  it.  After  travelling  a great  distance,  they  came 
in  view  of  a high  hill,  which  was  barren  of  trees,  but 
bore  one  bold  barren  rock.  As  they  neared  it,  the  bird 
endeavored  to  dash  him  upon  its  side,  but  the  old  Indian 
so  placed  his  spear  that  he  was  not  injured  in  the  least 
degree.  At  length  he  was  thrown  upon  the  place  where 
the  young  birds  were.  He  heard  fierce  muttering  thun- 
der overhead,  and  found  himself  left  to  the  mercy  of  the 
wild  birds. 

Soon  after,  they  began  to  peck  his  head,  when  he, 
thinking  them  helpless,  ventured  to  make  battle  with 
them.  The  Indian  arose,  and  soon  fomid  they  were  too 
much  for  him.  Whenever  they  winked,  a flash  of 
lightning  would  pass  from  their  eyes  and  scorch  him  so 
severely  as  to  burn  his  hands  and  face. 

The  birds  were  quite  small,  and  not  able  to  execute 
much,  and  therefore  by  perseverance  he  gained  the 
mastery  over  them  with  his  spear.  He  dragged  one  of 
them  to  the  edge,  rolled  it  over  the  precipice,  and  took 
the  skin  from  the  other. 

On  looking  round,  he  discovered  that  he  was  near  the 
North-west  end  of  Lake  Superior ; he  then  threw  the 
other  carcase  from  him,  and  after  filling  his  pipe  with 


112 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Ke-ne-ke-nik  (tobacco),  taking  one  or  two  whiffs  he  held 
it  in  his  hand,  and  pointing  with  its  stem  to  the  four 
corners  of  the  heaven,  he  offered  up  a prayer,  which  he 
believed  was  heard.  He  then  got  inside  of  the  young 
thunder  skin,  sewed  himself  in  it,  and  rolled  down  the 
rocks.  As  he  tumbled  from  rock  to  rock,  the  feathers  of 
the  skin  would  flash  with  fire.  After  descending  about 
half  way  to  the  bottom  of  the  precipice,  the  skin  in 
which  he  was  bound  bore  him  on  its  wings,  and  after  a 
long  flight,  alighted  with  him  near  the  spot  from  whence 
he  was  taken  ten  days  before.  His  wife  and  ctiildren 
were  in  mourning  for  his  loss,  for  they  had  seen  him 
taken  from  the  ice,  and  were  convinced  that  he  had 
been  taken  by  some  mysterious  spirit.  As  might  be 
supposed,  when  he  returned  he  surprised  them  by  bring- 
ing to  his  children  the  hearts  of  the  young  thunders. — 
He  broiled  them,  and  as  he  did  so,  the  fire  made  a 
crackling  noise.* 

The  next  summer,  the  mountains  West  of  the  Me-she- 
be-goo-toong,  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Superior,  were  con- 
tinually enveloped  in  flames  and  heavy  clouds,  for  it  is 
there  that  the  remainder  of  the  thunder  birds  rested. 

Since  mankind  have  gone  in  great  crowds,  these  birds 

* Indian  children  are  now  told  that  when  the  fire  makes  a noise, 
the  hearts  of  young  thunders  are  broiling  in  it. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


113 


are  seldom  seen,  but  are  often  heard  in  the  skies,  where 
they  fly  higher  than  they  once  did.  Once  they  lived 
on  human  flesh,  but  now  they  subsist  on  the  wild  game 
of  the  forest.  They  wink,  and  the  fire  flashes  from 
their  eyes.  Their  nests  are  now  built  on  the  Ah-sen- 
wah-ge-wing  (Rocky  Momitains),  in  the  far  West,  and 
at  times  they  are  heard  passing  through  the  air  towards 
the  East,  on  their  way  to  the  sea,  for  they  live  upon  fish 
and  serpents,  since  they  have  been  subdued  by  man. 


LEGEND  FOURTH. 

THE  TWO  COUSINS. 

There  lived  amongst  the  hills  of  the  North,  two 
most  intimate  friends,  who  had  appeared  to  have  loved 
each  other  from  the  years  of  their  earliest  childhood.— 
In  summer  they  lived  by  a beautiful  lake.  In  autumn 
on  the  banks  of  a noble  river.  In  personal  appearance 
they  were  very  near  alike  ; they  were  of  the  same  age 
and  statue.  In  their  early  days  a good  old  Indian  wo- 
man attended  to  their  wants,  and  cared  for  their  wig- 
wams ; together  they  strolled  among  the  green  woods,  and 
shared  the  results  of  their  ramblings.  Years  flitted  by. 
Manhood  came,  when  they  used  large  bows  and  arrows. 


114 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


One  day  the  old  lady  took  them  by  her  side,  and  told 
them  that  the  Nation  to  which  they  belonged  held  a 
fast;  and  that  she  wanted  them  to  fast  that  they  might 
become  great  hunters.  And  they  did  fast. 

As  spring  advanced,  they  killed  a great  many  wild 
ducks,  and  kept  the  old  woman  of  the  wigwam  busy 
in  taking  care  of  their  game. 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  year  they  killed  a great  num- 
ber of  heaver,  with  the  furs  of  which  they  clothed  their 
grand-mother  and  themselves. 

In  their  journey  one  day,  they  made  an  agreement  to 
this  eifect,  that  if  the  gods  should  make  known  any 
manifest  favor  to  the  one  he  should  inform  the  other. 

In  the  fall,  they  were  far  from  the  rivers,  hut  yet 
moved  towards  the  North,  where  they  knew  the  bears 
most  resorted.  During  that  winter  they  killed  a great 
many,  as  also  during  the  ensuing  March. 

At  the  close  of  one  of  their  hunting  expeditions,  they 
turned  their  feet  towards  home,  at  which  they  arrived 
at  a late  hour.  As  they  approached,  they  heard  the 
sound  of  several  voices  beside  that  of  their  grand-mo- 
ther. They  listened,  and  discovered  that  strangers 
were  in  their  wigwam.  They  entered,  and  beheld  two 
young  and  beautiful  damsels  seated  in  that  part  of  the 
room  in  which  they  generally  rested  during  the  night. 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


115 


The  hunters  and  the  young  women  appeared  very 
strange  and  modest.  At  length  the  old  lady  said  to 
the  young  men : — 

“ Noo-se-se-took  ! My  children,  I have  called  these 
two  young  women  from  the  South,  that  they  may  aid 
me  in  taking  care  of  all  the  meat  and  venison  you  may 
bring  home,  for  I am  getting  old  and  weak  and  cannot 
do  as  much  as  I used  to.  I have  put  them  by  your 
sides  that  they  may  be  your  companions.” 

When  the  last  words  were  spoken,  they  looked  upon 
each  other,  and  soon  left,  to  wander  by  themselves  in 
the  forest. 

They  there  consulted  together  as  to  whether  they 
should  comply  with  her  request.  One  said  he  should 
leave  the  wigwam.  The  other  said  that  if  they  left, 
there  would  be  no  one  to  supply  their  aged  grand-mo- 
ther ; and  they  finally  agreed  to  remain  in  the  wigwam 
and  pay  no  regard  to  the  new  comers. 

They  slept  side  by  side  every  night,  and  agreed  that 
^ if  either  should  wish  to  love  one  of  the  young  strangers 
he  would  inform  the  other,  and  that  they  would  then 
separate  forever.  In  February  they  obtained  a vast 
amount  of  game ; the  bears  having  returned  to  their 
winter  quarters  were  easily  found  and  captured 

It  was  observed  that  one  of  the  young  men  gazed 


116 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


very  intently  at  one  of  the  strangers,  and  the  next  morn- 
ing as  they  went  out,  he  asked  the  other  whether  he  did 
not  he^in  to  love  the  young  damsel  who  sat  on  his  side 
of  the  birchen  fire.  He  replied  negatively.  It  was  true 
that  one  of  the  cousins  appeared  to  be  deeply  absorbed 
in  thought  every  evening,  and  that  his  manner  was 
quite  reserved. 

After  a fortunate  hunting  day,  as  they  were  wending 
their  way  home  with  their  heavy  burden  of  bear  and 
deer,  one  accused  the  other  of  loving  the  young  woman. 

Tell  me,”  said  he,  “ and  if  you  do,  I will  leave  you  to 
yourselves.  If  you  have  a wife,  I cannot  enjoy  your 
company,  or  take  the  same  delight  with  you  as  I do 
when  we  follow  the  chase.” 

His  cousin  sighed,  and  said — “ I will  tell  you  to-night 
as  we  lie  side  by  side.” 

At  night  they  conversed  together,  and  agreed  to  hunt, 
and  if  they  did  not  meet  with  success,  they  would  sep- 
arate. The  next  morning  they  went  to  the  woods, — 
they  were  not  a great  distance  from  each  other  during 
the  hunt.  The  one  who  was  in  love  shot  only  five, 
while  the  other  returned  with  the  tongues  of  twenty 
bears.  The  former  was  all  the  time  thinking  of  the 
damsel  at  home,  while  the  latter  thought  only  of  his 
game,  having  nothing  else  to  divert  his  mind. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


117 


On  their  return,  the  lucky  man  informed  the  grand- 
mother that  he  should  leave  the  next  morning,  and  that 
what  he  should  kill  on  the  morrow  must  be  searched 
after,  as  he  should  not  return  to  tell  them  where  he  had 
killed  the  game.  His  cousin  was  grieved  to  find  that 
his  mind  was  made  up  to  leave,  and  began  to  expostu- 
late with  him  to  change  his  determination;  but  he 
would  not  be  persuaded  to  do  so. 

The  next  day  came.  The  young  man  who  was  to 
leave,  bound  a rabbit  skin  about  his  neck  to  keep  it 
warm,  and  having  used  on  himself  red  and  yellow 
paints,  left.  His  cousin  followed  close  in  his  rear,  en- 
treating him  not  to  leave  him. 

“ I will  go,”  said  he,  “ and  live  in  the  North,  where  I 
shall  see  but  few  persons,  and  when  you  come  that  way, 
you  will  see  me.” 

They  walked  side  by  side,  imtil  the  departing  cousin 
began  to  ascend — and  as  he  did  so,  the  other  wept  the 
more  bitterly,  and  entreated  him  most  perseveringly 
not  to  go. 

The  cousin  ascended  to  the  skies,  and  is  seen  in  the 
North,  Ke-wa-den-ah-mung  (North  Star),  still  hunting 
the  bear  ; while  the  other  wept  himself  to  nought  before 
he  could  arrive  home,  and  now  he  answers  and  mocks 
every  body.  He  lives  in  the  craggy  rocks  and  deep 


118 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


woods,  and  his  name  is  Bah-swa-way  (Echo).  The 
young  maidens  lived  for  a long  time  in  the  South, 
under  ambrosial  bowers,  awaiting  the  return  of  their 
lovers,  until  one  fell  in  love  with  another,  and  the  other 
is  waiting  for  the  return  of  her  lover,  where 

“ She  looks  as  clear  as  morning  roses, 

Newly  washed  in  dew.” 

AN  HISTORICAL  TALE. 

THE  EFFECTS  OF  LIQUOR. 

A FEW  years  after  the  extermination  of  the  Iroquois 
from  the  peninsula  which  is  formed  by  the  three  lakes, 
Huron,  Erie  and  Ontario,  a free  and  uninterrupted  inter- 
course existed  between  the  French  of  Montreal  and  the 
Ojibways  of  Lake  Superior,  which  brought  into  the  In- 
dians’ possession  implements  of  steel,  and  that  bane  of 
the  civilized  world,  “ fire-water.” 

The  people  had  already  commenced  to  inhabit  the 
islands  along  the  river  St.  Marie,  when  a quantity  of 
liquor  was  landed  at  a point  near  Grand  De  Tour,  be- 
tween St.  Marie  and  Mackanaw.  The  Indians  from  the 
upper  lakes,  as  they  camped,  began  to  use  this  liquor 
quite  freely,  in  order  to  see  its  curious  effects  upon  them. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


119 


Among  these  were  two  families  who  had  lived  and 
hunted  the  moose  together,  and  had  from  childhood 
roamed  the  wide  forest  without  one  word  of  difference 
between  them. 

They  also  wished  to  experiment  with  new  drink, 
which  when  some  drank  would  cause  them  to  enter 
into  curious  antics,  others  sang  war  songs,  others  were 
jovial,  while  a few  challenged  the  spectators  to  combat 
with  their  weapons  of  war. 

During  this  experimenting,  the  two  intimate  friends 
had  a quarrel,  which  resulted  in  the  death  of  one  of  - 
them.  The  murderer  seeing  what  he  had  done,  fled  to 
the  woods,  to  a spot  near  which  they  had  lived,  and 
there  concealed  himself.  The  deed  was  soon  known 
all  over  the  village.  As  the  murderer  had  fled,  it  was 
agreed  by  mutual  consent  and  in  accordance  with  their 
law  of  retaliation,  that  the  brother  of  the  murderer 
should  be  executed  in  the  guilty  one’s  stead.  That 
evening  was  to  be  the  time  of  execution,  and  orders 
were  given  that  two  fires  should  be  built  about  twenty- 
five  feet  apart.  A post  was  placed  between  the  two 
fires,  on  which  he  was  to  rest  himself. 

The  victim  prepared  himself  by  deliberately  painting 
himself  with  various  colors.  When  the  evening  came, 
there  were  twelve  warriors,  with  bows  well  strung. 


120 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


and  good  arrows,  who  were  to  fire  at  the  prisoner. — 
The  people  with  eager  curiosity  looked  on.  It  was 
announced  that  all  was  ready.  The  victim  walked 
calmly  from  his  lodge  to  the  place  where  he  was  soon 
to  represent  his  brother.  The  warriors  were  arranged 
at  a distance  of  thirty  steps,  and  the  innocent  man 
stood  at  the  post,  where  his  brother  should  have  stood. 

“ Don’t  shoot  me  till  I give  you  the  signal,”  said  he, 
as  he  waved  his  hand  toward  heaven.  His  breast  was 
painted  black,  with  the  exception  of  a white  spot  about 
the  size  of  a dollar  in  its  centre,  which  was  to  be  the 
point  to  which  the  arrows  should  be  aimed. 

The  warriors  and  the  victim  were  ready.  The  fire 
blazed,  and  amid  the  stillness  of  the  evening,  the  pris- 
oner was  heard  singing  the  death  wail : 

“ Ne-bah  bah-moo-say  Ke-zhe-goon-ai, 

Ne  ge  chog  a ye  shaw-wod.” 

Before  the  last  stanza  was  sung,  and  as  his  voice  be- 
came weak,  he  turned  to  the  crowd,  where  he  thought 
his  brother  might  be  lurking,  and  said — “ Ha  hay  !” — 
then  continued — “ Brother,  I am  now  ready  to  be  killed 
in  your  stead.  I will  not  dishonor  the  clan  I belong  to 
by  endeavoring  to  shun  this  fate.  If  you  can  endure 
the  idea  that  hereafter  the  Nation  will  look  upon  us  as 
a race  of  cowards,  live  ! but  I would  choose  to  die  in 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


121 


your  stead.”  As  he  finished  the  last  lines  of  the  death 
song,  his  brother  ran  from  the  woods  to  his  side,  and 
said — “ I am  not  a coward.  I ran  to  the  woods  to  get 
sober,  that  I might  not  be  killed  like  a dog.  I can  soon 
be  ready,  and  you  shall  see  how  a brave  can  die.”  He 
then  stepped  aside,  and  blackened  his  breast ; breaking 
the  ashes,  he  formed  a white  spot  in  the  centre  of  his 
breast.  Then  leaning  his  back  against  the  post,  he  be- 
gan his  death  song.  As  its  last  doleful  note  died,  far 
away  in  the  forest  glen,  he  lifted  both  hands,  and  bared 
his  breast  to  the  warriors.  Twelve  arrows  pierced  it, 
and  he  fell,  the  second  Indian  victim  of  intemperance. 

Note. — This  traditional  story  was  related  to  me  by 
Ne-gah-he-an,  in  the  year  1834,  while  we  camped  near 
Drumwood’s  Island  on  our  way  up  the  Sault  St.  Marie. 
It  was  my  purpose  some  time  since  to  have  published  a 
volume  of  Indian  stories,  and  trust  that  I shall  be  able 
to  do  so  in  a short  time. 


CHAPTER  X. 


THEIR  LANGUAGE  AND  WRITINGS. 

“ Here  are  a few  of  the  most  unpleasant  words 
That  ever  blotted  paper.” 

Shakspeare/ 

The  Ojibway  language  or  the  language  of  the  Algon- 
quin stock  is,  perhaps,  the  most  widely  spoken  of  any 
in  North  America.  The  Atlantic  tribes  partook  of  this 
idiom  when  they  were  first  discovered. 

The  snows  of  the  North  bounded  the  people  who 
spoke  this  language  on  that  side,  while  in  the  South  as 
far  as  the  Potomac  and  the  mountains  of  Virginia,  down 
the  Ohio,  over  the  plains  of  Illinois  to  the  East  of  the 
upper  waters  of  the  Father  of  Rivers,  Nations  resided 
three  or  four  hundred  years  ago  who  could  speak  so  as 
to  be  imderstood  by  each  other.  A person  might  have 
travelled  nearly  one  thousand  miles  from  the  head  of 
Lake  Superior,  and  yet  not  journey  from  the  sound  of 
this  dialect. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


123 


In  consequence  of  this  universality  of  their  language, 
the  Nation  has  had  a wide-spreading  influence.  Many 
of  the  Nation  have  travelled  from  the  main  body  to 
other  lands : thus  passing  in  contact  with  other  Nations 
they  have  adopted  their  customs,  and  have  so  intermix- 
ed the  two  languages,  that  the  original  Ojibway  is  not 
now  so  generally  spoken,  within  a thousand  miles  of  the 
Ojibway  or  Great  Lake,  as  formerly. 

Mr.  H.  R.  Schoolcraft,  who  has  studied  the  language 
more  than  any  other  person,  and  to  some  purpose,  has 
often  said  through  the  press  as  well  in  private  conversa- 
tion, that  there  is  in  it  that  which  few  other  languages 
possess  ; a force  of  expression,  with  music  in  its  words 
and  poetry  in  their  meaning.  I cannot  express  fully  the 
beauty  of  the  language,  I can  only  refer  to  those  who 
have  studied  it  as  well  as  other  languages,  and  quote 
their  own  writing  in  saying,  “ every  word  has  its  ap- 
propriate meaning,  and  with  additional  syllables  give 
additional  force  to  the  meaning  of  most  words.”  After 
reading  the  English  language,  I have  found  words  in 
the  Indian  combining  more  expressiveness.  There  are 
many  Indian  words  which  when  translated  into  English 
lose  their  force,  and  do  not  convey  so  much  meaning  in 
one  sentence  as  the  original  does  in  one  word. 

It  would  require  an  almost  infinitude  of  English  words 


124 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


to  describe  a thunder-storm,  and  after  all  you  would  have 
but  a feeble  idea  of  it.  In  the  Ojibway  language,  we 
say  '^Be-wah-sam-moogP  In  this  we  convey  the  idea 
of  a continual  glare  of  lightning,  noise,  confusion — an 


awful  whirl  of  clouds,*  and 
smoothness  of  its  words  : — 

Ah-nung-0“kah, 
Bah-bah-me-tum,  . 
Che-baum, 

De  goo  wah  skah,  . 
E-nah-kay-yah, 
Gah-gah-geeh, 
How-wah-do-seh, 

Ish  peming, 

Jeen  quon, 

Kah-ke-nah, 

Mah-nah-ta-nis, 

Nah-nah-gum-moo, 

0-nah-ne  quod, 

Pah-pah-say, 

Quah-nauge,  . , 

Sah-se-je-won, 

Tah-que-shin,  . 
Wah-be-goo-ne, 

Yah-no-tum, 

Ze-bee-won, 


much  more.  Observe  the 

The  starry  heavens, 

. Obedience. 

Soul. 

. The  rippling  wave. 

The  way. 

. Raven. 

Stone  carrier  (fish.) 

, Heaven. 

Earthquake. 

. All. 

Sheep. 

, Singing. 

Pleasant  weather. 

. Woodpecker. 

Pretty. 

. Rapids. 

He  or  she  comes. 

. Lily. 

. Unbelief. 

Streams. 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


125 


Upon  examination  it  will  be  found  that  there  are  sev- 
eral letters  not  sounded,  to  wit : F,  L,  R,  V,  X,  though 
Carver  mentions  in  his  vocabulary  the  use  of  the  letter 
L in  several  instances.  This  no  doubt  he  did  because 
he  lacked  a perfect  understanding  of  the  language.  The 
same  may  be  said  of  the  letter  R.  We  have  none  of 
the  mouthing  as  of  the  thick  sound  of  the  letter  L,  nor 
any  of  the  gutteral  accompaniments  of  the  letter  R.  To 
the  contrary,  all  the  softness  of  the  vowels  are  sounded 
without  many  of  the  harsh  notes  of  the  consonants,  and 
this  produces  that  musical  flow  of  words  for  which  the 
language  is  distinguished. 

It  is  a natural  language.  The  pronunciation  of  the 
names  of  animals,  birds  and  trees  are  the  very  sounds 
these  produce  ; for  instance.  Hoot  Owl,  0-o-me~seh ; 
Owl,  Koo-koo-ko-ooh  ; River,  AS(?e-&e  ; Rapids,  >S'aA 
won.  “>S(ee”  is  the  sound  of  the  waters  on  the  rocks. — 
the  commotion  of  waters,  and  from  its  sound 
occurs  its  name. 

The  softness  of  the  language  is  caused,  as  I have  be- 
fore said,  by  the  peculiar  sounding  of  all  the  vowels  ; 
though  there  is  but  little  poetic  precision  in  the  forma- 
tion of  verse,  owing  to  the  want  of  a fine  discriminating 
taste  by  those  who  speak  it. 

A language,  derived,  as  this  is,  from  the  peculiarities 


126 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


of  the  country  in  which  it  is  spoken,  must,  necessanly, 
partake  of  its  nature.  Our  orators  have  filled  the  forest 
with  the  music  of  their  voices,  loud  as  the  roar  of  a 
waterfall,  yet  soft  and  wooing  as  the  gentle  murmur  of 
a mountain  stream.  We  have  had  warriors  who  have 
stood  on  the  hanks  of  lakes  and  rivers,  and  addressed 
with  words  of  irresistible  and  persuasive  eloquence  their 
companions  in  arms. 

The  Ojibway  language  has  not  yet  been  reduced  to 
a perfect  written  form.  An  attempt  to  do  this  was  made 
by  the  lamented  Summerfield,  who  m his  degree  of 
usefulness  would  not  have  dishonored  his  name  had  he 
lived.  Close  study  was  followed  by  a consumptive  dis- 
ease, which  terminated  his  life  before  his  contemplated 
work  was  finished.  In  his  attempt  he  followed  too 
much  the  English  idiom  in  forming  a grammar  of  the 
Ojibway  language. 

The  records  of  the  Ojibways  have  a two-fold  mean- 
ing ; the  hieroglyphic  symbols  of  material  objects  repre- 
sent the  transmission  of  a tradition  from  one  generation 
to  another.  This  refers  more  particularly  to  their  reli- 
gion, which  is  itself  founded  on  tradition.  Picture  wri- 
ting is  most  prevalent,  and  is  used  altogether  in  their 
medicine  and  hunting  songs.  Here  are  figures  which 
suggest  sentences  to  be  sung  . 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


127 


This  is  one  of  their  war  sons,  which  might  read  in 
English  thus : 

I. 

I will  haste  to  the  land  of  the  foe, 

With  warriors  clad  with  the  bow. 

II. 

I will  drink  the  blood  of  their  very  heart ; 

I will  change  their  joy  into  sorrow’s  smart 
Their  braves,  their  sires  will  I defy, 

And  a Nation’s  vengeance  satisfy. 

III. 

They  are  in  their  homes,  now  happy  and  free ; 

No  frowning  cloud  o’er  their  camp  they  see ; 

Yet  the  youngest  of  mine  shall  see  the  tall 

Braves,  scattered,  wandering,  and  fall. 

The  warrior  is  represented  by  the  figure  of  a man 
with  a bow  about  him,  and  arrows  in  his  hand  ; with 
the  plume  of  the  eagle  waving  over  his  head,  indicative 
of  his  acquaintance  with  war  life.  The  next  figure 
represents  a watching  warrior,  equally  brave,  but  the 
heart  is  represented  as  dead.  The  curve  of  his  mouth 
shows  that  he  is  shouting.  The  next  figure  represents 
a person  with  long  hair,  an  indication  that  the  best  of  the 


128 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


enemy’s  warriors  were  to  fall,  and  their  wail  must  be 
heard  like  the  wail  of  a v?oman.  The  wigwam  with 
its  smoke  curling  upwards,  indicates  a council  fire  and 
the  defiance  of  an  attack.  The  other  wigwams  are 
seen  without  fire ; and  the  black  one  signifies  silence  and 
death. 

When  I was  young  I was  taught  this,  and  while  sing- 
ing I could,  in  imagination,  see  the  enemy,  though  none 

ft 

were  within  a hundred  miles. 

In  their  war  songs  animals  are  likewise  represented 
in  various  attitudes.  A rattle  is  made  of  deer’s  hoofs 
which  is  shook  during  the  singing. 

This  rattle  was  sometimes  used  for  the  purpose  of 
transmitting  news  from  one  nation  to  another  ; but  in 
most  cases  shells  were  used  for  this  purpose.  I have 
been  present  in  Canada  when  a string  of  beads  has  been 
received  from  the  head  waters  of  Lake  Superior.  A pro- 
found silence  ensued,  then  followed  a revelation  of  the 
message,  and  at  its  close  a prolonged  grunting  sound 
from  the  vast  assembly  signified  the  people’s  assent. 

There  is  a place  where  the  sacred  records  are  depo- 
sited in  the  Indian  country.  These  records  are  made 
on  one  side  of  bark  and  board  plates,  and  are  examined 
once  in  fifteen  years,  at  which  time  the  decaying  ones 
are  replaced  by  new  plates. 


THE  OJIBWr  ^ i^ATION. 


129 


This  secrecy  is  not  generally  known  by  those  people 
who  have  searched  with  interest  the  Indian,  and  traced 
him  in  all  his  wanderings  to  get  an  idea  of  his  religion 
and  his  worship,  which  however  absurd  they  may  have 
seemed,  have  nevertheless  been  held  in  so  rigid  respect 
that  he  has  formed  for  it  a cloak  of  almost  impenetrable 
mystery.  He  concluded  that  all  Nature  aromid  him 
was  clothed  in  mystery — that  innumerable  spirits  were 
ever  near  to  forward  a good  object  and  retard  a bad  one, 
and  that  they  existed  as  a chain  connecting  heaven 
with  earth.  His  medicine  bag  contained  all  those  native 
things  of  the  forest  aromid  which,  in  his  opinion,  the 
greatest  mystery  gathered  ; as  the  more  of  mystery,  the 
more  of  the  Great  Spirit  seemed  to  be  attached  to  them. 
A whale  was  an  object  of  much  importance,  because  it 
was  dedicated  to  the  Supreme  Being,  and  to  approach 
it,  or  look  upon  it  irreverently,  would  offend  him  and 
his  children.  They  therefore  never  drew  near  it  but 
with  the  most  profound  silence  and  veneration.  With 
this  great  awe  of  spiritual  things  in  his  mind,  he  feels 
reluctant  to  reveal  all  that  he  knows  of  his  worship  and 
the  objects  and  rites  which  perpetuate  it. 

Most  Indian  Nations  of  the  West  have  places  in  which 
they  deposit  the  records  which  are  said  to  have  origina- 
ted their  worship.  The  Qjibways  have  three  such  de- 


130 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


positories  near  the  waters  of  Lake  Superior.  Ten  of  the 
wisest  and  most  venerable  of  the  Nation  dwell  near 
these,  and  are  appointed  guardians  over  them. 

Fifteen  years  intervene  between  each  opening.  At 
the  end  of  this  time,  if  any  vacancies  have  been  caused 
by  death,  others  are  chosen  in  the  spring  of  the  year, 
who,  about  the  month  of  August,  are  called  to  witness 
the  opening  of  the  depositories.  As  they  are  being 
opened,  all  the  information  known  respecting  them  is 
given  to  the  new  members  ; then  the  articles  are  placed 
before  them.  After  this,  the  plates  are  closely  examin- 
ed, and  if  any  have  begun  to  decay  they  are  taken  out ; 
an  exact  fac  simile  is  made  and  placed  in  its  stead. 
The  old  one  is  divided  equally  among  the  wise  men.  It 
is  very  highly  valued  for  having  been  deposited  ; as  a 
sacred  article,  every  fibre  of  it  is  considered  sacred,  and 
whoever  uses  it  may  he  made  wise.  It  is  considered 
efficacious  for  any  good  purpose  it  may  be  put. 

These  records  are  written  on  slate  rock,  copper,  lead, 
and  on  the  hark  of  birch  trees.  The  record  is  said  to 
he  a transcript  of  what  the  Great  Spirit  gave  to  the  In- 
dian after  the  flood,  and  by  the  hands  of  wise  men  has 
been  transmitted  to  other  parts  of  the  country  ever  since. 
Here  is  a code  of  moral  laws  which  the  Indian  calls 
“ a path  made  by  the  Great  Spirit.”  They  believe  that 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


131 


a long  and  prosperous  life  will  be  the  result  of  obeying 
that  law.  The  records  contain  certain  emblems  which 
transmit  the  ancient  form  of  worship,  and  the  rules  for 
the  dedication  of  four  priests  who  alone  are  to  expound 
them.  In  them  is  represented  how  man  lived  happy  in 
his  wigwam,  before  death  was  in  the  world,  and  the 
path  he  then  followed  marked  out  an  example  for  those 
of  the  present  time. 

During  my  travels  over  the  whole  extent  of  the  Na- 
tion, I have  been  informed  of  a great  many  facts  respect- 
ing these  sacred  depositories  of  which  most  of  my  breth- 
ren are  ignorant. 

The  Chief  of  Lac  Coart,  Oreille,  (“  Moose  Tail,”)  in 
the  spring  of  1836,  related  to  my  uncle  John  Taunchey, 
of  Rice  Lake,  C.  W.,  an  account  of  one  of  these  deposi- 
tories near  the  mouth  of  “ Round  Lake.” 

He  said  he  had  been  chosen  as  one  of  the  guardians 
about  five  years  previous,  and  that  the  guardians  had 
for  a long  time  selected  as  the  places  of  deposit  the  most 
unsuspected  spot,  where  they  dug  fifteen  feet,  and  sunk 
large  cedar  trees  around  the  excavation.  In  the  centre 
was  placed  a large  hollow  cedar  log,  besmeared  at  one 
end  v/ith  gum.  The  open  end  is  uppermost,  and  in  - it 
are  placed  the  records,  after  being  enveloped  in  the  down 
of  geese  or  swan,  which  are  changed  at  each  examina- 


132 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


tion.  These  feathers  are  afterwards  used  in  war,  being 
supposed  to  have  a protective  power.  When  camping, 
a few  of  these  feathers  are  left  near  each  place  where 
the  warriors  dance. 

These  are  some  of  the  figures  used  by  us  in  writing. 
With  these,  and  from  others  of  a similar  class,  the  Ojib- 
ways  can  write  their  war  and  hunting  songs. 

An  Indian  well  versed  in  these  can  send  a communi- 
cation to  another  Indian,  and  by  them  make  himself  as 
well  understood  as  a pale  face  can  by  letter. 

There  are  over  two  hundred  figures  in  general  use 
for  all  the  purposes  of  correspondence.  Material  things 
are  represented  by  pictures  of  them. 

THE  CHARACTERS  USED  IN  PICTURE  WRITING. 


Sea,  water. 


<> 


Sickness. 


Bad  Spirit,  water  god. 


Great  Spirit, 
every  where. 


Spirit, 


Noon. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


133 


Storm,  windy. 


Old  tree. 


L 

Islands. 


Tree. 


Moose. 


Hemlock. 


Bad  spring  under  earth. 


ll /’IMI  flhn'/ffMII  . 


War.  woods. 


Medicine  Lodge. 


Wounded  water  god. 


Bad  Spirit, 
Medicine. 


Worship, 
Medicine,  pure. 


Scalps, 

number. 


A 

Young  warrior. 


Night. 


Fight-Man,  Bad  Spirit. 


Mountains. 


Spirits  above. 


a 

Great. 


Sea  Monster  eat  man. 


HIM  iU  T t jjj 


Animals  under  ground. 


Spirits  under  water. 


Fire. 


Ran.  passed. 


Hand, 
did  so. 


Cold, snow. 


Bear  Killed. 


Dream. 


^ Ik 

Speak.  Stand. 


134  TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 

Invitations  to  Indians  to  come  and  worship  in  the 
spring  are  made  in  the  following  form  : — 

irT/TTiTrrfTiTrrn 

Medicine  House  Gt.  Lodge.  Wigwam,  Woods. 

-C3v, 

Lake.  River.  Canoe.  Come.  Great  Spirit. 

The  whole  story  would  thus  read  : — 

“ Hark  to  the  words  of  the  Sa-ge-mah.” 

“ The  Great  Medicine  Lodge  will  he  ready  in  eight  days.” 

Ye  who  live  in  the  woods  and  near  the  Lakes  and  by  streams 
of  water,  come  with  your  canoes  or  by  land  to  the  worship  of  the 
Great  Spirit.” 

In  the  above,  the  wigwam  and  the  medicine  pale  or 
worship,  represent  the  depositories  of  medicine,  record 
and  work.  The  Lodge  is  represented  with  men  in  it ; 
the  dots  above  indicate  the  number  of  days. 

These  picture  representations  were  used  by  the  Ojib- 
ways  until  the  introduction  of  European  manners  among 
them.  When  this  occurred,  they  neglected  in  a great 
degree  their  correspondence  with  other  nations,  except 
by  special  messengers,  and  became  very  cautious  in 
giving  information  respecting  their  religious  worship  to 
the  whites,  because  they,  the  whites,  ridiculed  it.  It  is 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


135 


worthy  of  remark  in  this  place,  that  however  ridiculous 
the  simple  rites  and  ceremonies  by  which  the  untutored 
Indian  showed  his  faith  in  the  Great  Spirit  may  have 
appeared,  they  were  dear  and  sacred  to  him,  and  ridi- 
cule should  never  have  been  used  to  disabuse  his  mind 
of  his  long  formed  opinions.  It  was  a fruitless  way  to 
reclaim  him.  by  the  attempt  to  do  so  by  ridicule  ; and 
man  could  never  by  such  means  imbue  his  mind  with 
the  principles  of  true  worship. 

In  times  of  danger  or  in  the  progress  of  a war,  heads 
and  shells  were  used  for  the  purpose  of  conveying  a 
message,  and  this  custom  is  yet  in  vogue. 

These  heads  and  shells  were  colored,  and  each  had  a 
meaning,  according  to  its  place  on  the  string.  Black 
indicated  war  or  death — Whiie^  peace  and  prosperity — 
Red,  the  heart  of  the  enemy  would  represent — Partial 
white  or  red,  or  both  intermixed,  the  beginning  of  peace 
or  the  commencement  of  war. 

Numerals  are  marked  on  the  shell.  The  knot  gives 
information  of  its  starting  point,  or  the  name  of  the  per- 
son sending  it.  In  stringing  the  shells  or  heads,  the 
end  of  the  sentence  is  strung  first,  so  that  the  first  word 
of  the  message  is  in  the  person’s  hand.  This  manner 
of  correspondence  is  the  most  common. 

Three  hundred  years  ago  the  Delawares  sent  com- 


136 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


munications  in  this  way  to  the  Shawnees  in  Sandusky, 
Lake  Erie ; and  they  to  the  Ojibways  in  Superior  and 
Huron. 

This  mode  was  practised  by  Pontiac  in  his  appeals 
to  the  Indians  of  Michigan,  Huron,  and  the  prairies  of 
the  West,  during  the  wars.  The  Indians  say  that  these 
heads  cannot  give  false  stories,  for  it  is  not  possible  for 
the  man  who  takes  it  to  alter  or  add  to  them,  during 
his  journey. 


CHAPTER  XI. 


THEIR  GOVERNMENT. 

“ Each  state  must  have  its  pallaces ; 

Kingdoms  have  edicts  ; cities  have  their  charters ; 

Even  the  wild  outlaw  in  his  forest  walk 
Keeps  yet  some  touch  of  civil  discipline.” 

Pope, 

The  rulers  of  the  Ojibways  were  inheritors  of  the 
power  they  held.  However;  when  a new  country  was 
conquered  or  new  dominions  annexed,  the  first  rulers 
were  elected  to  their  offices.  Afterwards  the  descend- 
ants of  these  elected  chiefs  ruled  the  Nation,  or  tribe, 
and  thus  the  power  became  hereditary.  On  the  death 
of  the  chief  ruler,  should  the  son  be  under  age,  the  bro- 
ther of  the  deceased  rules  in  his  stead,  until  the  youth 
becomes  a man,  when  after  the  display  of  much  cere- 
mony, he  takes  his  seat  at  the  head  of  the  Council  of 
the  Nation. 

These  young  rulers  are  apt  to  be  more  cautious  in  the 


138 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


exercise  of  their  governing  power  than  those  who  pos- 
sess more  mature  age  with  its  more  mature  vanities. — • 
Ha  ving  been  trained,  and  trained  well  by  the  aged  wise 
men,  they  enter  upon  their  duties  conscious  of  their  re- 
sponsibilities, and  remembering  the  advise  they  have 
received  from  their  elders. 

Councils  were  only  convened  by  the  Chiefs  who  pre- 
sided on  important  occasions.  Those  who  sat  at  these 
councils,  did  so  according  to  their  age  and  wisdom. — 
Among  these  a free  discussion  was  allowed,  the  youngest 
generally  remaining  silent  listeners  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  aged. 

A Chief  had  always  two  braves  at  his  side — one  was 
always  near  him  day  and  night.  Their  duties  were 
various.  At  times  watching  the  lodge  of  the  Chief — at 
others,  sent  on  important  errands  for  the  Nations.  They 
were  frequently  ordered  not  to  stand  still  on  their  way, 
or  sit  down  to  rest  until  they  had  delivered  their  mes- 
sage and  received  an  answer. 

Being  commanded  to  go  on  one  of  these  errands,  the 
yomig  brave  utters  “ hah,”  signifying  his  assent  to  do 
all  that  is  required  of  him.  He  then  takes  the  brace  of 
beads,  turns  suddenly  about  and  proceeds  on  his  way 

Day  after  day,  night  after  night,  he  journeys  on  till  he 
reaches  his  destination  and  does  the  command  of  his  Chief. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


139 


I knew  a young  man  by  the  name  of  John  Loper. 
He  was  the  best  runner  my  father  had,  and  was  a man 
of  great  energy  and  activity.  He  travelled  with  us 
when  we  removed  to  the  north  towards  the  Ottawa 
River. 

In  the  dead  of  winter  the  track  of  his  snow  shoes  might 
have  been  seen  far  and  near. 

In  the  spring  of  the  year  we  often  sat  together  in  the 
open  woods,  he  relating  his  adventures  and  I listening 
to  his  account  of  having  crossed  swollen  streams  on  cakes 
of  ice  or  logs  of  wood,  holding  fast  to  his  only  hope  of  life 
with  his  clothes  all  in  rags,  and  his  body  so  torn  and 
bruised  by  the  brush-wood  and  briars,  that  his  mocca- 
sins were  filled  with  blood. 

John  died  in  1839,  much  lamented.  Since  then  the 
Ojibways  have  not  seen  aman  possessing  so  much  energy 
or  one  so  determined  upon  surmounting  all  obstacles 
that  lie  in  his  path  as  he  was. 

This  person  acted  the  part  of  a commissary  when 
any  thing  was  to  be  divided  in  the  village.  Formerly 
they  received  nothing  for  such  services,  but  now  they 
receive  a stated  salary  and  a provision  for  their  expenses. 
They  traverse  the  Ojibway  country  in  all  directions,  and 
during  the  winter  inform  the  people  that  they  must  meet 
together  at  the  first  change  of  the  flower  moon”  (May) 


140 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


at  the  place  named  by  the  Chief.  All  matters  of  impor- 
tance are  decided  by  the  Chief.  He  pronounces  all 
marriages,  and  his  word  settles  all  difficulties  of  every 
name  and  nature.  No  appeal  can  he  made  from  his 
decisions,  as  he  is  the  highest. 

Any  one  found  guilty  of  a misdemeanor  is  brought 
before  the  Chief,  who  reprimands  him  before  the  crowd. 

When  a murder  is  committed,  the  Chief  can  act  as  he 
pleases  in  regard  to  the  offender,  but  should  he  not  in- 
terfere, the  relations  of  the  deceased  take  the  law  in 
their  own  hands,  and  execute  death  upon  the  murderer. 

Those  who  murder  never  attempt  to  run  away  or  con- 
ceal their  guilt,  but  repair  to  their  wigwam.  If  the 
Chief  learns  that  the  crime  was  provoked,  he  shields  and 
protects  the  criminal : if  not,  he  is  put  to  death.  His 
life  is  at  every  moment  in  danger  should  he  live. 

Theft  is  punished  by  making  the  thief  publicly  known 
and  being  clothed  as  such.  In  this  way  adultery  is  pim- 
ished  in  the  case  of  a man : in  that  of  a woman,  she  has 
her  hair  cut  from  ear  to  ear,  which  is  a mark  of  disgrace. 
It  does  not  devolve  upon  any  Chief  in  particular  to  make 
or  form  a war  party,  but  any  of  the  braves  can  muster 
together  a band  of  volunteers.  Those  who  have  a 
desire  to  do  so,  can  join  these  parties,  the  number  of 
each  party  being  regulated  entirely  according  to  the 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


141 


bravery  of  the  individual  who  forms  it.  Among  the 
Indians  there  have  been  no  written  laws.  Customs 
handed  down  from  generation  to  generation  have 
been  the  only  laws  to  guide  them.  Every  one  might 
act  different  from  what  was  considered  right  did  he 
choose  to  do  so,  but  such  acts  would  bring  upon  him 
the  censure  of  the  Nation,  which  he  dreaded  more  than 
any  corporal  punishment  that  could  be  inflicted  upon  him. 

This  fear  of  the  Nation^s  censure  acted  as  a mighty 
band,  binding  all  in  one  social,  honorable  compact.  They 
would  not  as  brutes  be  whipped  into  duty.  They  would 
as  men  be  persuaded  to  the  right. 

Of  late  years,  law  has  borne  with  it  very  many  evils. 
We  can  judge  somewhat  of  the  character  of  a community 
by  its  buildings.  Prisons,  penitentiaries,  and  poor- 
houses  are  bad  signs. 

Before  law  was  introduced,  the  Indians  had  none  of 
these.  Whatever  we  had  was  shared  alike.  In  times 
of  gladness  all  partook  of  the  joy ; and  when  suffering 
came  all  alike  suffered. 

I believe  communities  can  be  governed  by  the  pure 
rules  of  Christianity,  with  less  coercion  than  the  laws  of 
civilized  nations,  at  present,  impose  upon  their  subjects. 

This  however  cannot  be  done  unless  each  is  resolved 
upon  a manly  forbearance  of  those  minor  evils  which  in 


142 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


all  cases  precede  great  ones.  A vast  amount  of  evidence 
can  be  adduced  to  prove  that  force  has  tended  to  bru- 
talize rather  than  ennoble  the  Indian  race.  The  more 
a man  is  treated  as  a brother,  the  less  demand  for  law. 
The  less  law  there  is,  the  more  will  man  be  honored 
thus. 

One  of  the  most  favorable  indications  in  the  Algon- 
quin tribes  of  their  ultimate  adoption  of  a pure  Christi- 
anity is  the  simplicity  of  their  government,  and  of  their 
life  and  manners.  To  this  the  eye  of  the  missionary 
should  be  directed,  and  all  his  actions  be  conformed  to 
this  happy  state  of  affairs. 

Of  late,  the  General  Councils  of  the  Christian  Ojibways 
have  been  convened  and  carried  on  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  public  meetings  of  the  whites  are  conducted. 

The  last  General  Council,  which  consisted  of  Ojibways 
and  Ottawas,was  held  at  Sangeeng.  The  Chiefs  came 
from  St.  Clair,  Huron,  Ontario,  Simcoe,  Rice,  and  Mud 
Lakes. 

The  object  of  this  convention  was  to  devise  plans  by 
which  the  tract  of  land  then  held  by  the  Sangeeng  In- 
dians, could  be  held  for  the  sole  use  of  the  Ojibway 
Nation  ; to  petition  the  government  for  aid  in  establish- 
ing a Manual  Labor  School ; to  ascertain  the  views  and 
feelings  of  the  Chiefs  in  relation  to  forming  one  large  sot- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


143 


tlement  among  themselves  at  Owen’s  Sound,  where  they 
might  live  in  future,  and  to  attend  to  other  things  of 
minor  importance. 

There  were  forty-eight  Chiefs  present  from  Canada 
West  alone.  Chief  Sawyer  took  the  chair,  and  the  writer 
had  the  honor  of  being  Vice  President.  Chief  John 
Jones  of  Owen  Sound,  was  appointed  to  deliver  the  open- 
ing address,  in  which  he  was  to  give  an  outline  of  the 
subjects  to  be  discussed. 

The  meeting  was  called  to  order  ; and  after  singing 
and  prayer,  the  former  by  the  members  of  the  council, 
the  latter  by  Chief  Sunday,  in  which  all  united.  Chief 
Jones  arose.  After  casting  a piercing  glance  over  the 
assembly,  he  spoke  as  follows  : — 

“ Brothers  ! You  have  been  called  from  all  parts  of 
Canada,  and  even  from  the  North  of  Georgia  Bay. 

You  are  from  your  homes,  your  wives  and  your  chil- 
dren. 

We  might  regret  this  separation  were  it  not  for  the 
circumstances  that  call  you  here. 

Fellow  Chiefs  and  Brothers  ! I have  pondered  with 
deep  solicitude  our  present  condition  ; and  the  future 
welfare  of  our  children  as  well  as  of  ourselves.  I have 
studied  deeply  and  anxiously  in  order  to  arrive  at  a true 
knowledge  of  the  proper  course  to  be  pursued  in  order  to 


144 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


secure  to  us  and  our  descendants,  and  even  to  others 
around  us,  the  greatest  amount  of  peace,  health,  happi- 
ness and  usefulness.  The  interests  of  the  Ojibways  are 
near  and  dear  to  my  heart ; for  them  I have  passed 
many  a sleepless  night,  and  have  oftentimes  been  wearied 
with  an  agitated  mind. 

The  people  of  these  Nations,  I am  proud  to  say,  are 
my  brethren ; many  of  them  are  bone  of  my  bone  ; 
and  for  them,  if  needs  be,  I could  willingly,  yea  cheer- 
fully sacrifice  my  life. 

Brothers,  you  see  my  heart.*  Fellow  Chiefs  and  W ar- 
riors  ! I have  looked  over  your  wigwams  through  Can- 
ada, and  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion,  that  you  are  in 
a warm  place  : your  neighbors,  the  whites,  are  kindling 
fires  all  around  you.f  One  purpose  for  which  we  have 
been  called  together,  is  to  devise  some  plan  by  which 
we  can  live  together ; and  become  a happy  people,  so 
that  our  fires  may  not  go  out  (Nation  become  extinct)  but 
may  be  kindled  in  one  place,  which  will  prove  a blessing 
to  our  children. 

Brothers  ! Some  of  you  are  living  on  small  parcels  of 

* Here  the  speaker  held  out  a piece  of  white  paper,  emblematic  of 
a pure  heart. 

t Reference  was  here  made  to  the  clearing  of  the  lands~The  trees 
being  burnt  for  that  purpose. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


145 


land,  and  others  on  Islands.  We  now  offer  you  any 
portion  of  the  land  which  we  own  in  this  region  ; that 
we  may  during  the  remainder  of  our  days,  smoke  the 
pipe  of  friendship ; live  and  die  together,  and  see  our 
children  reared  on  one  spot  and  join  there  in  their  youth- 
ful sports.  We  ask  no  more  from  you.  We  feel  for  you. 
We  feel  for  your  children’s  sake,  and  therefore  we  make 
this  proposition. 

Brothers  ! There  are  many  subjects  worthy  of  your 
consideration,  but  the  most  important  are 

1st.  Whether  it  would  he  better  for  the  whole  Ojib- 
way  Nation  to  reside  on  this,  our  own  territory  ? 

2nd.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  devise  ways  and  means 
for  the  establishment  * and  support  of  Manual  Labor 
Schools,  for  the  benefit  of  the  nation  7 

3d.  Ought  a petition  to  be  drawn  up  and  be  present- 
ed to  our  Great  Father,  (Governor  General)  for  the  pur- 
pose of  fixing  upon  a definite  time  for  the  distribution  of 
the  annual  “ presents”  and  the  small  annuities  of  each 
tribe  ? 

4th.  Is  it  desirable  to  petition  our  Great  Father  to 
appoint  a resident  Indian  Interpreter,  to  assist  the  agent 
at  Toronto  ? 

5th.  As  we  (the  Christian  part  of  the  Nation)  have 
abandoned  our  former  customs  and  ceremonies,  ought 


146 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


we  not  to  make  our  own  laws,  in  order  to  give  charac- 
ter and  stability  to  our  Chiefs,  as  well  as  to  empower 
them  to  treat  with  the  Government  under  which  we  live, 
that  they  may,  from  time  to  time,  present  all  our  griev- 
ances, and  other  matters  to  it  7 

11  My  Chiefs,  Brothers,  Warriors  ! This  morning,  (point- 
ing upwards)  look  up  and  see  the  blue  sky  ; there  are 
no  clouds  ; the  Great  Spirit  is  smiling  upon  us.  May 
he  preside  over  us,  that  we  may  make  a long,  smooth  and 
straight  path  for  our  children. 

It  is  true,  I seldom  see  you  all ; but  this  morning  I 
shake  hands  with  you  all  in  my  heart. 

Brothers  ! This  is  all  I have  to  say.” 

On  taking  his  seat  eighty-four  Chiefs  responded 
an  exclamation  of  great  applause. 

Several  Chiefs  addressed  the  Council,  highly  appro- 
ving of  the  plans  proposed,  and  expressing  their  grati- 
tude for  the  liberal  offer  of  lands. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


•j  THEIR  RELIGIOUS  BELIEF. 

“ The  generous  Author  of  the  Universe, 

Who  reins  the  winds,  gives  the  vast  ocean  bounds, 

And  circumscribes  the  floating  world  their  rounds.” 

“ Sees  God  in  clouds  or  hears  Him  in  the  wind.” 

The  Ojibway  Nation  believed  in  a Great  Good  Spirit, 
and  in  a Bad  Spirit.  They  had  also  “ gods  innumera- 
ble,” among  which  was  “ the  god  of  war,”  “ the  god 
of  hunting,”  and  “ the  god  of  the  fowls  of  the  air.” 

The  skies  were  filled  with  the  deities  they  worshipped, 
and  the  whole  forest  awakened  with  their  whispers. 
The  lakes  and  streams  were  the  places  of  their  resort, 
and  mountains  and  vallies  alike  their  abode.  All  the 
remarkable  spots  in  the  country  were  considered  their 
favorite  resorts.  These  were  the  peaks  of  rocky  cliffs  ; 
the  clefts  of  craggy  mounts.  Water-falls  were  thought 
to  be  their  sporting  scenes. 


148 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


The  sky  was  the  home  of  the  god  who  held  a watch- 
ful care  over  every  star.  They  heard  him  whisper  in 
the  gentle  breeze,  or  howl  in  the  tempest.  He  had  do- 
minion over  all  the  three  heavens,  and  sometimes  amused 
himself  by  hurling  stars  from  their  stations  and  causing 
them  on  their  passage  to  the  earth  to  change  into  de- 
mons to  wrong  and  perplex  the  people  who  inhabited 
the  place  of  their  destination. 

The  constellations  of  stars  were  council  gatherings  of 
the  god.  The  brightest  were  ruling  spirits,  appointed 
by  the  Great  Spirit  as  guardians  of  the  lesser  ones. 
Clusters  of  stars  were  the  populous  cities  of  the  celestials. 

In  the  stories  of  the  wigwam,  mention  is  made  of  some 
of  these  high  born  personages  coming  to  earth  to  dwell 
among  the  people  ; also  of  men  going  up  and  becom- 
ing inhabitants  of  the  skies.  They  say  animals  have 
received  wings  ; and  some  of  them  from  heaven. 

Were  all  the  stories  that  are  related  of  the  skies 
written,  it  would  be  found  that  each  star  has  connected 
with  it  some  strange  event.  The  history  of  the  tradition 
of  the  stars,  according  to  Indian  tradition,  would  be  a 
history  indeed,  and  would  rank  among  the  “ curiosities 
of  literature.” 

The  earth  teemed  with  all  sorts  of  spirits,  good  and 
bad  ; those  of  the  forest  clothed  themselves  with  moss. 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


149 


During  a shower  of  rain,  thousands  of  them  are  shelter- 
ed in  a flower. 

The  Ojibway,  as  he  reclines  beneath  the  shade  of  his 
forest  trees,  imagines  these  gods  to  be  about  him.  He 
detects  their  tiny  voices  in  the  insect’s  hum.  With  half 
closed  eyes  he  beholds  them  sporting  by  thousands  on 
a sunray.  In  the  evening  they  are  seen  and  heard 

“ Above,  below,  on  every  side, 

Their  little  minium  forms  displayed 
In  all  the  tricksy  pomp  of  fairy  pride.” 

They  have  a special  god  presiding  over  the  most 
noted  herbs  of  the  earth.  These  are  subject  to  this  be- 
ing who  is  called  the  god  of  Medicine,  Men  or  women 
are  deemed  capable  of  learning  the  virtues  of  roots  from 
him,  and  often  fast  in  order  to  gain  his  favor.  In  time 
of  war  they  carry  certain  roots  with  them,  which  accord- 
ing to  their  idea,  prevent  the  balls  of  an  enemy  from 
striking  them. 

The  Ojibways  place  much  dependence  upon  dreams. 
They  are  to  them  the  omens  of  good  or  bad  fortune. — 
Fastings  of  considerable  length  are  endured  in  order  to 
win  the  good  will  of  the  god.  These  fasts  are  at  vari- 
ous times.  The  summer  season  is  the  time  of  the  chil- 
dren’s fasting.  I well  remember  the  tedious  fast  of  four 
or  five  days  I underwent  when  quite  young,  and  what 


150 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


a tremendous  appetite  I had  when  it  was  over  ; as  far 
exceeding  that  of  the  renowned  Gogerins,  as  theirs  did 
that  of  the  Eastmans. 

I cannot  better  portray  the  influence  of  dreams  upon 
the  Indian’s  mind  than  by  relating  a story  of  an  Indian 
damsel,  who  according  to  the  custom  of  fasting,  deter- 
mined to  do  so  in  a remarkable  romantic  spot,  near  Grand 
Island.  A cave  in  each  side  of  this  cove  is  to  be  seen 
at  the  present  day,  with  a rivulet  coming  down  to  the 
edge  of  the  lake.  A rock  arches  the  stream  similar  to 
the  natural  bridge  of  Yirginia ; on  the  tops  of  which.is 
a pine  tree  standing  alone.  In  one  of  the  caves  lies  a 
ledge  of  rock,  and  it  was  to. this  the  maiden  resorted  to 
ask  the  favor  of  the  gods. 

In  a summer  season  she  with  her  friends  were  coasting 
along  the  southern  shore,  camping  every  evening.  Sud- 
denly, as  it  were,  she  became  pensive.  She  said  but 
little,  and  her  parents  wondered,  not  knowing  the  cause 
,ofher  change.  Her  mother  thought  she  had  become 
angered,  and  inquired  of  her  whether  such  was  the  fact. 
She  merely  smiled  and  said  Kah  ween. 

Evening  after  evening  passed,  and  on  each  she  took 
her  accustomed  stroll  along  the  beach,  picking  up  Cor- 
nelian stones,  which  are  found  there  in  great  numbers, 
one  evening  she  was  seen  standing  on  the  peak  of  the 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


151 


pictured  rocks  ; and  as  the  sun  was  passing  the  horizon, 
and  the  waves  dashed  furiously,  she  was  heard  to  sing 
for  the  first  time.  Her  long  filack  hair  floated  upon  the 
wind,  and  her  voice  was  heard  above  the  rustling  of  the 
leaves  and  the  noise  of  the  waters.  When  night  came, 
she  could  not  he  seen.  She  had  fled  to  the  rocky  cave, 
from  whence  were  to  go  up  her  petitions  to  the  gods. 

The  people  lighted  their  birch  torches,  and  wandered 
over  the  forest,  but  they  could  not  observe  the  slightest 
sign  of  the  maiden’s  presence.  They  were  obliged  to 
wait  until  the  morning.  At  length  day  dawned, — the 
sun  gradually  arose.  Her  parents  and  the  people  went 
in  search  of  her ; they  looked  in  every  place — in  wood- 
land, in  glades,  upon  the  shore  and  in  the  caves  of  the 
rocks,  yet  could  not  find  her.  Day  passed.  Night 
came.  They  called  her  by  name,  Shah-won-o-equa^^^ 
(Lady  of  the  South)  but  she  answered  not,  and  they 
were  left  in  great  distress,  conjecturing  about  her  situa- 
tion. The  next  day  was  spent  in  like  manner,  hut  with 
no  better  success.  As  evening  approached,  they  thought 
they  heard  her  voice.  They  all  listened.  “Yes,”  said 
the  father,  “ it  is  Shah-won-o-equa.”  The  voice  seemed 
to  he  at  so  great  a distance  among  the  rocks  that  they 
could  not  reach  the  spot  from  which  it  proceeded  before 
night  came,  and  the  voice  departed. 


152 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Anxiously  they  awaited  the  approach  of  day,  and 
when  it  came,  with  all  possible  speed  they  hasted  in  the 
direction  in  which  they  had  heard  the  voice.  Not  see- 
ing any  path  made  by  her  footsteps,  they  concluded  that 
it  was  not  her  voice,  but  that  of  a spirit  they  had  heard, 
and  that  she  had  been  taken  away  by  the  Great  Spirit 
whose  track*  was  seen  on  the  rocks. 

The  next  night  when  the  sun  was  sinking,  they  again 
heard  the  voice,  sounding  as  if  on  the  cliiFs  of  the  rocks. 
They  looked,  when  they  beheld  standing  on  a lofty 
peak  the  lost  maiden,  gazing  at  the  departing  sun,  and 
chanting  her  evening  prayer  to  the  gods  of  her  fathers. 
The  parents  were  convinced  that  the  form  they  beheld 
could  not  he  a spirit,  hut  in  reality  their  daughter.  The 
next  morning  another  search  was  made,  which  resulted 
in  finding  her  sitting  in  the  cave,  having  robes  of  fur 
covering  her  head,  and  boughs  of  cedar  all  around  her. 
Since  the  day  she  left  her  home,  she  had  taken  no  food, 
and  though  a rivulet  of  pure  water  coursed  along  at  her 
feet,  she  touched  it  not. 

She  was  asked  why  she  had  not  informed  her  friends 
of  her  situation.  She  replied,  that  she  wanted  to  fast, 
and  that  to  do  so,  it  was  best  for  her  to  remain  there  in 

♦ The  marks  on  the  pictured  rocks  are  thought  to  be  the  footsteps 
of  the  Great  Spirit. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


153 


seclusion.  Her  mother  wished  her  to  go  with  her  to 
their  wigwam,  but  the  girl  refused  to  do  so,  until  the 
gods  were  propitious  to  her. 

The  following  day  her  mother  again  visited  her,  and 
inquired  whether  the  gods  had  visited  her  since  their 
last  interview.  She  replied  that  they  had  not,  hut  that 
she  was  resolved  upon  remaining  there  until  they  did. 
She  then  covered  her  head  with  furs  and  laid  down. 

In  the  cave,  on  the  ledge  of  rocks,  she  waited  to  re- 
ceive the  god  of  war,  the  god  of  the  vegetable  kingdom, 
and  the  god  of  the  waters,  whom  she  expected  would 
visit  her  in  her  dreams,  or  in  a visible  form,  and  con- 
verse with  her. 

That  evening  the  waves  roared  furiously,  and  the 
winds  moaned.  She  fell  asleep.  She  saw  a young 
warrior  approach,  who  standing  over  her,  gazed  at  her 
as  her  raven  hair  was  tossed  about  by  the  wind.  Bend- 
ing over  her,  he  said  : — 

“ Equa  ! (woman)  I have  watched  thee  these  three 
days — and  now  I come  to  speak  to  you.  What  will 
you  have  ? The  furs  from  the  woods — the  plumes  of 
rare  birds — the  animals  of  the  forest — or  a knowledge 
of  the  properties  of  the  wild  flowers 

“ Young  man  !”  said  she,  “ I know  thy  fathers  are 
the  imseen  spirits  of  the  earth.  I want  not  the  furs. 


154 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


nor  the  plumes,  nor  the  animals.  I want  a knowledge 
of  the  roots  that  I may  relieve  the  Nation’s  sufferings, 
and  prolong  the  lives  of  the  aged  who  live  among  us.” 

^^And  is  this  for  what  you  have  fasted  so  long  and  so 
faithfully  ?” 

“ Yes — the  woods  had  their  charms  for  me  when  I 
was  small,  but  now  the  long  wail  of  my  people  over 
their  accumulating  woes  sounds  in  my  ears.  The  forest 
yields  pleasant  fruits,  and  the  lake  shores  are  decorated 
with  pebbles  of  various  hues.  I loved  to  gather  the 
lilies  and  the  flowers,  till  I learned  there  was  life  in 
them  and  a power  to  impart  it.  Then  I hasted  to  this 
secluded  spot,  and,  that  I might  learn  the  secret  of  the 
herbs  and  flowers,  I have  fasted  here  in  seclusion, wait- 
ing the  approach  of  thy  fathers  to  teach  them  to  me.” 

“ Then  wait  for  them,”  said  the  young  man,  “for  they 
will  soon  come.” 

He  left.  Night  came  on — dark  night,  and  she  dream- 
ed that  she  was  placed  on  the  edge  of  a high  rock  which 
was  suspended  over  the  great  prairies  of  the  West,  and 
that  before  her  many  Nations  assembled  to  join  in  a 
great  ball  play. 

She  stood  watching  the  progress  of  the  game,  and 
observed  that  the  women  were  the  fleetest,  and  that  one 
of  them  actually  won  the  prize. 


THE  OJIBWAT  NATION. 


155 


The  stranger  again  stood  at  the  damsel’s  side. — 
“ There,”  said  he,  “ do  you  see  that  maiden  among  the 
crowd  ?”  She  answered  that  she  did.  “ So  will  your 
Nation  look  to  you,  when  an  assembled  multitude 
gather  to  join  in  the  Nation’s  ball  play.  If  this  will 
satisfy  you,  go  now,  return  to  your  mother.” 

He  left  her  again,  and  in  much  agitation  she  awoke 
from  her  eventful  sleep. 

The  morning  dawned,  when  again  her  mother  in- 
quired whether  she  had  been  visited  by  the  gods.  She 
made  no  reply.  Her  mother  left,  but  soon  again  re- 
turned and  without  success  importuned  her  to  leave 
the  cave. 

That  night  the  winds  were  fierce,  and  the  waters 
dashed  with  great  power  against  the  pictured  rocks. — 
The  earth  trembled  as  the  thunder  growled  above  it, 
and  the  frequent,  almost  continuous  lightning  caused  the 
streams  of  water  to  appear  like  floods  of  molten  gold. 

Notwithstanding  the  tumult  of  nature,  the  maiden 
fell  asleep.  Numerous  individuals  surrounded  her. — 
One  was  clad  in  scarlet — another  in  blue — another  in 
black,  and  another  in  white  cloth.  They  sang  a song, 
then  left,  with  the  exception  of  one,  who  it  appeared  re- 
mained to  reveal  to  her  the  purport  of  what  she  saw. 
He  was  old  and  quite  bald-headed. 


156 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


No-sis  !”  (child)  said  he,  “ do  you  know  those  who 
came  and  sung  to  you  ?”  She  replied  that  she  did  not. 
« Why,”  continued  he,  “ they  are  all  my  children — they 
are  the  birds  you  see  in  the  forests — they  will  always 
sing  for  you.” 

“ And  I am  their  parent,”  said  a great  Bald  Eagle, 
adjusting  his  wings,  and  suddenly  starting  otf. 

The  next  morning,  these  same  birds  came  and  sang 
near  her  head,  while  she  was  musing  over  her  pleasant 
dream. 

The  Red-breast  Robin,  the  Scarlet  birds,  the  Blue 
Jays,  and  the  tiny  Humming-birds,  were  about  her. — 
She  thought  the  gods  had  been  propitious  to  her,  and 
her  heart  filled  with  emotions  of  gratitude. 

When  the  next  morning  came,  she  began  to  find  her 
strength  fast  failing.  Her  mother  again  came  with  her 
usual  entreaties,  but  to  them  all  she  remained  silent,  and 
apparently  did  not  notice  her  or  them. 

She  had  a number  of  remarkable  dreams.  In  one  of 
these  she  saw  two  beings  who  came  to  conduct  her  to  a 
hill,  from  whence  she  could  see  the  plains  below.  In 
climbing  the  hill,  they  ascended  many  steeps,  and  as 
she  stood  on  the  summit  of  one  of  these,  her  attendants 
bade  her  look  back  and  see  what  had  been  passed. 

She  turned.  What  a sight ! The  clouds  rolled  be- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


157 


neath  her  ; above  all  was  clear.  She  saw  the  path  she 
had  followed,  and  around  it  she  beheld  the  lightning’s 
flash. 

That  which  is  before  you,  bordering  on  the  great 
hill,  is  Infancy.  It  is  pleasant,  but  dangerous.  The 
rocks  represent  the  perilous  times  of  life.  But  keep 
moving : look  not  behind  you  again,  until  you  have 
reached  the  highest  peak.” 

Up — up  they  went.  The  way  was  diversified — some- 
times safe,  at  other  times  dangerous.  When  they  had 
fully  ascended,  they  beheld  on  one  side  the  deep,  broad 
ocean  : at  the  other,  the  lofty,  numerous  mountains  of 
the  West — Ocean  glittering  in  the  sunlight — Nature 
rearing  its  battlements  to  the  skies. 

One  of  the  maiden’s  companions  touched  her  head, 
when  one-half  of  her  hair  was  changed  to  snowy  white- 
ness. Then  she  awoke,  much  exhausted. 

The  next  morning,  when  her  mother  came,  and,  as 
before,  wished  her  to  accompany  her,  she  determined 
that  if  on  her  next  visit  she  should  refuse,  she  would 
take  her  from  the  cave  by  main  force. 

In  her  last  dream  she  saw  a canoe  sailing  upon  Lake 
Superior.  It  came  to  where  she  stood,  and  she  was 
asked  to  enter  it.  She  did  so,  when  one  of  her  visiters 
began  to  chant  a song  : — 


158 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


“ Ba  bah  mah  she  yon  nee  beeng  gay, 

Ba  bah  moo  say  ah  keeng  gay.” 

“ I walk  on  the  waves  of  the  sea, 

I travel  o’er  hill  and  dale.” 

They  proceeded  in  the  canoe  till  they  were  far  from 
the  sight  of  land,  and  the  waters  around  them  were 
immoved. 

“ When  becalmed,”  said  they,  “ sing  this,  and  you 
will  hear  us  whisper  to  you.  They  then  returned  her 
to  the  shore. 

When  she  awoke,  the  storm  was  yet  raging,  and  the 
voices  of  the  gods  were  heard  in  the  winds  among  the 
trees.  Believing  she  had  gained  the  good  will  of  the 
spirits  she  had  retired  to  meet,  she  permitted  herself, 
when  her  mother  came,  to  be  taken  to  the  wigwam.— 
It  was  the  tenth  day  of  her  fasting,  and  her  strength 
was  nearly  gone. 

“ By  my  fasting  I have  received  the  favor  of  the  gods,” 
said  she  to  the  friends  who  crowded  around  her.  “ I 
have  travelled  the  joiuney  of  life,  and  have  learned  that 
I shall  not  die  until  half  of  my  hair  has  turned  white.” 

Since  that  time,  I have  seen  that  girl  but  once.  In 
the  year  1842,  while  sailing  along  Lake  Superior,  on  its 
southern  shore,  I came  rather  imexpectedly  to  a cluster 
of  wigwams,  where  I saw  Shah- won  a-qua,  and  listened 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


159 


with  deep  interest  to  her  relation  of  the  dreams  of  hei 
childhood.  I gave  her  a few  wild  ducks  from  my  boa< 
load  of  game,  and  a yard  of  scarlet  cloth — a fabric 
which  is  esteemed  very  highly  by  the  Indian  women. 
This  I did  in  payment  for  those  early  impressions  she 
had  made  upon  my  mind,  leading  me  to  believe  that 
the  noble  deeds  of  man  are  those,  and  those  only,  which 
are  performed  for  the  good  of  others ; and  that  virtue 
will  be  alike  rewarded  in  the  future,  whether  it  be 
found  and  cherished  in  pagan  lands  or  in  Christian 
temples. 

There  is  one  Ruler  whom  we  call  Ke-sha-mon-e-doo^ 
“Benevolent  Spirit,”  or  Ke-che-mon-e-doo^  “Great Spirit.” 
This  being  is  over  the  universe  at  the  same  time,  ruling 
all  under  different  names,  such  as  “the  god  of  war,” 
“ the  god  of  the  fish,”  &c. 

The  Sun  is  the  wigwam  of  the  Great  Spirit,  and  it  is 
as  the  abode  of  this  being  that  the  Indians  view  that 
luminary.  Yery  few  of  the  Northern  Indians  ever  held 
the  idea  that  the  Sun  was  an  object  of  worship. 

When  great  Councils  are  held,  ot  the  Medicine  wor- 
ship is  in  progress,  if  the  day  is  clear  the  Indians  think 
that  the  Great  Spirit  smiles  upon  them.  If  it  be  cloudy, 
it  is  thought  the  Great  Spirit  is  displeased. 

None  of  the  Indian  youth  are  allowed  to  speak  the 


160 


thaditional  history  of 


name  of  the  Great  Spirit  witliout  proper  marks  of  ven- 
eration. There  was  a time  when  they  did  not  take  the 
name  of  God  in  vain,  hut  this  habit  some  have  acquired 
since  being  civilized  (!)  The  rigid,  though  not  too  rigid 
rules  they  have  adopted,  might  have  been  sustained  had 
not  evil  entered  with  the  good  during  their  intercourse 
with  the  whites.  As  it  is,  there  are  children  who,  as 
soon  as  their  tongues  get  in  shape,  use  them  to  blas- 
pheme their  Creator.  I never  heard  a man  swear  with- 
out its  causing  my  blood  to  run  cold.  Why,  pale  face, 
let  me  tell  you,  the  Bad  Spirit  is  a saint  to  such  a man. 

That  worship  of  the  Indians  called  “ Me-day  Wor- 
ship,” is  conducted  as  follows  : 

When  a lodge  is  made,  its  length  is  in  proportion  to 
the  number  of  persons  who  are  to  occupy  it.  Its  width 
is  generally  from  twenty  paces.  Long  poles  are  placed 
in  the  ground  which  meet  at  their  tops  to  within  about 
two  feet  of  each  other.  Over  these  awning,  or  roof  is 
formed.  In  the  centre  of  the  lodge  is  a pole,  which  we 
call  a meeting  pole,  or  Me-day  Wahtich.  It  has  paint- 
ed on  it  a representation  of  the  Great  Spirit.  The  sides 
jf  the  lodge  are  covered  with  boughs  or  mats.  The 
great  medicine  drum  is  beat  for  three  days  and  nights 
previous  to  the  time  of  worship.  Those  who  have 
received  their  lectures  for  a year  or  more  are 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION.  161 

brought  and  placed  in  the  centre.  The  priest  or  chief 
medicine  man,  with  powder  in  his  hand,  sings  at  one 
end  of  the  lodge,  a song.  This  concluded,  he  goes  to 
the  other  side  and  repeats  it.  They  then  aim  a blow 
at  their  student,  who  falls  to  the  gmund  as  though 
fainting,  as  well  he  might  after  such  a lesson.  The 
professor  sings  again : after  which  a spot  is  made  in  the 
centre  of  the  subject’s  breast,  where  it  is  supposed  the 
medicine  shell  entered.  This  shell,  which  the  teacher 
is  said  to  blow  from  himself  to  his  student,  and  which 
he  is  told  will  remain  with  him  during  life,  we  call.  Me- 
day-me-gis  (shell). 

In  a short  time  the  initiated  are  made  to  kneel  before 
the  Medicine  Bag,  which  is  held  as  sacred.  Then  a 
person  comes  near  the  kneeling  man  and  opens  a belt 
of  wampum,  or  shells,  from  which  he  takes  the  line, 
an  emblem  of  life ; one  is  crooked,  the  other  straight. 
The  various  articles  to  be  used  are  then  opened  and 
all  explained. 

During  the  two  days  preceding  this  worship,  great 
preparations  are  made.  Children  dress ; old  and  young 
are  fantastically  decorated  with  feathers,  paints,  and 
the  skin  of  wild  beasts. 

The  privilege  of  joining  in  this  worship  is  granted  by 
the  elder  members,  Some  children  are  allowed  to  do 


162 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


SO,  though  very  young.  When  any  are  very  sick,  the 
elders  hold  a consultation  and  propose  that  the  sick 
person  he  initiated,  as  it  is  thought  in  this  way  they  will 
receive  the  favor  of  the  Great  Spirit,  and  get  better.— 
Generally,  however,  lectures  are  given  for  one  or  two 
years  to  the  candidates  for  initiation,  in  which  they  are 
taught  the  responsibilities  they  are  to  assume. 

I believe  this  “Me-day  Worship”  is  common  among 
most  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  the  West  and  North.  It 
resembles  in  some  particulars  the  secret  societies,  so 
called  in  the  United  States.  Members  of  different  tribes 
when  they  meet  are  admitted  to  the  lodge,  on  their 
knowledge  of  it,  even  though  their  ignorance  of  the  lan- 
guage of  each  other,  renders  it  necessary  to  use  signs  in 
making  it  known. 

While  the  Medicine  Worship  is  progressing,  a little 
lodge  is  made  near  the  other,  where  the  chief  man  has 
in  keeping  all  their  medicine  bags,  songs,  and  emblem. 
In  this  lodge  the  preparatory  lectures  are  given,  as  also 
when  the  initiation  is  over,  the  initiated  is  accepted  with 
the  songs  they  have  learned.  None  of  the  uninitiated 
are  allowed  in  it. 

Some  years  ago,  a gentleman  travelling  in  the  Sioux 
Village,  below  St.  Paul,  was  told  by  a waggish  Indian 
to  go  in  there  and  smoke  with  the  old  man.  Sure 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


163 


enough,  in  he  went,  and  as  soon  as  he  was  seated,  the 
tug  of  war  came.  One  pulled  his  hat  off;  another 
pushed  him  out  of  the  lodge,  and  when  he  asked  for 
his  hat,  he  found  they  had  pushed  that  out  in  advance 
of  him.  Somewhat  resolved  upon  having  his  own  way, 
he  again  went  in,  or  attempted  to  do  so,  when  he  was 
met  at  the  entrance,  thrown  down,  and  in  the  scramble 
for  his  life  and  hat,  surrendered  the  tail  of  his  coat  to 
an  Indian  lad,  who  very  adroitly  cut  it  off.  He  could 
not  comprehend  the  meaning  of  such  treatment  until  I 
explained  it  to  him.  He  thought  them  rude.  I thought 
so  too — but  he  laughed  over  it,  and  finally  turned  it  off 
by  saying — “ ’twas  a good  joke  ” — of  which  he  was  of- 
ten reminded  when  he  examined  the  fit  of  his  coat  or 
the  fur  of  his  hat. 

The  origin  of  the  Indian’s  belief  in  this  Medicine 
Worship  is  to  be  found  in  the  following  traditional  sto- 
ry, which  is  usually  related  to  any  one  when  about  to 
join  the  clan.  I received  it  myself  upon  passing  the 
mysterious  ordeal. 

When  Keshamonedoo  made  the  red  men,  he  made 
them  happy.  The  men  were  larger,  were  fleeter  on 
foot,  were  more  dexterous  in  games,  and  lived  to  an 
older  age  than  now. 

The  forest  abounded  with  game,  the  trees  were  load- 


164 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


ed  with  fruit,  and  birds  who  have  now  a black  plum- 
age were  dressed  with  pure  white.  The  birds  and  the 
fowls  ate  no  flesh,  for  the  wide  prairies  were  covered 
with  fruits  and  vegetables.  The  fish  in  the  waters  were 
large.  The  Monedoo  from  heaven  watched  the  blaze 
of  the  wigwams’  fires,  and  these  were  as  countless  as 
the  stars  in  the  sky. 

Strange  visitants  from  heaven  descended  every  few 
days,  and  inquired  of  the  Indians  whether  any  thing 
was  wrong.  Finding  them  happy  and  contented,  they 
returned  to  then  high  homes. 

These  were  tutelar  gods,  and  they  consulted  with 
the  sages  of  the  different  villages,  and  advised  all  not 
to  climb  a vine  which  grew  on  the  earth,  and  whose  top 
reached  the  sky,  as  it  was  the  ladder  on  which  the  sphits 
descended  from  heaven  to  earth,  to  bless  the  red  men. 

One  of  these  errand-spirits  became  intimate  with  one 
of  the  young  braves,  who  dwelt  in  a cabin  with  his 
grandmother,  and  favored  him  with  invitations  to  stroll 
with  it  among  the  various  villages  around. 

The  favor  shown  by  this  god  to  the  young  man  pro- 
duced a,  jealousy  among  his  brethren,  and  during  the 
absence  of  his  distinguished  friend,  the  favored  one  was 
much  troubled  by  his  neighbors,  who  envied  him  his 
situation. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


165 


On  one  occasion,  when  this  persecution  became  intol- 
erable, he  determined  to  leave  his  country,  and,  if  pos- 
sible, accompany  the  spirit  to  the  skies. 

The  chief  men  had  enjoined  on  all  the  duty  to  refrain 
from  any  desire  or  any  attempt  to  ascend  the  vine 
whose  branches  reached  the  heavens,  telling  them  that 
to  do  so  would  bring  upon  them  severe  penalties. 

The  spirit  finding  the  young  man  quite  sad,  inquired, 
learned  the  true  cause  of  his  sorrow,  and  taking  him, 
reascended. 

The  old  woman  cried  for  his  return,  “ Noo-sis,  be-ge- 
wain,  be-ge-wain.”  “ My  child,  come  back,  come  back  f ’ 
He  would  not  come  home,  and  the  woman  having  ad- 
justed all  her  matters  in  the  lodge,  after  the  nightfall 
repaired  to  the  vine  and  began  to  ascend  it. 

In  the  morning  the  Indians  found  the  lodge  she  had 
inhabited  empty,  and  soon  espied  her  climbing  the  vine. 
They  shouted  to  her,  “ Shay ! ah-wos  be-ge-wain, 
mah-je-me-di — moo-ga-yiesh  ! ” “ Hallo,  come  back, 
you  old  witch  you.” 

But  she  continued  ascending,  up — up — up. 

A council  was  held  to  determine  what  inducement 
could  be  made  to  her  to  return.  They  could  hear  her 
sobbing  for  her  grandson.  “ Ne-gah-wah-bah-mah  nos- 
sis.”  “ I will  yet  see  my  child.” 


166  TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 

Consternation  and  fear  filled  the  hearts  of  the  Nation, 
for  one  of  their  number  was  disobeying  the  Great  Spirit. 
Indignation  and  fury  were  seen  in  the  acts  of  the  war- 
riors, and  the  light  of  the  transgressors  burning  wig- 
wam shed  its  lurid  rays  around. 

The  woman  was  just  rearing  the  top  of  the  vine 
which  was  entwined  around  one  of  the  stars  of  heaven, 
and  about  entering  that  place,  when  the  vine  broke, 
and  down  she  came,  with  the  broken  vine,  which  had 
before  been  the  ladder  of  communication  between  hea- 
ven and  earth. 

The  Nations,  as  they  passed  by  her,  as  she  sat  in  the 
midst  of  the  ruin  she  had  wrought,  pushed  her  declin- 
ing head,  saying,  “ Whah,  ke  nah  mah  dah  bee  mage 
men  di  moo  ya  yiesh.”  “ There  you  sit,  you  wicked 
old  witch.’* 

Some  kicked  her,  others  dragged  her  by  her  hair,* 
and  thus  expressed  their  disapprobation.  All  who  shall 
live  after  thee,  shall  call  thee  Equa  (woman). 

The  news  of  this  disaster  spread  rapidly  from  village 
to  village.  Some  niunbers  of  men,  women,  and  children 

* A lady  of  my  acquaintance,  quaintly  remarked,  when  I related 
this  story  to  her.  “ Yes,  the  gentleman  have  been  doing  that  ever 


since.” 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


167 


were  singularly  affected.  Some  complained  of  pains  in 
their  heads,  and  others  of  pains  in  various  parts  of  their 
bodies.  Some  were  unable  to  walk,  and  others  equally 
unable  to  speak. 

They  thought  some  of  these  fell  asleep,  for  they 
Imew  not  what  death  was.  They  had  never  seen  its 
presence. 

A deep  solemnity  began  its  reign  in  all  the  villages. 
There  was  no  more  hunting,  no  more  games,  and  no 
song  was  sung  to  soothe  the  sun  to  its  evening  rest. 

Ah,  it  was  then  a penalty  followed  transgression. 

Disease  was  the  consequence  of  the  breaking  of  the 
vine.  Death  followed. 

One  day  in  the  midst  of  their  distress,  they  consulted 
each  other  to  determine  what  could  be  done.  None  knew. 

They  watched  carefully  for  the  descent  of  those  be- 
ings who  used  to  visit  them — and  at  length  they  came. 
Each  strove  with  eagerness  to  tell  his  story.  They 
soon  found  that  the  strangers  were  silent  and  sad. — 
They  asked  the  Nations  what  they  wished  to  tell  the 
Great  Spirit  in  their  distress. 

The  first  sent  a petition  that  the  vine  might  be  re- 
placed between  heaven  and  earth. 

.The  second  sent  that  the  Great  Spirit  might  cause 
the  disease  to  leave  them. 


168 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


The  third  sent  a petition  to  have  the  old  woman  kill- 
ed, since  she  was  the  cause  of  so  much  distress. 

The  fourth  desired  that  the  Great  Spirit  would  give 
them  a great  deal  of  game. 

The  fifth,  and  last,  that  the  Great  Spirit  would  send 
them  that  which  would  calm  and  relieve  them  in  distress. 

After  they  had  heard  these,  the  strangers  left,  telling 
the  Indians  to  wait,  and  they  should  know  what  the 
Great  Spirit  should  say  to  each  of  the  petitioners. 

Each  day  of  their  absence  seemed  a month:  At 
length  they  came,  and  gathered  near  the  eager  people. 
They  told  them  that  they  must  die,  as  the  vine  that 
had  connected  earth  to  heaven  was  broken  ; but  the 
Great  Spirit  has  sent  us  to  release  you,  and  to  tell  you 
what  you  must  do  hereafter. 

The  strangers  then  gathered  up  all  the  flowers  from 
the  plains,  river  and  lake  sides ; and  after  drying  them 
on  their  hands,  blew  the  leaves  with  their  breath,  and 
they  were  scattered  all  over  the  earth, — ^wherever  they 
fell,  they  sprang  up  and  became  herbs  to  cmn  all  disease. 

The  Indians  instituted  a dance,  and  with  it  a mode 
of  worship.  These  few,  there  met,  were  the  first  who 
composed  a Medicine  Lodge  : they  received  their  char- 
ter from  the  Great  Spirit,  and  thus  originated  the 
“ Medicine  Worship.” 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


169 


The  strangers  gave  them  these  words,  and  then  left  • 

“ There  is  not  a flower  that  buds,  however  small, 
that  is  not  for  some  wise  purpose. 

There  is  not  a blade  of  grass,  however  insignificant, 
that  the  Indian  does  not  require. 

Learning  this,  and  acting  in  accordance  with  these 
truths,  will  work  out  your  own  good,  and  will  please 
the  Great  Spirit.” 

The  above  is  universally  believed  by  the  North  West 
Indians  as  the  origin  of  Disease  and  Death,  and  the 
foundation  of  the  Medicine  Worship. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


THE  OJIBWAY  OR  CHIPPEWA  RESIDENTS  OP 
CANADA  WEST. 

The  Ojibway  Nation  now  occupies  land  within  the 
bounds  of  two  Governments, — the  American  and  the 
British.  The  entire,  according  to  Drake,  in  1842,  was 
thirty  thousand,  which  is  not  far  from  the  truth.  The 
best  work  upon  the  Indians  of  North  America,  is  that 
deservedly  popular  book  written  by  Col.  McKinney,  of 
New- York,  a gentleman  of  extensive  information,  and 
an  undoubted  friend  of  the  red  man. 

That  part  of  the  Nation  occupying  territory  within 
the  United  States,  inhabit  all  the  Northern  part  of  Michi- 
gan, or  the  South  shore  of  Lake  Huron ; the  whole 
Northern  portion  of  Wisconsin  Territory  ; all  the  South 
shore  of  Lake  Superior,  for  eight  hundred  miles  ; the 
upper  part  of  the  Mississippi,  and  Sandy,  Leach,  and 
Red  Lakes. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


171 


Those  of  the  Nation  living  within  the  British  posses- 
sions, occupy  from  Gononaque,  below  Kingston;  all 
Western  Canada ; the  North  of  Lake  Huron ; the  North 
of  Lake  Superior ; the  North  of  Lake  Winepeg ; and 
the  North  of  Red  River  Lake,  about  one  hundred  miles. 
The  whole  extent  comprises  over  one  thousand  nine 
hundred  miles  East  and  West ; and  from  two  to  three 
hundred  miles  North  and  South. 

There  are  about  five  thousand  in  the  British  domin- 
ions. In  the  United  States  there  are  about  twenty-five 
thousand ; of  whom  about  five  thousand  receive  reli- 
gious instruction,  from  missionaries  sent  by  Societies  in 
the  States  and  the  Canadas. 

The  first  Mission  among  them  was  commenced  by 
the  Methodists  at  Credit  River,  in  Canada  West,  in 
1824,  which  was  followed  by  a second  Mission  at  Grape 
Island  in  1827. 

The  conversion  of  some  Ojibways  speedily  followed 
the  introduction  of  Christianity.  Many  of  these  were 
sent  as  native  teachers  to  their  brethren  in  the  West. 

In  1847,  there  were  twenty-three  Methodist  Mission- 
ary Stations,  six  of  which  were  in  the  States,  the  re- 
mainder in  Canada.  There  were  four  Presbyterian 
Missions,  all  of  which  were  within  the  States  ; viz. : 
La  Pointe,  Bad  River,  Leach  Lake,  and  Red  Lake. — 


172 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


There  were  seven  Episcopalian  Mission  Stations,  six  of 
which  were  in  Canada  and  one  in  the  United  States. 
Two  Baptist  Mission  Stations  ; one  at  Sault  St.  Marie, 
the  other  at  Green  Bay.  The  Roman  Catholics ' had 
Missionaries  in  nearly  all  of  the  principal  places. 

Numbers  are  not  under  religious  instruction,  though 
easily  accessible,  and  are  wandering  about  without  the 
restraints  and  privileges  of  the  gospel.  All  around  the 
shores  of  Lake  Superior  are  bands  of  Indians  who  have, 
time  after  time,  called  for  Missionaries.  The  Hudson 
Bay  Company  adopted  a plan  which,  in  my  opinion, 
did  them  much  credit,  by  the  operation  of  which  instruc- 
tions  were  given  to  the  Indians  and  their  children,  in 
the  principles  of  Christianity. 

Many  persons  once  belonging  to  other  Nations  now 
live  with  the  Ojibways,  and  conform  to  their  habits  and 
customs. 

The  present  state  of  the  Ojibways  renders  them  fully 
ripe  and  ready  for  great  advancement  in  religion,  litera- 
ture, and  the  arts  and  sciences  of  civilized  life.  Multi- 
tudes have  left  their  wigwams,  their  woods,  and  the 
attractive  chase,  and  are  now  endeavoring  to  tread  in 
the  footsteps  of  worthy  white  men. 

One  reason  for  this  change  is  this — the  Chiefs  see  the 
necessity  of  making  a “ smooth,  straight  path  for  their 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


173 


children.”  and  are  appropriating  as  much  of  their  means 
as  they  can  spare  towards  doing  so. 

Another  is  that  the  rising  generation  have  imbibed  a 
thirst  for  learning,  and  are  cultivating  a decided  taste 
for  improvement  in  all  its  branches. 

Native  teachers  being  among  the  people,  preaching  in 
their  own  language,  ‘ Christ  and  Him  crucified,’  is  a 
means  exceeding  all  others  in  their  elevation. 

The  prospects  of  the  Nation  have  been  made  brighter 
through  the  instrumentality  of  Missionary  effort.  Many 
of  the  Indians  residing  in  Wisconsin,  Lake  du  Flam- 
beau, the  South  shore  of  Lake  Superior,  and  about  Wine- 
peg  and  Red  Lakes,  have  repeatedly  requested  Mission- 
aries to  be  sent  among  them.  And  these  need  good 
teachers,  for  about  the  Western  part  of  Red  Lake  are 
indeed  “ the  habitations  of  cruelty.”  The  Chippewas 
and  Siouxs  are  always  at  war  with  each  other ; the 
hatred  engendered  five  hundred  years  ago  seems  to 
have  lost  none  of  its  bitterness. 

I will  in  this  place  give  an  account  of  the  Mission 
Stations  in  1842,  for  which  I am  mostly  indebted  to  an 
able  report  made  by  Commissioners  appointed  by  Pro- 
vincial Parliament  about  that  time. 


174 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


CHIPPEWAS  OF  THE  RIVER  THAMES. 

JOHN  RILET,  CHIEF. 

These,  together  with  the  Munsees,  occupied  a tract 
of  land  containing  about  nine  thousand  acres,  in  the 
township  of  Caradoc,  within  the  London  District,  at  a 
distance  of  about  twenty-five  miles  from  the  Moravian 
Village.  It  had  been  only  about  ten  years  since  their 
being  reclaimed  from  a wandering  life,  and  settled  at 
this  place.  Since  1800,  the  Munsees  had  been  settled 
on  land  belonging  to  the  Chippewas,  having  received 
the  consent  of  the  Chippewas  to  locate  there.  The 
Chippewas  numbered  three  hundred  and  seventy-eight ; 
the  Munsees  two  hundred  and  forty-two.  They  were 
not  collected  in  a village,  but  lived  on  small  farms,  scat- 
tered over  their  tract.  Some  of  the  Chippewas  culti- 
vated lots  of  twenty  acres  each.  This  tribe  occupied 
seventy-six  log  houses,  six  wigwams  and  twenty-five 
barns ; and  had  four  hundred  and  fifty  acres  of  land  under 
good  cultivation.  Their  stock  consisted  of  about  six 
hundred  head.  They  had  a fanning  mill,  a blacksmith’s 
shop,  and  a moderate  supply  of  agricultural  tools. 

THE  CHIPPEWAS  AT  AMHERSTBURG. 

These  all  professed  Christianity,  and  many  of  them 
were  examples  of  true  piety.  The  majority  were  Wes- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


175 


leyan  Methodists  ; the  minority  Romanists.  They  had 
no  place  of  worship  of  their  own,  though  they  had  the 
means  to  erect  one  had  they  desired  to  do  so.  The  In- 
dian settlement  is  about  three  miles  from  the  town  of 
Amherstburg.  The  Methodist  minister  stationed  at  Am- 
herstburg,  visited  those  of  his  persuasion  among  the  In- 
dians, every  Sabbath  day,  and  by  the  aid  of  an  Interpre- 
ter preached,  read  and  expounded  the  scriptures  to  them. 
They  held  a general  prayer  meeting  once  a fortnight, 
and  frequent  and  private  meetings  for  social  worship. 
Many  of  them  maintained  family  worship.  The  Ro- 
man Catholics  worshipped  in  a chapel  at  Amherstburg. 

There  were  no  schools  among  them  ; but  they  had 
expressed  a desire  to  have  one  established.  Persons 
capable  of  judging,  thought  the  children  no  way  inferior 
to  those  of  the  whites  in  their  ability  to  acquire  know- 
ledge. 


CHIPPEWAS  OP  THE  ST.  CLAIR. 

WA-WA-NOSH,  AND  SALT,  CHIEFS. 

These  Indians  were  among  the  first  whom  Sir  John 
Colborne  endeavored  to  settle  and  civilize.  Previous  to 
1830,  they  were  wandering  heathen,  like  their  brethren 
elsewhere,  scattered  over  the  Western  part  of  the  Upper 
Province ; they  were  drunken  and  dissipated  in  their 


176  TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 

habits,  and  without  religious  or  moral  restraint.  In 
1830-31,  a number  of  them  were  collected  on  a Reserve 
in  the  township  of  Sarnia,  near  the  head  of  the  River 
St.  Clair,  containing  over  ten  thousand  acres.  A num- 
ber of  houses  were  built  for  them,  and  an  officer  was 
appointed  to  superintend  the  settlement. 

Their  conversion  to  Christianity  and  their  progress 
in  religious  knowledge,  and  in  the  acquisition  of  sober, 
orderly  and  industrious  habits,  had  been,  under  the  care 
of  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Society,  both  rapid  and  uni- 
form. From  the  formation  of  the  Mission  to  that  time, 
(1842)  two  hundred  and  twenty-one  adults,  and  two 
hundred  and  thirty-nine  children  had  been  baptized  and 
admitted  into  the  community. 

In  1840,  the  total  number  at  this  Mission  did  not  ex- 
ceed three  hundred  and  fifty ; but  an  increase  soon  fol- 
lowed, owing  to  the  emigration  from  Saginaw  Bay, 
Michigan,  and  the  settlement  of  wandering  Indians — 
and  at  the  time  of  the  Commissioners’  report,  the  num- 
ber was  seven  hundred  and  forty-one. 

The  Indians  of  River  Aux  Sables  had  about  sixty 
acres  uncler  improvement,  and  one  log  house.  Those 
at  Kettle  Point,  twenty  acres  and  two  log  houses.  The 
land  on  the  Upper  Reserve  had  been  regularly  surveyed 
and  laid  out  in  farm  lots. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


177 


The  Chief,  with  the  approval  of  the  Superintendent, 
placed  most  of  the  occupants  on  these  lands  ; hut  it 
was  not  indispensable  that  he  should  be  consulted,  as 
the  members  of  the  tribe  had  the  liberty  to  choose  any 
unoccupied  spot,  and  improve  it  as  their  own.  When 
once  in  possession,  they  were  secured  against  intrusion, 
but  drunkenness  or  other  ill  conduct  made  them  subject 
to  the  Chief,  who  had  power  to  expel  them  from  the 
Reserve. 


CHIPPEWAS  AT  WALPOLE  ISLAND. 

These  Indians  are  also  known  by  the  name  of  “ the 
Chippewas  of  Chenaille  Ecarte.”  Those  who  have  for 
an  indefinite  length  of  time  hunted  over  the  waste  lands 
about  Chenaille  Ecarte  and  Bear  Creek,  are  a branch 
of  the  Nation  settled  in  Sarnia,  and  are  sharers  of  the 
same  annuity. 

The  Pottawatamies  emigrated  from  the  States.  The 
settlement  at  Walpole  Island  was  commenced  at  the 
close  of  the  American  war,  when  Col.  McKie,  called  by 
the  Indians  “ White  Elk,”  collected  and  placed  upon 
the  Island  which  lies  at  the  junction  of  the  River  and 
the  Lake  St.  Clair,  the  scattered  Indians  of  certain 
tribes  of  Chippewas  who  had  fought  on  the  British  side. 
Being  left  for  a number  of  years  without  any  interfer- 


178 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


ence  or  assistance  on  the  part  of  the  govemmentj  they 
became  a prey  to  the  profligate  whites  settled  on  the 
frontier,  who,  by  various  frauds,  and  in  moments  of  in- 
toxication, obtained  leases  and  valuable  portions  of  the 
Island. 

CHIPPEWAS  OF  THE  RIVER  CREDIT 
J.  SAWTER  & P.  JONES,  CHIEFS. 

These  were  a remnant  of  a tribe  which  formerly  pos- 
sessed a considerable  portion  of  the  Home  and  the  Gore 
Districts,  of  which  in  1818,  they  surrendered  the  greater 
part,  for  an  annuity  of  £532.10,  reserving  only  certain 
small  tracts  at  the  River  Credit,  and  at  Sixteen  and 
Twelve  Mill  Creeks.  They  composed  the  first  tribe 
converted  to  Christianity  in  Upper  Canada. 

Previous  to  1823,  they  were  wandering  pagans.  In 
that  year,  Messrs.  Peter  and  John  Jones,  the  sons  of  a 
white  Surveyor,  and  a Mississaga  woman,  having  been 
converted  to  Christianity,  and  admitted  members  of  the 
Wesleyan  Methodist  Church,  became  anxious  to  redeem 
their  countrymen  from  their  degraded  state  of  heathen- 
ism and  destitution.  They  accordingly  collected  a con- 
siderable number  together,  and  by  rote  and  frequent 
repetitions,  taught  the  first  principles  of  Christianity  to 
the  adults,  who  were  too  far  advanced  in  years  to  learn 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


179 


to  read  and  write.  In  this  manner  they  committed  to 
memory  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  the  Creed,  and  the  Com- 
mandments. As  soon  as  the  tribes  were  converted,  they 
perceived  the  evils  attendant  on  their  former  state  of 
ignorance  and  vagrancy.  They  began  to  work,  which 
they  had  not  previously  done,  and  recognized  the  ad- 
vantage of  cultivating  the  soil ; they  totally  gave  up 
drinking,  to  which  they  had  been  greatly  addicted,  and 
became  sober,  industrious,  and  consistent  Christians. 

THE  CHIPPEWAS  OF  ALNWICK. 

SUNDAY  & SIMPSON,  CHIEFS. 

These  Indians  became  converts  to  Christianity  in  the 
years  1826 — 1827.  Previous  to  those  years  they  were 
pagans,  wandering  in  the  neighborhood  of  Belville, 
Kingston,  and  Gananoque,  and  were  known  by  the 
name  of  “ the  Mississagas  of  the  Bay  of  Q^uinte.”  In 
the  years  referred  to,  two  or  three  hundred  were  received 
into  the  Wesleyan  Methodist  Church,  and  settled  on 
Grape  Island,  in  the  Bay  of  duinte,  six  miles  from  Bel- 
ville. On  this  island  they  resided  eleven  years,  sub- 
sisting by  agriculture  and  hunting.  Their  houses  were 
erected  partly  by  their  own  labor  and  partly  at  the  ex- 
pense of  the  Methodist  Mission  Society.  They  numbered 
twenty-three : besides  which  they  had  a commodious 


180 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


building  for  religious  service  and  school,  a room  for  an 
infant  school,  a hospital,  and  several  mechanical  estab- 
lishments. 


CHIPPEWAS  AT  RICE  LAKE. 

POUDASH,  COP  WAY  & CROW,  CHIEFS. 

These  settlers  belong  to  the  same  tribe,  the  Mississa- 
gas,  or  Chippewas  of  Rice  Lake,  who,  in  1818,  surren- 
dered the  greater  part  of  the  tract  now  forming  the  New- 
castle District,  for  an  annuity  of  £740.  They  have 
been  reclaimed  from  their  primitive  wandering  life,  and 
settled  in  their  present  locations  within  the  last  ten  or 
twelve  years. 

• The  Rice  Lake  Settlement  is  on  the  Northern  side  of 
the  Lake,  about  twelve  miles  from  Peterborough.  The 
number  of  Indians  was  one  hundred  and  fourteen. — 
They  possessed  about  fifteen  hundred  acres  of  land, 
which  were  divided  into  lots  of  fifty  acres  each;  of 
these  eleven  hundred  and  twenty  acres  were  granted  in 
April,  1834,  to  trustees,  who  were  “to  hold  the  same  for 
the  benefit  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  the  Province,  with  a 
view  to  their  conversion  and  civilization.”  The  re- 
maining four  hundred  and  thirty  were  afterwards  pur- 
chased by  them  with  their  own  funds.  They  had 
rather  more  land  cleared  than  had  the  Indians  of  Ain- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


181 


wick, — about  four  hundred  acres  ; but  the  cultivation 
was  not  so  good.  The  village  contained  thirty  houses, 
a number  of  barns,  a school  house,  and  a chapel,  to 
which  was  a bell.  At  this  village  the  head  Chief  re- 
sided. For  some  time  these  Indians  were  under  the 
charge  of  an  officer  appointed  by  the  Indian  Depart- 
ment, who  assisted  in  their  settlement,  but  at  the  time 
of  the  report  they  had  no  special  Superintendent. 

CHIPPEWAS  AT  MUD  LAKE. 

NOGEE,  IRON  &;  MCRUE,  CHIEFS. 

The  Mud  Lake  Indians  were  settled  on  a point  of 
land  on  the  Mud  or  Chemung  Lake,  sixteen  miles 
Northwest  of  Peterborough.  They  were  ninety-four 
in  number, — possessed  twenty  dwelling  houses,  with 
three  stables — and  occupied  a grant  of  sixteen  hundred 
acres  in  the  township  of  Smith,  made  to  the  New  Eng- 
land Company  for  their  benefit,  in  April,  1837,  of  which 
two  hundred  acres  were  well  improved. 

These  Indians  were  for  some  time  under  the  manage- 
ment of  the  late  Mr.  Scott,  an  agent  for  the  New  Eng 
land  Company,  and  were  members  of  the  Wesleyan 
Methodist  Church.  A chapel  was  in  progress  of  erec- 
tion at  the  village,  where  there  was  at  the  time  a Mis- 
sion-house and  a school. 


182 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


CHIPPEWAS  AT  BALSAM  LAKE. 

CRANE,  CHIEF. 

The  Indians  of  Balsam  Lake,  numbering  ninety, 
were  settled  within  the  Township  of  Bexley,  on  a point 
of  land  jutting  out  into  Lake  Balsam,  which  is  the  most 
Northerly  of  the  chain  of  Lakes,  running  Northwest 
across  the  back  townships  of  the  district  of  New  Castle. 
The  reserve  which  was  granted  to  them  by  the  Eng- 
lish government,  comprised  twelve  hundred  and  six 
acres.  Of  these,  two  himdred  were  cultivated.  The 
village  was  small ; composed  of  about  a dozen  houses, 
with  out-buildings  and  a commodious  school-house,  in 
which  divine  service  was  performed  by  a resident  Meth- 
odist Missionary. 

In  1843  these  Indians  became  dissatisfied  with  the 
climate,  and  with  the  quality  of  the  land  at  Balsam 
Lake,  and  purchased  six  hundred  acres  on  the  banks  of 
Lake  Scugog,  and  were  making  preparations  to  remove 
from  their  old  settlement  to  their  new  locality.  This  vol- 
unteer movement  of  theirs  evinced  how  rapid  an  improve- 
ment was  going  on  in  their  minds  ; and  showed  that 
the  spirit  of  enterprise  existed  among  them,  inasmuch 
as  it  was  made  on  account  of  the  superiority  of  the  land 
near  Lake  Scugog  for  agricultural  purposes. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


183 


CHIPPEWAS  OF  RAMA. 

TELLOWHEAD,  NA-NAH-GE-SKUNG  & BIG  SHILLING,  CHIEFS. 

These  Indians  formerly  occupied  the  lands  about 
Lake  Simcoe,  Holland  River,  and  the  unsettled  country 
in  the  rear  of  the  Home  District. 

General  Darling  reported  of  them  in  1828,  that  they 
had  a strong  desire  to  he  admitted  into  the  ranks  of 
Christian  people,  and  to  adopt  the  habits  of  civilized 
life  ; and  that  in  these  respects  they  might  he  classed 
with  the  Mississagas  of  the  Bay  of  Quinte  and  Rice 
Lake,  hut  were  at  that  time  in  a more  savage  state. 

In  1830,  Lieutenant  Governor  Sir  J.  Colborne  collect- 
ed them  on  a tract  of  land  on  the  Northwest  shore  of 
Lake  Simcoe,  where  they  cleared  a road  from  that  lake 
to  Lake  Huron.  This  tract  numbered  nearly  ten  thou- 
sand acres.  They  consisted  of  three  tribes  of  Chippe- 
was,  under  Chiefs  Yellowhead,  Aisance,  amd  Snake  ; 
and  a hand  of  Pottawatomies,  from  Drummond  Island  ; 
their  nmnber  was  about  five  hundred,  under  the  care  of 
Mr.  Anderson,  who  was  appointed  to  take  charge  of 
their  settlement.  They  made  a rapid  advancement. 


184 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


CHIPPEWAS  OF  BEAUSOLIEL  ISLAND,  MATCHADASH 
BAY,  LAKE  HURON. 

AISANCE  fc  JA]VIES  KA-DAH-GE-GWON,  CHIEFS. 

This  band  was  the  same  which  was  settled  by  Sir 
John  Colborne,  at  Cold  Water.  Their  village,  which 
was  not  far  from  their  former  settlement,  was  commenc- 
ed in  1841.  It  contained  nearly  twenty  houses.  The 
settlers  numbered  two  hmidred  and  thirty-two ; and 
had  mider  their  own  cultivation  one  hundred  acres  of 
land. 

The  majority  of  these  Indians  were  Roman  Catholics. 
They  had  no  place  for  worship  or  school.  The  Ro- 
man Catholic  priest  of  Penetanguishene  made  them 
occasional  visits. 

CHIPPEWAS  OF  SNAKE  ISLAND,  LAKE  SIMCOE. 

J.  SNAKE,  CHIEF.  ^ 

This  body  of  Indians  was  one  of  the  three  bands 
established  at  Cold  Water  and  the  Narrows,  and  separ 
ated  from  them  on  the  abandonment  of  those  settlements. 

In  1842  they  occupied  one  of  the  three  Islands  on 
Lake  Simcoe,  which  had  been  set  apart  for  the  tribe 
many  years  previous.  They  were  over  one  hundred  in 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION, 


185 


number,  and  occupied  twelve  dwelling  houses.  They 
had  other  buildings,  and  a school-house.  The  children 
were  instructed  by  a respectable  teacher,  and  Divine 
service  was  conducted  by  a resident  Missionary  of  the 
Methodist  persuation. 

They  had  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  acres  under 
cultivation,  and  were  rapidly  improving  in  habits  of  in- 
dustry and  agricultural  skill. 

Their  Missionary,  who  had  been  acquainted  with 
them  for  about  three  yearSj  stated  that  the  majority  of 
them  were  strictly  moral  in  their  character, — that  most 
of  the  adults  were  decidedly  pious — and  that  many  of 
^em  for  consistency  of  character,  would  not  suffer  by 
a comparison  with  white  Christians  of  any  denomina- 
tion. 


CHIPPEWAS  OF  SANGEEN  (lAKE  HURON). 

J.  METEGOUB,  ALEXANDER  & AH-Y  A H-B  A N C E,  CHIEFS. 

It  was  from  these  Indians,  and  their  brethren,  since 
settled  at  Owen’s  Sound,  that  Sir  Francis  Head,  in 
1836,  obtained  a surrender  of  a vast  tract  of  land  lying 
North  of  the  London  and  Gore  Districts,  and  between 
the  Home  District  and  Lake  Huron,  containing  one 
million  six  hundred  thousand  acres.  He  rQserved  at 


186 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


the  same  time,  for  the  Indians,  the  extensive  peninsula, 
lying  between  Lake  Huron  and  Georgian  Bay,  North 
of  Owen’s  Sound,  and  supposed  to  contain  four  hundred 
and  fifty  thousand  acres. 

CHIPPEWAS  OF  BIG  BAY,  IN  OWEN’s  SOUND,  LAKE 
HURON. 

JOHN  JONES  te  WAH-BAH-DEICK,  CHIEFS. 

These  Indians  were  formerly  either  wanderers  in 
the  Sangeeng  tract,  surrendered  by  Sir  Francis  Head,  or 
lived  in  scattered  wigwams  on  the  shores  of  Big  Bay. 
An  agreement  was  then  made  with  them,  by  which  it 
was  proposed  that  they  should  either  repair  to  Manitom 
lin,  or  to  that  part  of  their  former  territory  which  lies 
North  of  Owen’s  Sound ; upon  complying  with  which, 
it  was  promised,  “ that  houses  should  be  built  for  them, 
and  proper  assistance  given  to  enable  them  to  become 
civilized  and  cultivate  the  land.” 

CHIPPEWAS  AND  OTHERS,  IN  THE  TOWNSHIP  OP 
BEDFORD. 

Within  a few  years  previous  to  1842,  some  strag- 
glers from  the  Rice  Lake  tribe  had  settled  in  the  town- 
ship of  Bedford,  about  twenty-five  miles  North  of  the 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


187 


town  of  Kingston.  About  that  year  they  were  joined  by 
a band  of  eighty-one  Indians  from  Lower  Canada,  be- 
longing to  the  part  of  the  “ Lake  of  Two  Mountains.” 

By  instructions  issued  in  1843,  these  Indians  were 
transferred  from  the  Roll  of  Lower  Canada  to  that  of 
the  Upper  Province,  and  in  the  course  of  that  year  they 
received  their  annual  Government  presents  for  the  first 
time  in  that  Province. 


CHAPTER -XIV. 


MISSIONS  AND  IMPROVEMENTS. 

The  Mission  of  the  Episcopal  Church  at  the  Sault 
St,  Marie,  was  given  up  soon  after  the  Rev.  Mr.  Murray 
left  the  country,  on  account  of  the  removal  of  the  In- 
dians from  their  town  to  an  Island  in  Lake  Huron,  by 
order  of  Sir  Francis  Broadhead. 

This  dignitary  gained  notoriety  among  the  Indians 
and  the  whites  of  Canada,  on  account  of  his  attempt  to 
remove  the  Indians  to  ‘‘  a lone  barren  isle,”  where  those 
who  did  go  suffered  greatly  by  the  bleak  winds  of  the 
lake. 

The  soil,  what  there  was  of  it,  was  not  good  enough 
to  raise  potatoes,  or  any  vegetables  for  their  support, — 
its  chief  productions  being  large  rocks  and  small 
stones. 

Mr.  Murray,  it  appears,  was  a man  of  untiring  ener- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION- 


189 


gy  and  perseverance.  He  labored  for  a number  of 
years  as  a devoted  Missionary,  and  was  finally  obliged 
to  leave  by  the  impolitic  acts  of  government. 

In  the  month  of  September,  1834, 1 had  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  this  gentleman.  He  was  reading  an  account 
of  his  labors  to  a crowded  auditory  of  Indians,  who  lis- 
tened with  deep,  imfeigned  interest,  to  the  relation  of 
the  improvements  they  had  made  under  the  care  of 
“ the  good  white  man.” 

One  of  the  most  distinguished  individuals  of  the  Ojib- 
was,  is  Shin-gwah‘komce,  He  is  a Chief  of  much 
celebrity, — noted  for  his  bravery,  activity,  and  persever- 
ance. His  person  is  a little  above  the  medium  size,  and 
well  proportioned.  His  head  well  formed ; and,  to  a 

I 

phrenological  eye,  pleasing.  His  general  appearance  is 
highly  commanding. 

He  fought  with  the  British  during  the  last  war,  and 
was  engaged  at  the  storming  of  Mackanaw,  and  at  the 
battle  of  Chippeway.  It  is  said  that  he  retains  numer- 
ous scars,  and  such  like  mementoes  of  the  war  of  1822, 

The  Indians  who  then  lived  on  the  English  side  of 
Sault  St.  Marie,  have  removed  to  Manetowahning,  on  the 
North  shore  of  Lake  Huron,  where  a Mission  has  been 
established  by  the  Episcopal  Church.  There  are  also 
Roman  Catholics  on  the  Island.  They  are  by  far 


190 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


the  most  numerous  of  the  Missionaries  among  the 
Ojihways. 

The  Methodists  have  established  their  Missions  at  the 
Northwest  end  of  Lake  Superior. 

Fort  William  is  one  of  the  fortresses  of  the  Hudson 
Bay  Company.  One  of  the  young  men  who  was  edu- 
cated in  Cazenovia,  is  now  the  principal  minister  there. 
His  name  is  Henry  Steinhaux,  and  he  is  doing  a good 
work  in  teaching  school  and  acting  in  the  capacity  of 
Missionary  to  the  Indians  of  that  place. 

Norway  House  is  another  place  in  the  interior  of  the 
country,  towards  the  water  of  the  Red  River,  where 
there  is  a Mission.  Peter  Jacobs  is  the  most  efficient 
laborer  in  that  country.  He  has  been  for  a long  time 
very  zealously  engaged  in  teaching  his  less  fortunate 
brethren  the  first  rudiments  of  education. 

A very  amusing  story  is  told  of  Peter  Jacobs,  the  in- 
cidents of  which  occurred  at  a camp  meeting  near  Bel- 
ville,  about  the  year  1828. 

I must  mention  that,  during  tlie  previous  summer, 
several  hundred  had  embraced  Christianity.  Peter  atten- 
ded the  meeting  following  this  conversion.  The  white 
people  also  attended  the  meeting,  and  so  universal  was 
the  diffusion  of  the  Good  Spirit,  that  the  pale  face  and 
the  red  man  knelt  together  in  prayer  to  that  Great  Being 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION.  • 19l! 

who  makes  no  distinction,  but  between  good  and  evil. 
The  ground  was  covered  with  people  in  a devotional 
attitude.  Peter  knelt  with  them.  His  companions 
were  in  ecstacies  with  the  presence  of  Divine  favor. — 
Peter  soon  learned  the  fact  that  the  Great  Spirit  despis- 
ed not  even  the  trembling  prayer  of  the  forest  child. 

Springing  upon  his  feet  in  an  instant,  he  mounted 
one  of  the  benches,  and  waved  his  hand  to  the  vast 
concourse  of  people.  He  then  spoke  rapidly,  eloquently, 
and  feelingly,  as  follows  : 

“ The  Great  Spirit  has  blest  Peter  the  orphan  boy. — 
He  no  tell  lies.  He  says  He  love  me.  That  good  man 
say,  (pointing  to  the  preacher,)  Jesus  died  for  every  one. 
How  happy,  happy  now  ! My  father,  mother,  gone  ; 
they  drank  fire-water,  (turning  to  some  of  the  traders, 
who  were  at  this  moment  as  attentive  as  the  rest).  You 
did  not  give  the  Indian  blessed  Bible  ; you  cheated  poor 
Indian  for  his  furs.  You  kill  my  people.  What  will 
the  Great  Spirit  say  when  he  come  ? He  will  tell  you 
— ‘ You  give  poor  Indian  fire-water : you  kept  the  Bible 
from  poor  Indian,  long,  long  time.  You  hig  rascal  go 
to  HelV  That  is  what  he  will  say  to  you.” 

Peter  sat  down,  while  the  biggest  tradesman  trembled 
in  his  shoes. 

The  meeting  was  held  near  the  Bay  of  Quinte,  in 


192 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Adolphustown,  The  above  incident  in  Peter’s  early 
experience,  was  related  to  me  by  a gentleman,  now  liv- 
ing near  the  place. 

Lately  Peter  went  to  England,  and  created  consider- 
able interest  in  behalf  of  the  Northwest  Indians,  among 
whom  he  is  now  laboring. 

The  Wesleyan  Methodist  Missions  in  the  interior,  are 
now  altogether  supported  by  the  Hudson  Bay  Company. 
It  has  become  a well  known  fact,  that,  when  the  Indians 
are  under  the  influence  of  Christian  Missionaries,  the 
Company  have  less  trouble  with  individuals  in  the 
course  of  trade.  Indians  thus  instructed,  are  becoming 
good  farmers  and  support  themselves  by  labor. 

The  Hudson  Bay  Company  discountenance  the  use 
of  fire-water  in  all  the  coimtry  they  occupy.  But  re- 
cently, during  the  mining  operations  on  the  North  shore 
of  Lake  Superior,  liquor  has  been  introduced. 

The  Indian  population  of  Canada  have  ever  mani- 
fested a strong  friendly  feeling  towards  the  British  gov- 
ernment. 

In  former  years,  the  American  governors  were  more 
kindly  disposed  to  us  than  they  have  been  of  late,  yet 
the  name  of  “ Children”  is  applied  tons.  The  govern- 
ment and  its  agents  style  us,  “ My  Children.”  The 
Indians  are  of  age — and  believe  they  can  think  and  act 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


193 


for  themselves.  The  term,  “ My  Children,^’  comes  with 
an  ill  grace  from  those  who  seem  bent  on  driving  them 
from  their  fathers’  house. 

As  yet,  the  Ojibway  Nation  in  Canada  West 
have  not  to  my  knowledge  received  any  encouragement 
pecmiiarily  from  the  government  for  education.  What 
they  have  attained  has  been  received  by  their  own  ef- 
forts. I remember  several  years  ago  of  being  sent  to 
the  then  Governor  of  the  Province,  in  Montreal,  for  aid 
in  our  school.  All  that  we  received  was  a nod — which 
our  gracious  father  deigned  to  give. 

It  is  more  provoking  now  with  us,  since  we  have 
suffered  in  name  from  the  acts  of  the  last  war,  with  the 
British  and  the  Americans.  Our  fathers  fought  for  the 
British  during  these  struggles.  Now,  since  these  are 
passed  we  have  been  left  to  ourselves, — and  until  the 
government  require  our  services,  shall  remain  uncared 
for.  Your  British  subjects  may  say,  ^ Do  we  not  give 
you  blankets,  and  clothe  you  and  your  children  V But 
what  amount  of  land  has  not  our  people  given  to  ther 
government  since  they  became  so  poor  ? 

And  if  the  benevolent  of  the  United  States  had  not 
given  us  education,  many  of  us  would  have  been  still 
wandering  in  the  woods  of  Canada  without  the  means 
of  religious  education.  We  don’t  want  merely  blankets 


194 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


to  coYer  the  body, — ^we  want  Light ! We  want  Edu- 
cation ! 

For  several  years  I have  been  denied  receiving  any 
presents  from  the  British  government, — consisting  of  a 
blanket,  a shirt,  and  leggins — ^because  I had  been  too 
much  with  the  Americans^  the  enemies  of  the  British 
government.  I would  rather  never  see  a blanket  again. 
Think  how  ‘ small  for  a man  to  be  bought  with  a 
blanket ! 

The  whole  of  the  Indian  population  of  Canada  West 
is  improving  rapidly.  The  bands  are  uniting,  and  will 
not  in  future  be  so  isolated  as  formerly. 

The  writer  in  1844  and  1845,  endeavored  to  convince 
his  brethren  of  many  advantages  they  would  derive 
by  being  in  large  communities.  Through  his  influence 
the  Chiefs  of  Owen’s  Sound,  and  Sahageeng,  made  their 
ofier  to  the  scattered  bands  of  Indians  throughout  the 
Western  country. 

At  the  General  Council,  to  which  allusion  was  made 
in  a previous  chapter,  it  was  suggested  that  a meeting 
of  the  small  villages  be  made  at  the  following  places — 
Rice  Lake,  in  New  Castle  District;  in  Muncytown, 
London  District ; and  in  Owen’s  Sound  Bay,  in  the 
Eastern  part  of  Lake  Huron. 

This  meeting  the  Indians  have  already  commenced. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


195 


Several  villar^es  have  been  abandoned,  and  their  tenants 
departed  to  the  places  above  specified. 

In  the  winter  seasons  sleigh  rides  are  popular,  and 
visits  to  neighboring  tribes,  in  large  bodies,  are  quite 
frequent. 

Christmas  and  Nftw  Year’s  dinners  are,  with  the  Ojib- 
ways,  occasions  of  much  merriment. 

The  village  of  Alnwich  is  one  side  of  the  Lake,  and 
that  of  Rice  Lake  opposite.  The  distance  between 
them  is  about  seven  miles.  Chief  John  Sandy  orders 
his  wan’iors  to  give  a dinner  to  the  other  tribe  on  Christ- 
mas— and  they  in  return  give  a dinner  to  Sandy’s  tribe 
on  New  Year’s  day.  ♦ 

In  1848,  I was  present,  at  my  father’s  village.  Rice 
Lake,  when  one  of  these  dinners  took  place.  In  point 
of  order,  social  mirth,  and  real  enjoyment,  it  was  equal 
to  any  aldermanic  festivity  among  the  whites. 


CHAPTER  XV. 


THE  EARLY  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  NORTHWEST THE 

FIRST  TRADERS  AND  ADVENTURERS. 

The  early  discovery  of  the  Northwest  has  been  a 
subject  of  considerable  interest — and  as  there  is  much 
valuable  information  in  the  following,  which  we  take 
from  one  of  the  Minesota  Territory  papers,  prepared  by 
the  Rev.  Edward  D.  Neill,  the  research  which  is  here 
found  will  be  apparent.  If  the  missionary  field  was 
blessed  with  more  such  men,  it  would  augment  its  in- 
terests in  the  mind  of  the  literary  world.  It  is  to  be 
hoped  that  he  will  continue  to  give  such  information 
from  time  to  time  for  the  general  good. 

“ The  journals  of  the  first  missionaries  to  the  Hurons 
were  perused  with  like  enthusiasm  by  the  kings,  queens, 
statesmen,  merchants,  artizans,  and  peasants  of  Papal 
Europe.  The  lovers  of  romance  wept  freely  over  the 
sufierings  of  the  priests,  and  the  reported  conversion  of 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


197 


SO  many  to  the  faith.  The  enterprizing  merchant 
encouraged  the  missions  that  were  opening  so  many 
new  avenues  of  trade. 

Before  proceeding  to  a sketch  of  the  explorers  and 
explorations  in  Minesota  during  the  seventeenth  century, 
let  us  rapidly  glance  at  the  progress  of  discovery  in  the 
countries  adjacent.  As  early  as  1634,  the  Indians  had 
learned  to  bring  their  furs  to  (Quebec,  and  received 
European  manufactures  in  exchange.  In  September  of 
that  year,  two  priests,  Brebosuf  and  Daniel,  determined, 
to  accompany  a party  of  Hurons  to  their  forest  home, 
and  teach  them  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion. 
They  were  the  first  Europeans  that  erected  a house  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Lake  Huron. 

Seven  years  after,  a bark  canoe,  containing  priests  of 
the  same  order,  passed  through  the  river  Ottawa,  and 
coasted  along  the  shores  of  Lake  Huron,  to  visit,  by  in- 
vitation, the  Ojibways,  at  the  outlet  of  Lake  Superior. 
After  a voyage  of  seventeen  days,  they  arrived  at  the 
Falls  of  St.  Mary,  where  they  found  assembled  two 
thousand  of  that  tribe,  who  now  dwell  in  the  North- 
eastern  portion  of  our  Territory. 

While  here,  they  obtained  much  information,  calcula- 
ted to  inflame  the  zeal  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  their 
patrons  in  Europe.  Here,  for  the  first  time,  civilized 


198 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


man  learned  that  the  Nation  of  Dakotas,  amid  whose 
lodges  we  reside,  was  in  existence.  The  Ojibways  in- 
formed the  missionaries  that  the  Dakotas  lived  eighteen 
days’  journey  farther  to  the  West. 

Thus,  says  Brancroft,  in  his  eloquent  chapter  on 
Jesuit  Missions,  ‘ did  the  religious  zeal  of  the  French, 
bear  the  cross  to  the  hanks  of  the  St.  Mary,  and  the 
confines  of  Lake  Superior,  and  look  wistfully  toward 
the  home  of  the  Sioux  in  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi, 
five  years  before  the  apostle  Eliot  had  addressed  the 
tribe  of  Indians  that  dwelt  within  six  miles  of  Boston 
Harbor.’ 

Either  accompanying  the  missionary,  devoted  to  a 
life  of  poverty,  or  in  his  immediate  rear,  followed  the 
trader,  devoted  to  a life  of  gain ; so  that  a chapel  was 
hardly  surmounted  with  a cross,  before  a trading  house 
stood  by  its  side.  In  the  year  1654,  two  adventurous 
young  men,  connected  with  the  fur  trade,  followed  a 
party  of  Indians  in  their  hunting  excursions  for  two 
years,  and  were  probably  the  first  white  men  that  ever 
penetrated  the  Dakota  country. 

Upon  their  return  to  Quebec,  they  gave  such  glowing 
accounts  of  the  lands  they  had  seen,  the  lakes  they  had 
crossed,  the  Nations  they  had  become  acquainted  with, 
among  whom  were  the  Sioux  or  Dakotas,  that  both 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


199 


trader  and  ecclesiastic  burned  with  desire  to  go  up  and 
possess  the  land.  Even  the  Bishop  of  (Quebec  was 
ready  to  be  the  pioneer  in  planting  the  symbol  of  his 
faith  among  the  newly  discovered  tribes.  But  it  was 
at  length  decided  that  the  aged  Mesnard,  who  had  ob- 
tained dearly  purchased  experience  among  the  Indians 
of  Western  New-York,  should  carry  the  religion  of 
Rome  to  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior.  With  an  ardor 
that  every  one  must  admire,  he  loitered  not  after  his 
appointment,  but  leaving  the  pleasant  society  of  his 
associates,  he  pushed  onward  to  his  field  of  labor,  to  use 
his  own  language,  trusting  ‘ in  the  Providence  which 
feeds  the  little  birds  of  the  desert,  and  clothes  the  wild 
flowers  of  the  forest,’  and  expecting  that  his  friends 
would  shortly  add  him  ‘ to  the  memento  of  deaths.’ 

Hoping  against  hope,  he  reached  the  shores  of  Supe- 
rior in  safety.  After  residing  on  the  Southern  shore  of 
the  Lake  about  eight  months,  he  started  on  a journey 
for  the  Bay  of  Che-goi-me-gon.  But  one  person  accom- 
panied him,  and  while  his  companion  was  making,  as 
it  is  supposed,  what  is  called  the  Keweena  Portage, 
Mesnard  was  lost  in  the  forest.  Wliether  he  died  from 
starvation,  exposure,  or  the  tomahawk,  has  never  been 
discovered.  There  is  a tradition  that  his  cassock  and 
prayer  book  were  kept  as  amulets  for  many  years  by 


200 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


the  Dakotas.  The  melancholy  disappearance  of  this 
aged  soldier  of  the  church,  did  not  deter  Claude  Allouez, 
also  a Jesuit,  from  visiting  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior, 
in  the  year  1665. 

At  that  early  date,  there  were  rumors  that  there  was 
a large  mass  of  copper  on  the  Southern  shore,  but  his 
search  for  it  was  unavailing.  Pushing  beyond  Ontan- 
agon,  the  adventurous  man  did  not  stop  until  he  reach- 
ed the  Island  of  La  Pointe,  the  ancient  residence  of  the 
Ojibways,  who  were  then  as  often  times  now,  planning 
a war  party  against  their  enemies,  the  Dakotas.  He 
then  must  be  regarded  as  the  first  white  man  of  whom 
we  have  authentic  account,  who  first  trod  the  soil  on 
the  confines  of  Minesota.  According  to  the  Ojibway 
tradition,  the  first  white  men  at  La  Pointe  were  traders, 
who  had  been  confined  by  the  ice,  and  were  found  in  a 
starving  condition,  eating  their  cloth  and  blankets.  Yet, 
that  priests  were  here  at  a very  early  period,  is  very 
certain  from  the  fact  that  a small  silver  crucifix  of 
antique  workmanship,  has  been  lately  ploughed  up  in 
that  vicinity.  At  that  period  the  territory  of  the  Dakotas 
extended  quite  to  the  shores  of  Superior  ; and  Allouez 
in  his  intercourse  with  them,  was  the  first  to  learn  of 
the  existence  of  a great  river  which  he  calls  the  ‘ Messipi.’ 

During  his  two  years  residence  in  the  Northwest,  he 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


201 


founded  the  Mission  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  passed  his 
time  in  teaching  the  Ojihways  the  ‘ Pater  Noster’  and 
‘Ave  Maria  in  endeavoring  to  awaken  their  slumber- 
ing consciences  hy  pictures  of  hell  and  the  judgment 
day,  and  in  obtaining  infoimation  from  the  Sioux  or 
Dakota  Nation. 

His  labors  were  so  successful,  that  he  returned  to 
(Quebec  to  solicit  assistants,  but  his  heart  remained  with 
the  Ojihways,  and  in  two  days  he  was  on  his  return 
route,  accompanied  by  a fellow-laborer,  named  Nicolas. 

In  1668  he  was  cheered  by  the  arrival  of  two  others, 
named  Dahlon  and  Marquette,  the  latter  of  whom  was 
destined  to  become  known  by  posterity. 

Marquette,  during  his  missionary  tours  in  the  vicinity 
of  Lake  Superior,  had  heard  so  much  of  the  ^ great  river 
Messipi,’  that  he  determined  to  take  the  first  favorable 
opportunity  to  discover  it. 

On  the  10th  of  July,  1673,  in  company  with  a French 
Envoy,  and  five  others,  they  left  the  Mission  at  Green 
Bay,  ascended  the  Fox  River,  made  a portage,  and  de- 
scended the  W isconsin.  After  paddling  the  birch  canoes 
for  seven  days,  without  meeting  man  or  beast,  they 
reached  its  mouth  and  floated  on  the  bosom  of  the 
‘ Father  of  Waters.’  Fearing  nothing,  excited  by  the 
very  danger  of  the  adventure, 


202 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


' Day  after  day  they  glided  adown  the  turbulent  river ; 

Night  after  night,  by  their  blazing  fires,  encamped  on  its  borders. 
Now  through  rushing  chutes,  among  green  islands  where  plume-like 
Cotton-trees  nodded  their  shadowy  crests,  they  swept  with  the  current, 
Then  emerged  into  broad  lagoons,  where  silvery  sand-bars 
Lay  in  the  stream,  and  along  the  rippling  waves  of  their  margin, 
Shining  with  snow-white  plumes,  large  flocks  of  pelicans  waded. 
They  were  approaching  the  region  where  reigns  perpetual  summer.* 

Nor  did  they  cease  descending,  until  they  left  the 
Wisconsin  eleven  hundred  miles  above  them.  Return- 
ing by  the  way  of  the  Illinois  river  to  Chicago,  they 
proceeded  by  Lake  Michigan  to  Green  Bay,  where  they 
arrived  about  the  last  of  September.  This  voyage  ex- 
cited much  conversation  and  speculation,  in  old  as  w-ell 
as  new  France. 

At  this  time  there  dwelt  in  Canada,  a native  of  Rouen, 
named  La  Salle,  who  not  only  possessed  an  adventu- 
rous disposition,  but  was  also  a man  of  foresight,  deter- 
mination, and  finished  education.  While  a student  at 
a Jesuit  College  in  France,  he  was  distinguished  for  his 
proficiency  in  mathematics. 

At  the  time  of  Marquette’s  return  from  the  Mississ- 
ippi, he  was  living  at  his  trading  post  at*the  junction  of 
the  St.  Lawrence  with  Lake  Ontario,  where  the  town 
of  Kingston  stands.  Around  Fort  Frontenac,  for  that 
was  the  name  of  the  post,  there  were  gathered  a few 
French  families  and  priests. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


203 


The  more  La  Salle  dwelt  upon  the  discovery  of  Mar- 
quette and  Joliet,  the  greater  his  eagerness  to  complete 
what  had  been  commenced,  and  to  discover  what  he 
believed  to  exist,  a short  route  to  China  and  Japan  from 
the  head  waters  of  the  Mississippi.  To  obtain  the 
patronage  of  Louis  XIY.,  he  sailed  for  France,  and  in 
the  year  1678  received  permission  to  make  discoveries 
in  the  Western  part  of  New  France,  to  build  forts 
wherever  they  were  necessary,  and  the  exclusive  right 
to  the  trade  in  Buffalo  skins,  which  were  just  beginning 
to  be  known  and  valued  in  Europe. 

Among  the  priests  at  Frontenac,  was  a native  of 
Flanders,  a Franciscan  of  the  meditative  order,  styled 
Recollect.  From  early  life,  he  evinced  a roving  dispo- 
sition, and  the  stories  of  the  sailors  who  used  to  enter 
the  harbors  of  Calais  and  Dunkirk,  where  he  had  re- 
sided, are  said  to  have  created  a strong  desire  in  him 
to  see  the  new  world. 

His  name  was  Louis  Hennepin  ; vain,  boasting,  and 
ambitious,  he  suffers  by  comparison  with  the  meek,  un- 
ostentatious, and  comparatively  truthful  Marquette. — 
While  La  Salle  was  absent,  the  Franciscan  passed  his 
time  in  missionary  tours  among  the  Iroquois,  and  is 
said  to  have  visited  the  present  capital  of  the  State  of 
New-York.  When  La  Salle  returned  from  France,  he 


204 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


despatched  a small  vessel  to  Niagara  river,  laden  with 
materials  for  building  a ship  suitable  for  navigating  the 
Lakes.  Among  the  passengers  was  Hennepin,  who 
with  eight  others  landed  and  travelled  some-  thirty 
leagues  through  the  woods,  to  hold  a council  with  the 
Senecas,  whose  good  will  they  obtained. 

On  the  20th  of  January,  1679,  La  Salle  joined  the 
party,  encamped  on  the  shores  of  the  Niagara  river,  and 
strained  every  nerve  in  making  preparations  for  a great 
Western  voyage.  In  a week,  a dock  yard  was  not  only 
selected,  but  the  keel  of  a ship  laid.  The  builders  plied 
the  adze  and  the  hammers  vigorously,  though  in  fear 
that  the  Indians  would  apply  the  torch  to  their  work 
and  the  tomahawk  to  their  scalps.  When  they  began 
to  murmur.  Father  Hennepin  began  to  exhort,  and  as 
he  says,  ‘ allay  their  fears.’ 

In  six  months,  the  vessel  was  ready  for  launching. 
It  was  named  the  Griffin,  in  compliment  to  Count  Fron- 
tenac,  the  Governor  of  Canada,  whose  armorial  bearings 
were  adorned  by  two  griffins.  It  was  defended  by  a 
few  guns,  and  ornamented  by  an  eagle  and  a griffin  on 
its  prow. 

By  means  of  ropes,  the  vessel  was  towed  from  the 
Niagara  River  to  Lake  Erie,  much  to  the  astonishment 
of  the  natives.  On  the  7th  of  August,  1679,  La  Salle, 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


205 


Hennepin,  and  some  thirty  others,  entered  the  ship  and 
spread  their  sails  to  the  bree2re.  The  waters  of  Lake 
Erie  bore  the  vessel  most  gallantly,  and  in  three  days 
they  were  within  the  vicinity  of  the  spot,  where  now 
stands  the  city  of  Detroit.  Passing  through  the  Lake, 
which  they  named  St.  Clair,  in  honor  of  one  of  the 
saints  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  they  entered  Lake  Huron. 
Here  they  encoimtered  one  of  those  terrible  storms, which 
even  the  experienced  sailor  of  modern  days  dreads.  All 
but  the  pilot,  who  according  to  Hennepin,  was  destitute 
of  religious  feeling,  began  to  pray  to  the  Patron  Saint, 
Anthony  of  Padua.  But  not  a hair  of  their  heads  was 
injured ; the  waves  at  last  fell  to  sleep,  and  upon  the 
27th  of  the  month  they  safely  moored  in  one  of  the  har- 
bors of  Mackinaw  Island. 

Here  Hennepin,  and  the  other  ecclesiastics,  celebrated 
mass,  and  La  Salle,  wrapped  in  a scarlet  cloak  edged 
with  gold,  visited  the  assembled  Indians.  This  being 
a desirable  point  for  trade  with  the  trites,  a fort  was 
built.  Leaving  Mackinaw,  they  entered  Lake  Michigan, 
and  anchored  at  an  island  at  the  mouth  of  Green  Bay. 
In  two  weeks  time  the  Griffin  was  freighted  with  furs 
to  the  amount  of  twelve  thousand  dollars,  and  sent  back 
to  Niagara,  which  point  she  never  reached,  and  as  it 
was  supposed,  was  wrecked  in  another  storm. 


206 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Leaving  Green  Bay  in  foin  birch  canoes,  La  Salle 
and  his  followers  coasted  along  the  Eastern  boundary 
of  Wisconsin,  and  at  last  pitched  their  tents  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Milwaukie  river.  Fatigued  and  without  a 
supply  of  food,  they  were  much  disheartened  ; but  the 
Indians  in  the  vicinity  proved  friendly,  and  administered 
to  their  wants. 

After  being  exposed  to  many  perils  by  land  and  by 
water,  they  landed  on  the  first  of  November  at  the 
mouth  of  the  river  St.  Joseph  in  Michigan.  Late  in 
the  season  they  started  from  thence  for  the  Illinois  river; 
but  before  they  reached  that  stream,  provisions  again 
grew  scarce.  In  their  extremity.  Providence  assisted ; 
for,  says  Hennepin,  a stray  Buffalo  was  found  sticking 
fast  in  a marsh,  which  served  for  food.  After  a journey 
of  three  hundred  miles,  they  at  last  reached  the  Illinois, 
and  descended  to  an  Indian  village  situated  near  the 
present  town  of  Ottawa.  Winter  being  at  hand,  the 
inhabitants  were  on  their  annual  hunt ; but  the  travel- 
lers, pressed  with  hunger,  could  not  refrain  from  help- 
ing themselves  to  some  of  the  corn. 

They  continued  to  proceed  down  the  river,  until  the 
first  of  January,  1680,  when  they  halted,  and  had  a 
new  year’s  celebration,  consisting  of  religious  services 
by  Hennepin  and  other  priests. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


207 


The  ceremonies  being  over,  they  entered  Lake  Peoria, 
at  the  lower  end  of  which  they  discovered  an  encamp- 
ment of  Indians.  After  the  red  men  had  recovered 
from  their  astonishment,  they  invited  the  strangers  to 
their  cabins,  and  passed  the  day  in  feasting. 

La  Salle  told  them  that  he  had  come  to  impart  a 
Imowledge  of  the  true  God,  and  to  supply  them  with 
fire  arms,  in  the  place  of  the  awkward  weapons  they 
had  been  accustomed  to  use.  The  night  after  he  made 
this  speech,  a Chief  of  a tribe  residing  on  Fox  River, 
stole  into  the  camp,  and  calling  the  Chiefs  together,  told 
them  that  he  had  been  informed  that  the  Frenchmen 
were  allied  with  their  old  enemies,  the  Iroquois.  This 
false  intelligence  communicated  to  the  Indians  by  La 
Salle’s  enemies,  produced  much  consternation.  The 
next  morning,  in  the  place  of  cordiality,  the  travellers 
found  only  coldness  and  suspicion.  The  commander 
inquired  the  cause  of  the  sudden  change,  and  he  was 
then  told  the  whole  tale.  A man  of  uncommon  tact 
and  address,  he  soon  regained  their  confidence.  He 
now  began  to  inquire  about  the  Mississippi,  and  spoke 
of  his  plan  of  building  a boat,  after  the  white  man’s 
fashion,  to  sail  upon  that  stream.  The  principal  men 
of  the  camp  did  not  fully  approve  of  his  plan,  and  they 
attempted  to  dissuade  him,  by  saying,  ‘ that  the  banks 


208 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


of  the  Mississippi  were  inhabited  hy  a gigantic  race  of 
men,  who  killed  all  travellers  ; that  it  was  filled  with 
crocodiles,  serpents  and  monsters,  as  well  as  falls  and 
rapids,  and  that  there  was  a dreadful* whirlpool  at  its 
mouth.’ 

The  discernment  of  La  Salle  convinced  him  that  this 
was  what  we  vulgarly  term  a ‘ hoax,’  and  he  arose  and 
told  the  spokesman,  that  his  sayings  were  stamped  with 
improbability.  These  stories,  however,  caused  six  of 
the  company  to  desert  and  others  to  complain. 

As  it  was  now  too  cold  to  travel  with  comfort,  the 
erection  of  a fort  was  commenced  not  far  distant  from 
the  town  of  Peoria 

Here,  in  the  interior  of  the  North  American  Continent, 
two  years  before  the  Cluaker  Penn  purchased  of  the  In- 
dians the  spot  where  the  city  of  Philadelphia  now 
stands,  might  he  heard  the  sound  of  the  saw,  the  bloAV- 
ing  of  the  forge,  the  stroke  of  the  sledge,  and  the  ring 
of  the  anvil.  In  less  than  six  weeks,  and  in  the  midst 
of  winter,  this  exploring  hand  had  erected  a log  fort, 
which  they  named  Crevecoeur,  and  the  hull  of  a vessel 
42  feet  long  and  12  broad,  which  was  to  have  been  em- 
ployed in  navigating  the  Mississippi.  The  necessary 
cordage  and  rigging  being  absent,  the  ship  could  not  be 
completed. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


209 


But  La  Salle  was  still  intent  upon  discovering  a short 
route  to  the  ‘ wealth  of  Ormus  and  of  Ind,’  and  therefore 
ordered  Father  Hennepin  to  proceed  on  a voyage  to  the 
sources  of  the  Mississippi. 

This  was  not  unwelcome  intelligence  to  the  forward 
Franciscan  ; and  on  the  last  day  of  February,  1680, 
with  one  canoe  laden  with  goods,  and  two  companies, 
Picard  du  Gay  and  Michel  Ako,  he  began  his  long  and 
dangerous  journey. 

In  seven  days  he  had  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Illi- 
nois ; but  on  account  of  the  floating  ice,  he  had  to  wait 
some  time  before  he  could  ascend  the  ‘ Meschasipi,’  as 
he  termed  the  river  upon  the  banks  of  which  we  dwell. 
By  the  11th  of  April,  he  had  paddled  as  far  as  the  Wis- 
consin river,  in  the  vicinity  of  which  he  met  a flotilla 
of  canoes,  filled  with  Issati  or  Dakota  Indians,  call^ 
Issati  or  Issanti,  as  it  is  supposed,  after ' their  ’ &cient 
residence  at  Mille  Lac.  With  them  he  passed  through 
the  Lac  des  Pleurs,  shortly  after  called  Pepin,  which 
narne  it  still  retains,  which  he  thus  describes.  ‘ About 
thirty  leagues  above  Black  River,  we  fomid  the  Lake  of 
Tears,  which  we  named  so,  because  the  savages  who 
took  us,  as  it  will  be  hereafter  related,  consulted  in  this 
place  what  they  should  do  with  their  prisoners,  and 
those  who  were  for  murdering  cried  all  night  upon  us, 


210 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


to  oblige  by  their  tears,  w-  eir  companions  to  consent  to 
our  death.  This  lake  is  formed  by  the  “ Meschasipi,” 
and  may  be  seven  leagues  long  and  five  broad.’ 

As  the  Dakotas  were  generally  very  kind  in  the  treat- 
ment of  their  white  captives,  very  little  credence  can  be 
given  to  the  tale  of  the  Father’s  captivity. 

After  nineteen  days’  travel  vnth  the  Indians,  he  dis- 
covered a cataract,  which  he  says  ‘ indeed  of  itself  is 
terrible,  and  hath  something  very  astonishing.’  He  re- 
ported the  falls  to  be  sixty  feet  in  height,  which  is  quite 
moderate  for  the  man  who  published  those  at  Niagara 
to  be  six  hundred  feet.  Near  the  cataract  was  a bear- 
skin upon  a pole,  a sort  of  oblation  to  the  spirit  in  the 
waters. 

After  carving  the  cross  and  the  arms  of  France  on  a 
tree,  and  calling  them  after  the  Patron  Saint  of  the  ex- 
pedition, the  eloquent  divine,  Anthony  of  Padua,  he 
abandoned  his  canoe  and  journeyed  by  land  to  the  resi- 
dence of  the  Indians,  on  a stream,  which,  in  honor  of 
the  foimder  of  his  order,  he  called  St.  Francis.*  Their 
manner  of  welcoming  a stranger  at  that  time,  seems  to 
have  been  very  peculiar.  Says  Hennepin,  ^ at  the  entry 
of  the  Chiefs  cabin,  who  had  adopted  me,  one  of  the 
barbarians,  who  seemed  to  be  very  old,  presented  me 


♦Now  called  Elk  River. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


211 


with  a pipe  to  smoke,  and  weeping  over  me  all  the 
while  with  abundance  of  tears,  rubbed  both  my  hands 
and  my  head.  This  was  to  show  how  concerned  he 
was  to  see  me  so  harrassed  and  fatigued.  And  indeed 
I had  often  need  enough  of  two  men  to  support  me, 
when  I was  up,  or  raise  me  when  I was  down.  There 
was  a bear’s  skin  before  the  fire,  upon  which  the  young- 
est boy  of  the  cabin  caused  me  to  lie  down,  and  then 
with  the  grease  of  wild-cats,  anointed  my  thighs,  legs, 
and  soles  of  my  feet.’ 

The  first  of  white  men  then,  who  looked  upon  the 
Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  was  not  a Jesuit,  as  Steinmetz, 
misled  by  Kip’s  eloquent  preface  to  the  ‘ early  Jesuit 
Missions  in  North  America,’  asserts  ; but  a Franciscan 
of  the  Recollect  branch. 

While  Hennepin  was  dwelling  upon  the  banks  of  the 
St.  Francis,  he  was  agreeably  surprised  by  the  arrival 
of  a party  of  French  traders  from  Lake  Superior,  under 
the  direction  of  a Sieur  de  Luth,  and  probably  among 
the  first  who  had  ever  penetrated  so  far  into  the  interior 
of  the  Dakota  country.  About  the  last  of  September, 
1680,  the  whites  left  the  Indian  village,  and  descending 
the  Mississippi  as  far  as  the  Wisconsin,  they  proceeded 
by  way  of  that  stream,  and  Green  Bay,  to  Quebec. — 
Hennepin  did  not  tarry  long  in  that  city,  but  went  to 


212 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


France,  and  in  1683,  published  a book  of  travels  under 
the  title  of  ‘ A Description  of  Louisiana,’  as  all  of  the 
Valley  of  the  Mississippi  was  then  called. 

Had  the  restless  Franciscan  remained  contented  with 
the  reputation  acquired  by  the  discovery  of  the  Falls  of 
St.  Anthony,  posterity  would  have  viewed  his  exagger- 
ations and  misstatements  with  a kindly  eye,  and  re- 
membered his  name  with  pleasure. 

But  in  an  evil  hour,  he  was  tempted  to  claim  the 
honor  of  not  only  discovering  the  source,  but  the  mouth 
of  the  Mississippi ; and  to  sustain  the  claim,  he  contra- 
dicted what  he  had  previously  asserted,  and  committed 
one  of  the  meanest  plagiarisnas  on  record.  After  the 
renowned  La  Salle  had  met  an  untimely  end,  by  the 
hand  of  a conspirator.  La  Clercq  published  the  letters 
of  Fathers  Zenobe  and  Anastase,  giving  a description 
of  the  scenery  and  productions  of  the  lower  Mississippi. 
Hennepin,  with  the  aid  of  these  missionary  letters,  and 
a fertile  imagination,  prepared  a book  entitled  ‘ New 
Discovery  of  a vast  Country  situated  in  America,  be- 
tween New  Mexico  and  the  Frozen  Ocean.’  In  this  he 
is  daring  enough  to  state,  that  he  paddled  a canoe  with 
the  aid  of  two  men,  from  the  Illinois  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  and  back,  more  than  two  thousand  five  hun- 
dred miles,  in  forty-nine  days. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


213 


Anticipating  the  query  from  some  inquisitive  French- 
man, ‘ why  did  you  not  say  something  about  the  dis- 
covery of  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi,  in  your  first 
work,  published  more  than  ten  years  since  V he  frames 
a most  awkward  and  insufficient  apology.  After  stating 
that  La  Salle  was  envious  and  jealous  of  him,  he  re- 
marks that  he  was  also  unfriendly,  because  during  his 
first  voyage  to  France,  when  a gay  company  of  young 
women  commenced  dancing  upon  the  deck  of  the  ship, 
he  had  reprimanded  them  for  their  gaiety  ; La  Salle, 
who  was  a fellow  passenger,  interposed  and  said  there 
was  no  harm  in  dancing,  and  that  the  Franciscan  had 
overstepped  the  bounds  of  his  authority.  Warm  words 
ensued,  and  we  are  called  upon  to  believe  that  by  this 
frivolous  incident,  a root  of  bitterness  was  planted  in 
his  bosom  which  was  never  eradicated. 

None  of  his  excuses  sustained  Hennepin’s  reputation ; 
and  shortly  after  we  find  him,  in  his  old  age,  leaving 
France.  Crossing  the  Channel,  he  published  in  Lon- 
don another  edition  of  his  real  and  fictitious  discoveries 
in  the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  staunch  Romanist 
as  he  professed  to  be,  entered  into  the  pay  of  England’s 
Protestant  King,  William  III.,  who  was  anxious  to  be 
the  rival  of  France  in  colonizing  the  banks  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, and  willing  ^ to  leap  over  twenty  stumbling 
blocks  rather  than  not  effect  it.’ 


214 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


As  a town  in  the  State  of  Illinois,  has  already  taken 
the  name  of  Hennepin,  which  would  have  been  so  ap- 
propriate for  our  neighboring  and  beautiful  village  of 
St.  Anthony,  we  take  leave  of  the  discoverer  of  those 
picturesque  Falls,  which  will  always  render  that  town 
equally  attractive  to  the  eye  of  the  poet  and  capitalist, 
by  suggesting,  that  the  island  which  divides  the  ‘laugh- 
ing waters,’*  he  called  Hennepin,  who  though,  as  Ban- 
croft says,  ‘ a boastful  liar,’  was  nevertheless  a ‘ daring 
discover.’ 

Eight  years  after  Hennepin  announced  the  discovery 
of  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony  to  his  friends  in  Canada, 
another  exploration  of  the  Yalley  of  the  Upper  Missis- 
sippi was  undertaken  by  Baron  Lahontan.  About  the 
last  of  September,  1688,  with  a large  party  of  French 
and  Indians,  he  departed  with  his  heavily  laden  canoes 
from  the  fort  at  Mackinaw,  and  proceeded  by  the  usual 
and  natural  route  by  Green  Bay,  Fox  and  Y^isconsin 
Rivers,  to  the  Mississippi,  upon  whose  waters  he  floated 
on  the  23d  of  October.  Ascending  this  stream,  he  says 
fliat  on  the  3d  of  November,  he  entered  into  a river  that 
was  almost  without  a current,  and  at  its  mouth  filled 
with  rushes.  He  remarks  moreover,  that  he  ascended 

* The  Dakota  Indians  call  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  “ Kara/’  from 
Irara,  to  laugh. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


215 


it  for  more  than  five  hundi’ed  miles.  Upon  its  banks 
dwelt  three  Nations  : the  Eokoros,  Essannapes,  and  the 
Gnacsitares.  On  account  of  its  great  length,  having 
been  employed  sixty  days  in  its  ascent,  he  named  it 
Riviere  Longue.  As  there  is  no  stream  in  existence 
that  answers  to  the  description,  many  have  been  inclined 
to  look  upon  the  account  of  Baron  Lahontan,  in  the 
same  light  as  they  view  the  stories  of  Baron  Munchau- 
sen. Others,  more  credulous,  have  credited  him  with 
the  discovery  of  the  Minesota  or  Saint  Pierre  River. — 
Nicollet  supposes  that  the  Riviere  Longue  of  Lahontan 
was  Cannon  River,  which  enters  the  Mississippi  near 
the  head  of  Lake  Pepin,  and  that  this  stream  was  then 
an  outlet  of  the  Minesota.  A reference  to  the  map, 
shows  that  there  is  but  a short  distance  between  the 
sources  of  Cannon  River,  and  the  Le  Suein  and  other 
tributaries  of  the  Mankato  or  Blue  Earth  Rivers. 

Bradford  in  his  ‘ Notes  on  the  North  West,’  agrees 
with  Nicollet.  He  remarks — ^ there  is  very  clear  evi- 
dence, from  geological  indications,  that  the  whole  Upper 
Mississippi  was  at  one  time  submerged ; and  it  is  highly 
probable,  that  in  the  gradual  subsidence  of  the  waters 
which  may  not  have  taken  place  in  1690  or  1700,  to 
the  extent  it  has  now  attained,  a great  lake  may  have 
covered  all  that  area. 


216 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


The  supposition  that  he  passed  through  Cannon  River 
is  not  improbable.  The  sources  of  Cannon  River  are 
within  four  or  five  miles  of  an  Eastern  branch  of  Blue 
Earth  River,  and  the  intervening  ground  is  a perfect 
level.  The  communication  may  at  the  time  of  the  voy- 
age have  been  complete,  or  been  made  so  by  a freshet, 
and  he  would  thus  have  passed  through  the  Blue  Earth 
into  St.  Peter’s  River.* 

Keating  supposed  that  the  Hoka  or  Root  River,  was 
the  one  referred  to  by  Lahontan,  and  remarks,  ‘ it  is 
impossible  to  read  the  Baron  Lahontan’s  account  of 
this  river,  without  being  convinced  that  the  greater  partj 
if  not  the  whole  of  it,  is  a deception.’  When  doctors 
disagree,  it  would  be  vain  for  us  to  attempt  to  decide. 


* ‘ Having  procured  a copy  of  Lahontan's  book,  in  which  there  is  a 
roughly  made  map  of  his  Long  River,  I was  struck  with  the  resem- 
blance of  its  course  as  laid  down,  with  that  of  Cannon  River,  which 
I had  previously  sketched  in  my  own  field  book.  I soon  convinced 
myself  that  the  principal  statements  of  the  Baron  in  reference  to  the 
country,  and  the  few  details  he  gives  of  the  physical  character  of  the 
river,  coincide  remarkably  with  what  I had  laid  down,  as  belonging 
to  Cannon  River.’ 

Thus  the  lakes  and  swamps  corresponded : traces  of  Indian  villages 
mentioned  by  him  might  be  found  in  the  growth  of  a wild  grass  that 
propagates  itself  around  all  old  Indian  settlements.  His  account  of 
the  mouth  of  the  river  is  particularly  accurate.  ‘We  entered  the 
mouth  of  this  Long  River,  which  is  a sort  of  large  lake  filled  with 
cane  brakes,  in  the  midst  of  which  we  discovered  a narrow  channel, 
which  we  followed  up.’ — (Nicolett’s  Report. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


217 


Lahontan  having  navigated  the  streams  in  this  region, 
(perhaps  the  St.  Peter’s  River,)  descended  the  Mississippi 
as  far  as  the  junction  of  the  Ohio. 

Upon  his  return,  he  stopped  at  Fort  Crevecoeur,  on  the 
Illinois,  the  post  from  which  Hennepin  had  departed  in 
1680,  on  his  exploring  tom*  to  the  sources  of  the  Missis- 
sippi. 

Though  La  Salle  had  been  cruelly  murdered  by  a 
member  of  his  exploring  party,  his  friend,  Coimt  Fronte- 
nac,  the  Governor  of  Canada,  continued  to  prosecute  with 
vigor,  discoveries,  and  the  establishment  of  commercial 
relations  with  the  Indian  tribes  in  the  Mississippi  valley. 

In  1695,  he  deputed  a Monsieur  Le  Sueur,  to  build  a 
fort  on  an  island  in  the  Mississippi,  in  order  that  peace- 
ful relations  might  be  maintained  with  the  Ojibways  and 
Dakotas.  Returning  to  Montreal,  a Chief  from  each  of 
these  then,  as  now  warlike  tribes,  accompanied  him. 
While  in  that  city,  the  Dakota  Chief,  the  first  that  had 
ever  been  there,  with  much  ceremony,  presented  to  the 
Governor  as  many  arrows  as  his  Nation  had  villages,  and 
entreated  that  his  tribe  might  enjoy  the  same  privileges 
of  trade  as  other  Indian  Nations. 

Le  Sueur  brought  back  the  news,  that  there  were 
mines  of  lead  and  copper  in  the  Sioux  country,  and  has- 
tened to  France  to  lay  the  information  before  Louis  XIV. 


218 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Entirely  successful  in  his  application  for  a grant  to 
work  the  mines,  he  left  Europe  in  1697  ; but  just  as  he 
came  in  sight  of  Newfoundland,  the  ship  in  which  he 
was  sailing,  was  captured  by  the  British,  and  the  pas- 
sengers carried  as  captives  to  Portsmouth.  The  next 
year  he  was  released,  and  returned  to  Paris.  Receiving 
a fresh  patent,  he  started  anew  to  explore  the  mines, 
believed  to  be  not  many  miles  distant  from  the  spot  on 
which  we  dwell.  After  he  arrived  in  Canada,  it  was 
impossible  for  him  to  execute  his  plans,  and  he  returned 
a third  time  to  the  mother  country. 

The  commencement  of  the  year  1699,  found  a distin- 
guished Canadian  in  the  naval  service  of  the  French 
Government.  His  name  was  Iberville,  and  with  several 
ships  and  a company  of  colonists,  he  went  forth  to  estab- 
lish a settlement  on  the  Mississippi.  They  built  a fort 
eighty  miles  Northeast  of  New  Orleans,  and  here  in 
1700  we  find  Le  Sueur,  who  appears  to  have  possessed 
indomitable  perseverance. 

By  the  order  of  Iberville,  Le  Sueur,  with  a company 
of  ninety  men,  proceeded  to  explore  the  mines  in  the 
Dakota  coimtry,  of  which  he  had  given  an  account  five 
years  before.  On  the  first  of  September,  1700,  he  had 
reached  the  mouth  of  the  Wisconsin.  Fourteen  days 
after  this,  he  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  Chippewa,  on  a 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


219 


branch  of  which  he  had  said  he  had  discovered  a lump 
of  copper  weighing  sixty  pounds.  Passing  through  Lac 
des  Pleurs,  which  at  that  early  date  had  begun  to  be 
called  Lake  Pepin,  he  reached,  on  the  16th  of  Septem- 
ber, the  mouth  of  a river,  where  a Monsieur  St.  Croix 
was  drowned,  and  in  memory  of  whom,  it  received  the 
name  it  now  bears.  Three  days  after  this,  he  entered 
the  Minesota  or  St.  Peter’s  River,  which  was  not  men- 
tioned by  Hennepin,  the  sight  of  it  as  he  ascended  the 
stream,  being  obscured  perhaps  by  the  island  which  is 
at  its  mouth. 

Carver  informs  us  that  when  he  visited  this  country 
in  1766,  there  were  on  the  Eastern  side  of  Lake  Pepin, 
the  ruins  of  a trading  post,  that  had  been  in  early  days 
under  the  superintendence  of  a captain  St.  Pierre,  and 
after  him,  probably,  did  Le  Sueur  call  the  Minesota 
River.* 

On  the  first  of  October,  Le  Sueur  had  ascended  the 
Minesota  to  the  mouth  of  the  Mankato  or  Blue  Earth 
River,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  above  Fort 
Snelling.  He  there  erected  a trading  post  or  fort,  which 
did  not  give  satisfaction  to  the  Kapoja  and  other  bands 

* Since  the  above  was  written,  we  find  the  following  statement  in 
Nicolett’s  Report ; — ‘ As  for  my  part,  I have  no  hesitation  in  assign- 
ing its  origin  to  a Canadian,  by  the  name  of  St.  Pierre.’ 


220 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


of  Dakotas  in  our  vicinity.  They  claimed  that  the  fort 
should  have  been  on  their  lands,  at  the  confluence  of 
the  Minesota  and  Mississippi,  where  Mendota,  the  post 
of  the  Fur  Company,  is  now  situated ; because  they 
were  the  first  with  whom  the  French  had  traded  and 
furnished  with  fire  arms.  The  fort  was  called  L’Huillier, 
after  a scientific  Parisian,  and  is  said  to  be  marked  upon 
a map  published  at  Amsterdam  in  1720. 

Having  completed  the  necessary  buildings,  on  the 
26th  of  October,  with  three  canoes,  he  proceeded  to  the 
locality  where  the  Blue  Earth  was  found.  After  pass- 
ing the  winter  in  digging,  he  returned  with  several 
thousand  pounds  of  this  bluish  green  earth,  to  the  mouth 
of  the  Mississippi,  from  whence  four  thousand  pounds 
were  transported  to  France,  where  it  appears  to  have 
been  of  the  same  value  as  the  sand  of  the  Virginia  colo- 
nists in  England,  a century  previous. 

In  the  vicinity  of  the  Blue  Earth,  were  said  to  be 
mines  of  copper  ; but  geologists  and  others,  who  have 
lately  explored  the  country,  while  they  describe  the 
blue  pigment  used  by  the  Indians,  say  not  a word  about 
any  metalic  deposits  on  the  Blue  Earth  River  or  its 
tributaries. 

With  Le  Sueur,  the  French  explorations  in  Minesota 
appear  to  have  ceased.  It  is  stated  that  the  white  resi- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


221 


dents  were  obliged  to  leave  the  country  in  1720,  on  ac- 
count of  the  hostility  of  the  Dakotas.  Though  this  may 
have  contributed  to  their  departure,  yet  no  doubt  many 
traders  were  impoverished  by  the  bursting  of  the  cele- 
brated Mississippi  Company,  projected  by  the  infamous 
swindler,  John  Law.  The  professed  object  of  this  asso- 
ciation was  the  aggrandizement  and  cultivation  of  the 
colonies  of  France  in  North  America  ; and  the  French 
Government  enhanced  its  delusive  credit,  by  assigning 
to  it  the  whole  Territory  of  Louisiana,  of  which  this 
country  was  a district.” 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


FURTHER  NOTICES  OF  THE  NOTHWEST. 

*‘The  first  British  traveller  to  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony, 
in  the  introduction  to  his  book  of  travels,  expresses  the 
opinion,  • that  at  some  future  period,’  the  then  unculti- 
vated wilderness  would  become  the  abode  of  a civilized 
people,  and  ‘ that  stately  palaces,  and  solemn  temples 
with  gilded  spires  reaching  to  the  skies,’  would  ‘supplant 
the  Indian  huts,  whose  only  decorations  are  the  barba- 
rous trophies  of  their  vanquished  enemies,’  and  hopes 
that  he  may  be  gratefully  remembered  by  the  future 
inhabitants,  as  one  of  those  who  first  visited  and  des- 
cribed the  country  now  called  Minesota.  In  the  place 
of  the  skin-lodge  of  the  Dakota,  and  the  oblations  to  the 
Spirit  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  roaring  waters,  we  wit- 
ness this  evening,  (assembled  in  a hall  dedicated  to  the 
purposes  of  education  and  unsectarian  religion,)  an  audi- 
ence, descendants  of  the  old,  blue-eyed,  energetic  Saxon, 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


223 


clad  in  robes  which  their  Atlantic  forefathers  would 
have  esteemed  princely,  and  dwellers  in  comfortable 
houses,  situated  upon  beautiful  eminences  which  the 
Architect  of  the  Universe  has  been  ‘ smoothing  down’ 
for  centuries,  and  preparing  for  the  abode  of  a Christian 
people. 

As  it  is  the  chief  design  of  your  association  to  impart 
useful  information,  it  is  proposed  as  an  introductory 
lecture,  to  give  a review  of  the  principal  French,  British 
and  American  travels  to  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony. 

After  noticing  the  tour  of  Father  Hennepin,  Mr.  N. 
remarked  that  the  next  visiter  to  the  Falls,  of  whom  we 
have  any  account,  is  Jonathan  Carver,  a captain  of  a 
company  of  Provincial  troops  during  the  war  between 
Great  Britain  and  France.  After  the  conquest  of  Can- 
ada, and  the  peace  of  1783,  he  passed  some  time  in  an 
exploring  tour  through  the  Northwest ; filled  with  the 
same  idea  that  pervaded  the  minds  of  Hennepin  and 
La  Salle,  the  discovery  of  a short  passage  to  the  Pacific 
Ocean.  He  was  convinced,  and  the  late  settlement  of 
the  Pacific  coast  has  shown  that  he  was  correct,  that 
the  establishment  of  a colony  on  the  Western  coast  of 
America,  ‘ would  not  only  disclose  new  sources  of  trade 
and  promote  many  useful  discoveries,  but  would  open  a 
passage  for  conveying  intelligence  to  China  and  the 


224 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


English  settlements  in  the  East  Indies  with  greater 
expedition  than  a tedious  voyage  by  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  or  straits  of  Magellan  will  allow  of.’ 

Leaving  the  city  of  Boston  in  June  1766,  he  proceed- 
ed by  way  of  Albany  and  the  Lakes  to  Mackinaw, 

I 

which  was  the  Northernmost  British  post.  On  the  3d 
of  September,  he  departed  from  this  fort,  and  on  the  18th 
arrived  at  Green  Bay,  the  site  of  the  old  French  Mission 
and  Fort,  where  in  the  latter  part  of  the  previous  cen- 
tury, men  educated  in  the  schools  of  France  and  accus- 
tomed to  the  polished  society  of  the  Courts  of  Europe, 
used  to  assemble  and  talk  over  their  discoveries  and 
travels.  While  in  this  vicinity,  he  visited  an  island  in- 
habited by  Ottawas,  and  though  deploring  the  effect  of 
spirituous  liquors  upon  the  savage,  made  a present  of 
some  to  the  Chief,  with  which  the  tribe  made  them- 
selves drunk. 

Leaving  Green  Bay,  he  proceeded  up  the  Fox  River 
till  he  came  to  a town  of  the  Vvhnnebagoes,  situated  on 
an  island  at  the  eastern  end  of  Lake  Winnebago.  He 
asserts  that  a female  presided  over  this  tribe,  and  des 
cribes  her  as  ‘ a very  ancient  woman,  small  in  stature 
and  not  much  distinguished  by  her  dress  from  several 
yoimg  women  that  attended  her.  Her  attendants  seem- 
ed greatly  pleased  whenever  I showed  any  tokens  of 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


225 


respect  to  their  Queen,  particularly  when  I saluted  her, 
which  I frequently  did  to  acquire  her  favor.  On  these 
occasions,  the  good  old  lady  endeavored  to  assume  a 
juvenile  gaiety,  and  by  her  smiles  showed  she  was 
equally  pleased  with  the  attention  I paid  her.’ 

Carver,  like  most  travellers  of  olden  times,  has  many 
curious  conceits,  and  supposes  that  the  Winnehagoes 
were  originally  from  Mexico,  being  driven  North  by  the 
conquests  of  the  Spaniards.  He  bases  his  opinion  upon 
the  following  data : ‘ their  unalienable  attachment  to 
the  Sioux,  the  peculiarity  of  their  dialect,  and  their  in- 
veterate hatred  of  the  Spaniards.’  After  making  a port- 
age, he  descended  the  Wisconsin.  On  the  9th  October, 
he  entered  a town  of  the  Sauk  Indians,  where  he  saw 
great  quantities  of  lead  brought  from  the  mines  which 
are  now  so  extensively  worked  in  Wisconsin.  On  the 
15th  of  October,  he  reached  the  Mississippi.  Near  the 
mouth  of  the  Wisconsin  he  found  the  town  of  ‘ Prairie 
des  Chiens,  or  Dog  Plains.’ 

This  village  he  thus  describes : ‘ it  contains  about 
three  hundred  families.  The  houses  are  well  built  after 
the  Indian  manner.  It  is  the  great  mart  where  all  the 
adjacent  tribes  and  even  those  who  inhabit  the  most  re- 
mote branches  of  the  Mississippi,  trade.’, 

Having  bought  a canoe,  he  proceeded  on  the  19th  of 


226 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


October,  in  company  with  a French  Canadian  and  a 
Mohawk  up  the  Mississippi.  After  some  difficulty  with 
a band  of  Pillagers,  he  arrived,  on  the  first  of  Novem- 
ber, at  Lake  Pepin.  On  the  East  bank  of  this  Lake,  he 
observed  the  ruins  of  a French  factory,  where  it  is  said 
Captain  St.  Pierre  resided,  and  carried  on  a very  great 
trade  with  the  Naudowessies,  (Sioux  or  Dakotas.) — 
While  taking  a walk  a few  miles  below  Lake  Pepin,  he 
found  some  elevations  that  had  apparently  been  thrown 
up  for  military  defence.  He  says,  ‘ notwithstanding  it 
was  now  covered  with  grass,  I could  plainly  discern 
that  it  had  once  been  a breast-work  of  about  four  feet 
in  height,  extending  the  best  part  of  a mile.  I have 
given  as  exact  an  account  as  possible  of  this  singular 
appearance,  and  leave  to  future  explorers  of  these  dis- 
tant regions  to  discover  whether  it  is  a production  of 
nature  or  art.’ 

Featherstonaugh,  a United  States  geologist,  about 
fifteen  years  ago,  visited  the  spot,  and  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  it  was  a work  of  art,  thrown  up  by  some 
unknown  Nation. 

Not  far  distant  from  the  River  St.  Croix,  Carver  met 
a band  of  Sioux,  and  while  encamped  with  them,  a party 
of  Chippewa  warriors  came  to  wage  war.  The  Sioux 
being  alarmed,  b^ged  the  Captain’s  assistance.  He 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


227 


then  visited  the  Chippewas,  from  whom  he  received  a 
friendly  reception,  and  succeeded  in  persuading  them 
to  retire. 

About  two  miles  below  St.  Paul,  he  saw  a remarkable 
cave,  called  by  the  Indians  the  dwelling  of  the  Great 
Spirit.  The  entrance  was  about  ten  feet  wide  and  five 
feet  high.  About  twenty  feet  from  the  entrance  was  a 
lake,  the  water  of  which  was  transparent.  He  found  in 
this  cave  many  Indian  hieroglyphics,  which  appeared 
very  ancient,  for  time  had  nearly  covered  them  with 
moss.  For  many  years  the  mouth  of  this  cave  has  been 
filled  up  with  gravel  and  sand  ; but  in  July,  1837,  after 
much  digging,  Nicollet  succeeded  in  making  an  entrance, 
and  saw  Indian  marks  on  the  wall. 

Not  far  distant  from  the  cave  was  an  Indian  burying 
place,  and  this  fact  will  help  us  to  account  for  some  of 
the  mounds  on  the  farm  of  Mr.  Weld.  Just  below  the 
cave  resided  the  Kaposia,or  Little  Crow  band  of  Indians, 
who  now  live  four  miles  below  St.  Paul,  on  the  West 
side  of  the  river. 

He  also  gives  an  interesting,  if  not  a reliable  account, 
of  the  burial  ceremonies  that  were  performed  at  this 
cave  in  the  vicinity  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  purport  of  the 
harangues  made  to  the  deceased. 

Having  abandoned  his  canoe  opposite  the  mouth  of 


228 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


the  St.  Peter’s  River,  on  account  of  the  ice,  he  travelled 
by  land  to  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  at  which  place  he 
arrived  on  the  17th  of  November,  1766.  In  company 
with  him  was  his  Mohawk  servant,  and  a young  Win- 
nebago Chief.  He  says  he  heard  the  roaring  of  the 
waters  at  a distance  of  fifteen  miles.  As  soon  as  the 
Winnebago  reached  the  point  below  the  village  of  St. 
Anthony,  which  overlooks  the  Falls,  he  began  to  ad- 
dress the  Great  Spirit,  supposed  to  reside  in  yon  waters. 
He  told  him  that  he  had  come  a long  way  to  pay  his 
adorations  and  offerings  to  him  ; after  which,  he  threw 
his  pipe,  tobacco-pouch,  bracelets,  beads,  ear-rings,  and 
all  that  he  esteemed  valuable,  into  the  boiling  waters. 

Carver  states  the  Falls  to  be  two  hundred  and  fifty 
yards  wide,  and  the  perpendicular  fall  to  be  thirty  feet. 
In  the  middle  of  the  Falls,  was  an  island  as  at  present, 
and  half  way  between  the  side  on  which  we  stand  and 
the  island,  there  was  a rock,  lying  at  the  very  edge  of 
the  Falls,  in  an  oblique  position,  that  appeared  to  him 
to  be  about  five  or  six  feet  broad,  and  thirty  or  forty 
feet  long. 

With  the  surrounding  scenery  he  was  as  delighted  as 
the  most  enthusiastic  citizen  of  St.  Anthony  could  de- 
sire. His  description  is  as  follows : ‘ The  country 
around  them  is  extremely  beautiful.  It  is  not  an  unin- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


229 


temipted  plain  where  the  eye  finds  no  relief,  but  com- 
posed of  many  gentle  ascents,  which  in  the  summer  are 
covered  with  the  finest  verdure,  and  interspersed  with 
little  groves  that  give  a pleasing  variety  to  the  prospect. 
On  the  whole,  when  the  Falls  are  included,  which  may 
be  seen  at  the  distance  of  four  miles,  a more  pleasing  and 
picturesque  view  cannot,  I believe,  be  found  throughout 
the  universe.’ 

Accompanying  this  description,  with  which  none  of 
you  will  find  fault,  there  is  in  the  London  edition  of  his 
work  a beautiful  copperplate  engraving  of  the  Falls, — 
which  in  beauty,  to  say  the  least,  is  equal  to  many 
engravings  of  the  same  that  have  been  otfered  to  the 
public  within  the  last  ten  years.  At  the  time  of  his 
visit,  the  island  below  the  Falls  was  full  of  eagles’ 
nests,  the  rapids  rendering  them  secure  from  the  attacks 
of  man  or  beast. 

After  a careful  inspection  of  the  Falls,  he  continued 
his  journey  to  the  point  where  his  predecessor,  Hennepin, 
stopped,  to  the  River  St.  Francis.  Carver  believed  that 
this  country  was  destined  to  be  settled  ; he  even  parti- 
tioned the  lands  of  Wisconsin  and  Eastern  Minesota 
into  subordinate  colonies.  These  he  divided  by  dotted 
lines  and  numbered,  that  future  adventurers  might 
readily,  by  referring  to  the  map,  choose  a commodious 


230 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


and  advantageous  situation.  Tract  No.  I,  or  Eastern 
Minesota,  is  thus  described  : 

‘ The  country  within  these  limits,  from  its  situation, 
is  colder  than  any  of  the  others,  yet  I am  convinced 
that  the  air  is  much  more  temperate  than  in  those  pro- 
vinces that  lie  in  the  same  degree  of  latitude  to  the  east 
of  it.  The  soil  is  excellent,  and  there  is  a great  deal  of 
land  that  is  free  from  woods  in  the  parts  adjoining  to 
the  Mississippi,  whilst  on  the  contrary,  the  Northeastern 
borders  are  well  wooded.  Towards  the  heads  of  the 
River  St.  Croix,  rice  grows  in  great  plenty,  and  there  is 
abundance  of  copper.  Though  the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony 
are  situated  at  the  Southeast  corner  of  this  division,  yet 
that  impediment  will  not  totally  obstruct  the  navigation. 
As  the  River  St.  Croix,  which  runs  through  a great  part 
of  the  Southern  side  of  it,  enters  the  Mississippi  just  be- 
low the  Falls,  and  flows  with  so  gentle  a current,  that 
it  afibrds  a convenient  navigation  for  boats.  This  tract 
is  about  one  hundred  miles  from  N.  W.  to  S.  E.,  and 
twenty  from  N.  E.  to  S.  W.’ 

Living  more  than  a quarter  of  a century  before  Evans 
and  Fitch  and  Fulton  made  their  incipient  attempts  to 
apply  steam  to  the  propulsion  of  boats  on  the  Delaware 
and  Hudson  rivers,  he  could  not  conceive  how  vessels 
could  ascend  with  ease  above  the  Forks  of  the  Ohio ; 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


231 


yet  he  looked  for  the  time  which  we  are  destined  to  see, 
when  by  canals,  or  ‘ shorter  cuts,  a communication 
may  be  opened  by  water  with  New- York  by  way  of  the 
Lakes.’ 

On  Carver’s  return  from  the  Falls,  he  ascended  the 
St.  Peter’s  River,  and  wintered.  Concerning  his  resi- 
dence there,  we  can  say  but  little,  as  many  of  his  state- 
ments are  incredible  ; especially  that  which  says  that 
he  learned  the  Sioux,  one  of  the  most  difficult  of  the 
Indian  languages,  in  a few  months,  so  that  he  could 
deliver  speeches  in  that  tongue. 

Descending  the  St.  Peter’s  in  the  spring,  after  attend- 
ing a great  council  of  the  Sioux  just  below  St.  Paul,  he 
proceeded  with  a deputation  of  their  number  by  the  way 
of  the  Chippewa  River  and  Lake  Superior  to  Mackinaw. 

Returning  to  Great  Britain,  he  communicated  the  in- 
formation he  obtained  to  several  gentlemen  of  wealth 
and  intelligence.  In  the  year  1774,  Richard  Whitworth, 
a member  of  Parliament,  a Colonel  Rogers  and  Caiwer 
had  determined  to  proceed  to  America  and  built  a Fort 
at  Lake  Pepin,  and  then  ascend  the  St.  Peter’s  and 
Missouri  Rivers,  imtil  they  discovered  the  River  Oregon, 
whose  sources  they  supposed  were  on  the  other  side  of 
the  ridge  dividing  the  waters  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  from 
those  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.  On  that  coast  another 


232 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


post  was  to  have  been  established,  and  from  thence  they 
expected  to  be  able  to  reach  the  countries  of  Asia  by 
some  short  passage.  These  plans,  however,  were  all 
frustrated  by  the  war  between  the  American  Colonies 
and  the  mother  country.  That  Captain  Carver  made 
many  statements  not  consistent  with  truth,  cannot  be 
denied  ; yet  no  one  can  read  his  book  without  acknow- 
ledging that  he  was  a man  of  vigorous  intellect  and  keen 
observation.  When  we  remember,  that  the  European 
nations  expected  every  traveller  to  tell  some  wondrous 
tale  upon  his  return,  and  believed  it  more  readily  on 
account  of  its  improbability  ; that  the  age  had  not  quite 
passed  when  ‘ feathers  could  be  produced  which  had 
dropped  from  the  tail  of  a phcenix ; that  ostriches  were 
to  be  seen  which  unlike  the  birds  of  the  present  day, 
had  not  pecked  their  way  into  the  world  through  an 
egg  shell,  but  had  been  born  alive ; that  bones  were 
plentiful,  of  giants,  with  whom  Goliath  was  a dwarf ; 
that  petrified  babies  were  not  rare  we  ought  not  to  be 
surprised  that  he  describes  a thunder  storm  in  the 
vicinity  of  Mendota,  ‘ so  violent  that  the  earth  shook  and 
the  lightning  flashed  along  the  ground  in  streams  of 
sulphur nor  that  he  should  print  a speech  which  he 
says  he  delivered  in  the  Dakota  language,  after  a resi- 
dence of  a few  months  among  the  Nation. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


233 


After  the  explorations  of  General,  then  Lieut.  Pike, 
the  United  States  Government  in  1823  determined  that 
‘an  expedition  he  immediately  fitted  out  for  exploring 
the  River  St.  Peter’s,  and  the  country  situated  on  the 
Northern  boundary  of  the  United  States  between  the 
Red  River  of  Hudson’s  Bay  and  Lake  Superior.’  The 
commander  of  the  expedition  was  Major  Stephen  Long, 
The  party  left  Philadelphia  and  proceeded  via  Fort 
Dearborn  (the  site  of  the  city  of  Chicago)  to  Prairie  du 
Chien,  where  they  arrived  on  the  19th  of  June.  On 
the  2d  of  July,  the  party  passed  the  narrowest  pla<ce  of 
the  Mississippi,  and  landed  for  a few  moments  six 
miles  below  St.  Paul,  to  examine  a stone  which  was 
then  held  in  high  veneration  among  the  Indians  on 
account  of  the  red  pigment  with  which  it  was  covered, 
hence  now  called  Red  Rock.  ‘ It  is  a fragment  of  sien- 
ite,  which  is  about  four  and  a half  feet  in  diameter.  It 
is  not  surprising  that  the  Indians  should  have  viewed 
this  rock  with  some  curiosity,  and  deemed  it  wonderful, 
considering  that  its  character  differs  so  materially  from 
the  rocks  which  are  found  in  that  neighborhood.  A 
man  who  lives  in  a coimtry  where  the  highest  hills  are 
wholly  formed  of  sand-stone  and  secondary  limestone, 
will  necessarily  be  struck  with  the  peculiar  characters 
of  the  first  specimen  of  the  granite  that  comes  under  his 


234 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


notice,  and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  one  who 

sees  God  in  all  things”  should  have  made  part  of  a 
stone  an  object  of  worship.’ — (Long’s  Expedition.) 

Above  Red  Rock,  they  visited  the  cemetery  which  had 
been  mentioned  by  Carver  more  than  a half  century 
previous,  and  saw  scaffolds  supporting  rude  coffins. — 
At  a little  distance  below  St.  Paul  they  passed  the  vil- 
lage of  Kaposia,  as  before  stated  on  the  East  side  of  the 
river,  and  called  ^ Petit  Corbeau,’  after  the  Chief  who 
resided  there.  This  tribe  now  live  on  the  other  side, 
and  is  the  mission  station  of  Dr.  Williamson.  The  In- 
dians that  are  so  constantly  in  the  streets  of  St.  Paul, 
reside  there.  The  cave  discovered  by  Carver  below  St. 
Paul,  the  party  of  1823  did  not  visit,  but  the  little  cave 
above  that  town,  which  we  have  inappropriately  marked 
on  our  maps  ^ Carver’s  Cave,’  a place  which  Carver 
never  saw,  and  was  never  discovered  until  1811. 

On  the  night  of  the  2d  July,  Long  and  his  party 
reached  Fort  Snelling,  which  work  had  been  commen- 
ced about  four  years  before. 

On  the  6th  of  July,  members  of  this  party  walked  to 
the  Falls  of  St.  Anthony,  which  they  began  to  ford. — 
Some  of  the  company,  however,  found  great  difficulty 
in  stemming  the  current,  and  reached  this  side  of  the 
rapids  much  exhausted. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


235 


By  Major  Long’s  measurement,  the  perpendicular  fall 
of  water  was  found  to  be  about  sixteen  feet.  A quarter 
of  a century  ago,  the  United  States  had  two  mills  in 
operation  here,  which  were  watched  by  a sergeant’s 
guard. 

In  the  narrative  of  Major  Long’s  expedition,  we  not 
only  find  for  the  first  time,  the  legend  of  Winona,  who, 
thwarted  in  marrying  the  object  of  her  love,  dashed  her- 
self to  pieces  from  the  lofty  bluff  on  Lake  Pepin,  which 
will  always  be  called  Maiden’s  Rock,  but  he  also  gives 
the  following  legend  of  the  Falls,  which  he  learned 
from  an  Indian : 

‘An  Indian  of  the  Dakota  or  Sioux  Nation,  had 
united  himself  early  in  life  to  a youthful  female,  whose 
name  was  Ampato  Sapa.  With  her  he  lived  happily 
for  several  years.  Two  interesting  children  gathered 
around  their  lodge  fire,  from  day  to  day,  and  they  loved 
to  think  that  they  were  “ their  little  ones.”  The  man 
was  skilled  as  a hunter,  and  drew  around  him  many 
families.  Desirous  of  being  more  intimately  connected 
with  him,  some  of  them  suggested  that  a man  of  his 
skill  ought  to  possess  more  than  one  wife,  to  wait  upon 
him  and  his  friends.  They  assured  him  that  if  he 
would  increase  the  number  of  his  wives,  that  he  would 
increase  his  influence,  and  soon  be  recognized  as  a Chief. 


236 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Ambition  overcame  his  atFection,  and  he  secretly  took  a 
second  wife.  Being  desirous  to  introduce  his  new  bride 
to  his  lodge  in  a way  that  would  not  displease  his  first 
love,  he  said  to  the  mother  of  his  children,  “ You  know 
that  I can  love  no  woman  so  fondly  as  I doat  upon  you ; 
with  regret  have  I seen  you  of  late  subjected  to  toils 
which  must  be  oppressive  to  you,  and  from  which  I 
would  gladly  relieve  you.  I have  therefore  resolved 
upon  taking  another  wife,  but  she  shall  always  be  sub- 
ject to  your  control,  as  she  will  always  rank  in  my 
affections  second  to  you.” 

^ With  deep  grief  did  his  first  wife  listen  to  these 
words.  She  pleaded  all  the  endearments  of  their  past 
life  ; she  spoke  of  his  former  fondness  for  her,  and  bade 
him  beware  of  introducing  another  woman  into  the 
lodge.  Finding  that  he  could  not  persuade  her  to  be 
contented,  he  informed  her  that  he  had  already  procured 
another  woman  to  share  the  lodge  with  her. 

‘ Distressed  at  this  information,  she  watched  her  op- 
portunity, stole  away  from  the  cabin  with  her  children, 
and  fled  to  a distance,  where  her  father  was.  With 
him  she  remained  until  a party  of  Indians  went  up  the 
river  to  hunt.  In  the  spring,  as  they  returned  with 
their  furs,  they  encamped  near  these  Falls.  In  the 
morning  the  band  left,  but  she  lingered  near  the  spot. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


237 


Having  launched  her  light  canoe,  she  entered  with  her 
children.  Paddling  down  the  rapids,  she  began  to  sing 
her  death  song. 

‘ Her  friends  saw  the  movement,  but  they  were  too 
late  to  prevent.  Her  voice  grew  less  and  less  distinct 
as  she  approached  the  edge  of  the  Falls.  For  a mo- 
ment, the  canoe  paused  at  the  brink,  enveloped  with 
spray,  then  with  a sudden  plunge  it  darted  down,  carry- 
ing all  of  its  contents  to  instant  death. 

‘ The  Indians  believe  that  in  the  morning  a voice  is 
heard,  singing  a doleful  ditty  along  the  edge  of  the  Fall, 
and  that  it  ever  dwells  upon  the  inconstancy  of  her  hus- 
band. Some  even  assert  that  her  spirit  has  been  seen 
wandering  near  the  spot,  with  her  children  wrapped  to 
her  bosom.’ 

We  have  thus  given  you  a brief  review  of  the  princi- 
pal French,  English,  and  American  travels  to  this  widely 
celebrated  spot. 

A few  months  has  worked  great  changes  in  the  vici- 
nity of  these  ‘ roaring  waters.’ 

Less  than  two  years  ago,  a divine  of  European  as 
well  as  American  reputation,  visited  this  place,  and  felt 
that  he  was  in  a far  distant  land.  Were  he  to  repeat 
his  visit,  on  every  seventh  day,  though  he  might  not 
hear  the  doleful  ditty  of  Ampato  Sapa,  he  would  listen 


238 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


to  the  songs  ‘ of  a Saviour’s  dying  love,’  mingling  with 
the  majestic  chorus  of  ‘ many  waters  he  would  wit- 
ness to-night,  an  audience  not  less  intelligent  than  those 
gathered  on  similar  occasions,  ‘ in  the  smiling  villages 
of  the  East and  a library,  as  yet  small,  in  which  how- 
ever the  last  new  novel  is  not  conspicuous,  but  the  works 
of  Burke,  Carlyle’s  and  Headley’s  Cromwell,  Arnold’s 
History  of  Rome,  and  the  Essays  of  Talfourd,  Stephens 
and  Channing. 

Though  the  citizens  of  the  most  Northern  village  in 
the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi,  you  show  to  the  world 
that  extremes  are  often  in  close  proximity ; that  the 
dwellers  on  the  borders  of  an  Indian  country  can  com- 
mune with  the  noblest  and  best  of  minds,  through  their 
works,  and  appreciate,  as  well  as  any  in  the  world,  the 
voice  of  a living  ministry,  and  the  truths  of  the  Sacred 
Writings.” 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


THE  NORTH  AMERICAN  INDIANS  IN  GENERAL. 

Being  desirous  of  doing  all  that  I can  towards  bet- 
tering the  condition  of  my  brethren,  I here  subjoin  four 
letters,  originally  addressed  to  the  “ Saturday  Evening 
Post”  of  Philadelphia,  on  the  subject  of  Indian  Civiliza- 
tion,— the  plan  which  I have  presented  before  different 
Legislatures,  and  recently  in  a Memorial  presented  in 
both  Houses  of  Congress  for  their  action, 

I am  happy  to  say  that  there  is  a universal  approval 
of  this  plan  throughout  the  Union  ; and  it  is  my  design 
to  request  the  General  Government  of  this  country  that 
they  may  sooner  or  later  take  these  Indians  under  their 
care,  and  have  the  credit  of  dealing  justly  with  her  long 
abused  red  races.  If  Congress  does  not  do  any  thing 
in  the  present  first  session  of  the  thirty-first  Congress, 
I shall  go  again — and  just  as  often  as  they  meet  I shall 
press  this  subject  before  them,  until  something  is  done. 
The  remarks  here  penned  may  be  also  applied  in  the 


240 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


case  of  our  Nation,  who  are  now  becoming  demoralized 
yearly  by  alcoholic  drinks. 

I desire  the  reasons  here  given  to  be  weighed  by  all 
impartial  readers,  and  if  any  lack  of  soundness  in  our 
arguments  be  found,  let  it  not  be  laid  to  the  weakness 
of  the  cause  we  advocate,  but  to  the  writer’s  deficiency 
for  such  a work. 

INDIAN  CIVILIZATION. 

Mr.  Editor, — Your  readers  will  have  noticed  by 
the  papers  throughout  the  Union,  the  plan  I have  pre- 
sented before  the  American  public  of  my  endeavors  to 
save  a remnant  of  the  scattered  Indian  tribes  of  the 
Northwest. 

I will  endeavor  to  give  a short  outline,  in  three  or 
four  letters,  of  the  matter,  as  follows  : 

1.  Why  the  Indians  have  not  improved,  and  why 
they  have  decreased  in  numbers  when  coming  in  con- 
tact with  the  Europeans,  since  the  first  commencement 
of  their  intercourse  until  the  present. 

2.  The  fears  I entertain  that  they  never  will  hold  a 
peaceable  possession  of  any  great  portion  of  the  West. 

3.  The  plan  I advocate,  and  its  practicability. 

4.  The  benefit  it  must  be  to  the  American  Govern- 
ment, and  to  the  Indians. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


241 


I.  In  this  letter  : TVliy  they  have  not  improved^  and 
why  they  have  decreased  in  numbers. 

To  give  a statement  of  all  the  disadvantages  they 
have  had  to  encounter  would  not  be  in  accordance  with 
my  present  object,  nor  with  the  necessity  imposed  on  me 
with  reference  to  your  columns ; yet  I will  mention  a 
few.  In  their  intercourse  with  the  frontier  settlers  they 
meet  the  worst  classes  of  pale  faces.  They  soon  adopt 
their  foolish  ways  and  their  vices,  and  their  minds  be- 
ing thus  poisoned  and  preoccupied,  the  morality  and 
education  which  the  better  classes  would  teach  them 
are  forestalled.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  when  it 
is  generally  known  that  the  frontier  settlers  are  made  up 
of  wild,  adventurous  spirits,  willing  to  raise  themselves 
by  the  downfall  of  the  Indian  race.  These  are  traders, 
spirit-sellers,  horse  thieves,  counterfeiters  and  scape- 
gallow'ses,  who  neither  fear  God  nor  regard  the  laws  of 
man.  When  the  Indians  come  in  contact  with  such 
men,  as  representatives  of  the  American  people,  what 
else  could  be  expected  of  them  ? It  is  not  strange,  that, 
seeing  as  he  does  the  gross  immorality  of  the  whites 
whom  he  meets,  and  the  struggle  between  the  pale  face 
for  wrong  and  the  red  man  for  right,  which  begins  when 
they  first  meet,  and  ends  not  until  one  dies,  that  he  re- 
fuses to  follow  the  footsteps  of  the  white  man  in  the 


242 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


attainment  of  science.  The  majority  having  never  been 
in  the  society  of  the  good,  religious  and  refined,  they 
know  hut  little  of  the  advantages  of  civilization. 

There  has  been  another  class  of  men  who  have  kept 
pace  with  the  frontier,  whose  fathers  and  friends  were 
killed  in  the  wars  in  the  more  Easterly  States  some 
years  ago  by  the  Indians  ; these  having  such  implaca- 
ble hatred  against  the  poor  Indians,  do  all  they  can  to 
enrage  one  race  against  the  other,  and  if  possible  involve 
the  two  in  war,  that  they  may  engage  in  their  favorite 
work  of  depredation. 

II.  Their  love  of  Adventurous  Life. 

Their  fathers  having  been  Nimrods,  in  a literal  sense, 
they  have  followed  in  their  footsteps. 

Not  that  I would  have  you  suppose  that  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  teaching  the  American  Indian  the  peace- 
ful arts  of  agriculture,  for  he  has  already  proved  himself 
teachable.  The  suddenness  with  which  the  American 
people  have  come  upon  them,  has  prevented  them  from 
gradually  acquiring  the  arts  of  civilized  life  ; and  leav- 
ing local  employment,  they  have  hunted  for  a living, 
and  thus  perpetuated  that  independent,  roaming  dispo- 
sition which  was  their  early  education. 

III.  The  agitation  of  mind  they  experience  in  the  be- 
lief that  Government  will  want  their  lands  and  they  be 
removed  to  the' West. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


243 


None  but  an  Indian  can,  perhaps,  rightly  judge  of  the 
deleterious  influence  which  the  repeated  removals  of  the 
Indians  has  wrought,  since  they  began  in  the  days  of 
Jefierson,  and  have  been  continued  by  succeeding  admin- 
istrations, until  now.  Fear  has  prevented  the  Indian 
from  making  any  very  great  advancement  in  agricul- 
tural science. 

Having  seen  the  removal  of  other  Indian  tribes,  they 
have  been  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the  Government 
may  and  doubtless  will  want  more  land,  and  they  be 
obliged  to  sell  at  whatever  price  Government  may  see 
fit  to  give,  and  thus  all  improvements  they  might  have 
made  would  become  useless  to  them. 

In  some  instances,  the  Missionaries  have  done  well  in 
subduing  the  wild  and  warring  dispositions  of  the  In- 
dians, but  these  lessons  have  been  lost  by  the  removal 
of  the  Indians  Westward,  and  should  he  say  aught,  he 
is  represented  by  the  agents  in  an  antagonistical  atti- 
tude towards  his  own  Government,  and  the  Indian  has 
been  the  sufferer. 

lY.  The  want  of  Schools  of  the  character  that  are  re- 
quired for  the  Education  of  the  Indians. 

I mean  schools  where  the  whip  may  be  dispensed 
with  as  the  motive  power  of  acquiring  education,  and 
where  rational  beings  are  to  be  taught  in  a rational 


244 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


maimer.  Tliis  whipping  to  learn  is  brutish  and  degra- 
ding— I might  add.  savage. 

Gentle  persuasion  is  that  cord  which  has  done  the 
most  for  me  and  others.  Many  a school-teacher  who 
has  gone  into  the  Indian  coimtr}',  had  just  as  much 
right  to  become  a teacher  to  the  Indians,  as  I have  to  sit 
in  the  place  of  “ Old  Rough  and  Ready.” 

You  will  tell  me,  no  doubt,  that  the  Indians  have 
been  taught  the  advantages  of  education — that  some 
even  have  gone  and  attended,  not  only  the  common 
school,  but  schools  of  a high  order,  colleges,  and  have 
retm-ned  to  the  forest  again — have  put  on  the  blanket 
and  roamed  the  woods.  This  has  not  always  been  the 
case.  I might  name  a great  many,  who,  to  my  know- 
ledge, have  done  and  are  now  doing  well  for  themselves 
and  for  their  people. 

The  reasons  for  their  returmng  back  again,  were  the 
absence  of  a good  moral  traming,  and  their  not  having 
learned  any  trade  with  which  to  be  employed  on  their 
leaving  the  schools.  Having  no  employment,  and  no 
income,  they  found  themselves  m possession  of  all  the 
qualities  of  a gentleman,  without  the  requisite  funds  to 
support  themselves. 

Some  of  their  teachers  where  they  went,  knowing 
only  Christianity  in  theory,  and  not  by  a practical  know- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


245 


ledge  of  the  persuasive  influences  of  its  truths  in  the 
mind  and  soul,  how  could  they  teach  them  what  they 
are  destitute  themselves  ? Open  the  pages  of  inspira- 
tion— and  as  fast  as  the  clouds  of  ignorance  shall  roll 
away,  let  the  warm  rays  from  Him  who  smiles  from  the 
sky,  into  the  soul.  The  mind  of  the  Indian,  well  pol- 
ished, shall  then  shine  like  the  pure  pearl  from  the  deep. 
The  cause  of  Education  and  Christianity  must  he  to 
him  what  the  wings  are  to  eagles,  both  must  he  exercised 
before  he  can  arise  aloft. 

Teaching  the  Indians  in  their  own  language  what 
little  some  have  learned,  is  one  of  those  errors  in  which 
the  majority  of  Missionaries  have  fallen,  unintentionally, 
all  over  the  country.  I have  endeavored  to  persuade 
them  to  teach  our  people  English,  and  their  course  after- 
wards tells  me — We  know  better  than  you  do — and, 
therefore,  a great  amount  of  time,  and  a tremendous 
amount  of  money  has  been  expended  in  translating  and 
publishing  a few  hooks.  We  have  been  able  to  read 
these,  hut  not  one  sentence  of  English.  Our  language 
perpetuates  our  own  ideas  of  civilization,  as  well  as  the 
old  usages  in  our  Nation ; and,  consequently,  how 
limited  our  field  of  acquiring  knowledge  ! On  the  other 
hand,  by  giving  them  an  English  education,  you  intro- 
duce them  into  the  endless  field  of  English  literature, 


246 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


and  from  the  accumulated  experience  of  the  past,  they 
might  learn  the  elements  which  would  produce  the 
greatest  amount  of  good  to  our  Nation.  The  English 
language,  it  is  true,  is  very  hard  to  learn,  but  since  it  is 
to  he  the  universal  language  in  all  lands,  the  sooner  you 
give  them  this  the  better.  I conclude  this  part  of  my 
letter  by  stating  that  the  most  requisite  things  for  the 
Indian  are  these  three — a mechanical  or  an  agricultural 
education,  a high-toned  literature,  and  a rational  moral 
training.  Give  him  these — you  make  him  exalted. — 
Deprive  him  of  these — you  make  him  degraded. 

V.  The  great  quantity  of  Land  which  they  have  re- 
served to  themselves  for  the  'purpose  of  hunting. 

This  wild  field,  filled  with  a variety  of  game,  perpet- 
uates their  natural  propensity  of  living  by  the  use  of 
the  bow  and  arrow ; instead  of  following  the  plough 
and  having  the  hoe  in  hand.  When  they  can  have  a 
piece  of  land  they  can  call  their  own,  and  so  limited 
that  the  scarcity  of  game  will  oblige  them  to  till  the  soil 
for  a subsistence,  then  they  will  improve,  and  the  sooner 
this  state  of  things  is  brought  about  will  be  the  better. 

YI.  The  mode  generally  adopted  by  the  Missionaries 
in  introducing  Christianity  among  the  Indian  Tribes. 

I know  I shall  be  censured  here — I can  only  appeal 
to  the  experience  of  the  past,  and  leave  every  one  to  de- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


247 


cide  for  himself.  The  Indian,  not  knowing  abstract 
truths,  cannot  possibly  understand  the  foundation  of  the 
many  doctrinal  views  which  he  is  desired  to  learn  and 
adopt.  Forms  of  worship,  varied  as  they  are,  have  been 
urged  on  him,  and  in  being  perplexed,  his  mind  thus  is 
prejudiced  to  Christianity. 

Veneration  and  devotion  make  up  the  Indian’s  heart. 
Take  him  as  he  is,  and  lead  him,  and  he  will  soon  see 
the  right  from  the  wrong.  We  want  also  educated  men. 
It  has  been  the  idea  of  some  that  any  thing  will  do  for 
the  Indians. 

Other  reasons  might  be  given,  did  space  allow  ; now, 
I proceed  to  give,  in  conclusion,  a few  of  the  reasons 
why  their  numbers  have  been  lessened. 

1.  The  Diseases  introduced  hy  Europeans. 

The  Indian  Nations  had  no  small  pox  or  measles. — 
The  small  pox  has  destroyed  thousands  since  it  has 
been  introduced  into  this  country.  Entire  families  have 
perished.  Many  an  ill-fated  tribe  have  followed  their 
ancestors  down  to  the  grave,  haggard,  diseased,  wretched 
and  loathsome,  by  the  disease  which  keeps  pace  with 
the  debauchery  towards  the  West. 

These  diseases,  not  many  of  them  being  known  be- 
fore, they  knew  not  how  to  check  their  disastrous  pro- 
gress. 


248 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


2.  Wars  which  they  have  made  on  each  other  since 
the  introduction  of  fire-arms. 

Before  this,  the  weapons  they  used  against  one  an- 
other were  not  so  disastrous  as  the  rifle  has  been  since. 
With  the  gun  they  have  been  as  expert  as  they  were 
with  the  bow  and  arrow.  Champlain,  in  the  year  1609, 
supplied  the  Algonquins  of  the  North  with  the  weapons 
of  war,  that  they  might  successfully  wage  war  with  the 
Six  Nations.  The  Dutch  supplied  the  Six  Nations 
with  the  same  materials.  The  Spaniards  of  the 
South  and  others,  might  be  cited,  which  history  relates. 
They  receiving  those  weapons  of  war  from  a civil- 
ized and  Christianized  nation,  guaranteed  a free  use  of 
them. 

3.  Wars  which  have  raged  in  this  country  between  the 
whites. 

During  these  wars  the  Indian  has  been  called  from 
the  woods  to  show  his  fearless  nature,  and  for  obeying, 
and  showing  himself  fearless,  it  is  said  of  him  that  he  is 
“a  man  without  a tear.”  He  has  been  stigmatized 
with  the  name — “ a savage,” — by  the  very  people  who 
called  for  his  aid,  and  he  gave  it.  In  the  midst  of  these 
mighty  contests,  the  Indian  has  been  put  in  the  front 
ranks,  in  the  most  dangerous  positions,  and  has  conse- 
quently been  the  greatest  loser. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


249 


4.  And  lastly — The  introduction  of  sjyirituous  liquors. 

This  has  been  greater  than  all  other  evils  combined. 
Intemperance  and  disease.  The  fire-water  has  done  its 
work  of  disaster.  By  it  the  glad  shouts  of  the  youth  of 
our  land  has  died  away  in  wails  of  grief ! Fathers  have 
followed  their  children  to  their  graves.  Children  have 
sent  their  wail  of  woe,  echoing  from  vale  to  vale.  And 
around  the  cheering  fires  of  the  Indian,  the  white  man 
has  received  the  gain  of  avarice.  Peace  and  happiness 
entwined  around  the  fire-side  of  the  Indian  once.  Union, 
harmony,  and  a common  brotherhood  cemented  them  all. 
But  as  soon  as  these  vile  drinks  were  introduced,  dissi- 
pation commenced,  and  the  ruin  and  downfall  of  a noble 
race  has  gone  on — every  year  lessening  their  numbers. 
Wave  after  wave  of  destruction  has  gone  on — the  raven- 
wings  of  the  angel  of  death  have  covered  their  fires,  and 
still  unsatisfied,  it  screams  for  more  victims — all,  all, — 
yes,  all  for  “ model  New  England  rumP  The  ministry 
of  this  country,  and  the  sluggards  in  the  cause  of  hu- 
manity, say  now  : There  is  a fate  or  certain  doom  on 
the  Indians^  therefore  loe  need  do  nothing  for  them. 
How  blasphemous  ! First  you  give  us  rum  by  the  thou- 
sand barrels,  and,  before  the  presence  of  God  and  this 
enlightened  world,  point  to  God,  and  charge  him  as  the 
murderer  of  the  unfortunate  Indians. 


250 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


• “ Oh,  Mercy,  oh,  Mercy ! look  down  from  above. 

Great  Creator,  on  us  Thy  sad  children  with  love.” 

Yes,  save  us  from  such  orthodoxy ! The  laws  of  na- 
ture deranged  in  the  Indian,  both  morally  and  physically, 
has  been  the  consequence  of  his  sinking  condition. 

I have  already  taken  too  much  of  your  space.  I must 
conclude.  My  next  will  be  the  fears  I entertain  they 
will  not  hold  their  lands  to  any  great  extent  this  side  of 
the  Rocky  Mountains. 

Excuse  all  errors,  for  I have  by  a railroad  accident 
been  thrown  on  my  bed. 

Am,  sir,  yours,  in  the  cause  of  humanity. 

K. 


INDIAN  CIVILIZATION. NO.  II. 

Mr.  Editor, — In  this  letter  I will  give  you  the 
grounds  of  my  fears  why  the  Indians  will  never  have  a 
permanent  hold  upon  any  part  of  the  Western  country, 
unless  by  special  act  of  Congress. 

1.  Their  position  upon  the  press  of  ewAgration. — 
In  this  way  for  years  the  fires  of  the  Indian  lodge  have 
been  removed  West.  Their  rights  have  been  trampled 
upon  by  the  settlers,  and  this,  with  other  annoyances, 
have  ever  unsettled  the  minds  of  the  Indians — the  con- 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


251 


sequence  has  been,  and  will  he,  that  they  will  remove, 
step  by  step,  to  escape  this  annoyance. 

The  present  belief  of  the  Western  and  South-western 
Indians,  that  they  never  will  he  again  moved,  and  that 
the  land  that  they  now  occupy  is  to  he  their  own  for- 
ever— what  sort  of  a guarantee  do  they  have  of  their 
continuing  on  their  lands  unmolested  ? Will  not  the 
same  plea  which  was  given  to  remove  the  New- York, 
Massachusetts,  Ohio  and  Georgia  Indians — will  not  the 
same  plea  of  necessity  (and,  as  some  say,  an  act  of 
kindness  to  them)  be  urged  on  those  on  the  other  side 
of  the  Father  of  Waters  as  has  been  urged  this  side  7 
If  not  this,  enterprise — yes,  Yankee  enterprise,  will  re- 
quire railroads  to  be  laid  out,  canals  to  be  opened,  mili- 
tary roads  cut  through  the  land  of  the  Indians  in  the 
West,  and  their  land  must  either  be  bought  from  them 
or  taken.  And  when  this  is  done,  or  commenced  to  be 
done,  they  will  cease  to  work  their  lands,  since  such 
labor  would  not  be  for  their  benefit,  but  for  those  who 
must  occupy  it  when  they  leave  it.  The  delightful 
fields  of  the  Indians  in  Georgia  were  the  great  objects 
which  the  white  men  desired. 

2.  The  quantity  of  land  they  have  reserved  to  them- 
selves, has  retarded  their  progress  in  the  acquirement  of 
agricultural  science.  They  have  lived  on  the  game 


252 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


which  roamed  in  their  woods,  which  has  called  off  their 
attention  from  the  soil.  They  will  still  neglect  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil,  since  it  is  easier  to  hunt  for  game 
for  a living  than  to  toil  in  the  field.  This  quantity  is  a 
detriment  to  us — we  do  not  want  so  much  land.  But, 
what  we  have,  give  it  to  us  forever. 

3.  The  quality  is  another.  There  is  a rich  spot  of 
land  this  side  of  the  desert  below  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
the  only  rich  land,  and  the  Indian  has  been  placed  on 
this  like  a barrier.  The  land  so  occupied,  if  not  culti- 
vated^ the  pale  face  will  reason  himself  into  the  idea 
that  the  Great  Spirit  intended  to  make  the  whole  of 
North  America  a farm  yard,  and  thereby  justify  himself 
for  taking  to  till  what  the  Indian  could  not  improve. 

4.  Necessity  will  oblige  him  to  sell.  They  have, 
within  my  knowledge,  reasoned  this  way.  Om*  fathers 
sold  their  lands  to  the  Government,  and  lived  on  the 
proceeds  of  the  sale,  and  soon  the  Government  will  want 
to  buy  this  land.,  and  our  children  will  live  on  the  annui- 
ties as  we  now  do  on  ours.  So,  they  will  fare  no  worse 
than  we  have.  In  this  way  they  become  impoverished, 
and  they  to  sustain  soul  and  body  a few  years  of  linger- 
ing misery,  must  sell  their  land  piece  by  piece,  imtil  all 
is  gone  and  they  must  suffer. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


253 


Much  greater  and  certain  evils  are  yet  to  be  appre- 
hended, arising  from  another  source,  which  is  this  : 

5.  The  scarcity  of  game  for  food,  must  cause  suffer- 
ing among  the  Indians,  and  a world  of  trouble  to  the 
frontier  settlers.  Where  will  the  Indian  go  to  get  any 
thing  to  feed  his  children,  but  to  the  frontier  for  the  cat- 
tle of  the  settlers  for  food?  and  this  will  cause  war  and 
bloodshed. 

The  game  is  being  killed  more  and  more  every  year. 
It  is  computed  by  recent  travellers  in  the  buffalo  coim- 
try,  that  this  game  alone  is  killed  at  the  rate  of  one 
hundred  thousand  every  year,  by  trappers  and  the  In- 
dians, for  their  hide  and  tongues,  which  are  sold  to 
traders  on  the  Upper  Missouri.  Game  of  all  kinds  is 
disappearing  this  side  of  the  Rocky  Mountains.  Twelve 
years  ago  we  could  go  seventy-five  miles  West  of  Dubu- 
que, Iowa,  on  the  Mississippi,  for  game  of  every  kind  up 
to  buffalo  ; now,  I travelled  last  summer  four  hundred 
miles  West  of  the  above  mountains  towards  the  Missouri 
River,  and  found  no  game  of  any  kind  ! When,  by 
force  of  circumstances,  the  Indian  is  obliged  to  live  on 
the  cattle  of  the  frontiers — as  soon  as  the  first  bullock  is 
killed,  the  cry  will  be  heard,  “ The  Indians  are  coming 
on  us.”  The  answer  will  be,  “ To  arms,  to  arms,”  and 
the  soldieiy  of  the  United  States  must  be  sent  to  go  and 


254 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


destroy  a few  dying  and  gasping  Indians.  The  boom 
of  the  cannon  and  the  rattle  and  peal  of  the  drum  will 
sing  the  dirge  of  the  once  free  and  powerful  sons  of 
America.  Desperation  will  drive  the  Indian  to  die  at 
the  cannon’s  mouth — for  it  is  then  he  will  think  of  the 
land  of  his  forefathers,  which  will  nerve  him  to  the  field 
of  war  ! — mustering  his  armies  on  the  peaks  of  the  cliifs 
of  the  West,  they  will  shout  to  each  other.  On  one 
hand,  far  off  below,  the  dying  fires  of  his  race  lie  scat- 
tered, and  the  graves  of  his  ancestors  desecratad — his 
children  scattered  where  he  has  been  driven.  On  the 
other  hand  he  will  see  the  races  of  the  Pacific  driven  to 
the  Eastward  from  the  Valley  of  the  Columbia.  It  is 
there  I expect  to  see  what  our  forefathers  have  not  yet 
witnessed.  My  blood  runs  cold  when  I think  of  it. — 
Great  God,  save  us  from  realizing  the  horrors  of  an  ex- 
terminating war  ! 

6.  Their  isolated  condition  in  detached  nivmhers^  will 
be  the  means  of  preventing  the  acquirement  of  know- 
ledge. When  there  is  no  stimulus  to  improve,  there  will 
be  no  idea  of  learning  much.  In  small  bodies,  they  re- 
tain all  the  feelings  of  their  forefathers,  and  will  continue 
this  way.  The  American  Government  has  addressed 
us  like  different  Nations,  instead  of  addressing  us  as  an 
Indian  Nation,  and  as  one  family ; they  have  in  this 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


255 


way  perpetuated  our  differences  towards  each  other. — 
The  same  law  which  governs  the  masses  of  people 
of  all  nations  (civilized)  among  the  pale  faces,  in  some 
degree  would  then  keep  them  at  peace  with  each  other. 
The  law  of  necessity — the  law  of  a common  interest — 
the  law  of  love,  are  so  many  influences  which  ought  to 
have  operated  on  them  before ; since,  then,  these  are 
wanting,  the  feuds  which  have  been  kept  up  must 
necessarily  exist  for  some  time.  The  tribes,  being 
weakened  by  their  hostilities,  can  never  prosper.  But 
collect  them  in  a large  body  by  themselves,  and  com- 
mence rationally  to  adopt  a system  of  pupilage  which 
will  be  well  adapted  for  the  young  ; and  one  good  man 
would  be  like  a light-house  in  a storm,  who  would  warn 
and  guide  the  rest. 

In  my  next  I will  give  the  plan  of  concentrating  the 
Northwest  Indian  tribes  and  its  practicability. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  in  the  cause  of  humanity. 

K. 


256 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


INDIAN  CIVILIZATION. NO.  III. 

Mr.  Editor  : — In  my  last,  I gave  you  some  reasons 
why  I think  the  possessions  of  the  Indians  are  still  pre- 
carious. In  this,  I propose  to  give  an  outline  of  the 'pro- 
ject of  civilizing  the  JSorthwestern  Tribes  and  its  prac- 
ticability. 

My  plan  is  to  get  a grant  of  land  from  the  Congress 
of  the  United  States,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
square,  as  a perpetual  reserve  for  all  the  Northwest 
Tribes  this  side  of  the  Rocky  Mountains — where  the 
half-civilized  on  the  frontier  might  live  permanently  to 
enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  labor,  and  immediately  form  a 
government  of  their  own,  from  the  crude  state  in  which 
they  are,  and  gradually  introduce  the  most  simple  laws 
to  govern  them,  as  they  may  need. 

1.  A Governor  to  be  appointed  by  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  to  be  a white  man,  and  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor  to  be  an  Indian. 

2.  A Secretary,  to  be  a white  man,  or  an  Indian,  if 
any  is  found  capable  to  fill  the  office,  who  shall  trans- 
mit all  the  laws  of  the  Indian  territory  to  the  Congress 
of  the  United  States  every  year. 

3.  That  the  Governor  and  Lieutenant-Governor  shall 
convene  all  the  Lidian  tribes  within  the  said  territory, 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


257 


that  they  may  organize  such  form  of  Government  as 
may  be  for  their  interest.  The  Chiefs  of  each  tribe  to 
become  the  delegates  from  their  number,  and  this  to  be 
every  three  years. 

4.  That  all  white  people  who  travel  through  this  re- 
served land,  must  travel  with  a special  license  from  the 
Agent  of  the  American  Government  who  may  reside 
here . And,  that  all  the  white  people  who  may  reside 
as  Government  officers,  missionaries  and  school  teachers, 
must  reside  by  such  license,  to  be  issued  once  a year  ; 
and  all  who  have  no  license,  must  be  looked  upon  as 
intruders. 

5.  That  a court  of  law  be  instituted,  composed  half 
of  white  people  and  half  of  Indians,  who  shall  decide 
all  grievances  between  the  two  races,  the  Indian  and 
the  pale  face,  instead  of  harassing  the  Government 
with  them. 

6.  That  the  gathering  of  the  Indians  be  voluntary  on 
their  part,  and  by  giving  them  inducements,  they  need  not 
be  compelled  by  arbitrary  means  to  leave  their  own  lands. 

7.  That  a military  post  be  placed  near  the  centre  of 
the  Indian  Territory,  and  manned,  to  give  security  to 
individuals  who  may  travel  or  reside  there ; but  more 
to  keep  off  the  white  savages^  who  deal  in  fire  water. 

8.  That  the  Indian  Government  be  represented  in 


258 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Washington  by  a Commissionerj  to  be  appointed  by  the 
General  Council  of  the  Indian  Confederacy  in  the  mean- 
time, until  the  state  of  intelligence  among  them  should 
require  a more  intimate  connection  with  the  Federal 
States — then,  if  deemed  proper,  to  form  one  of  the  States 
of  the  Union. 

9.  Schools  to  be  supported  by  a general  fund,  which 
will  accumulate  as  they  cede  their  present  lands  to  the 
Government,  and  those  schools  to  he  connected  with  the 
education  of  the  plough,  and  the  tillage  of  the  soil. 

Next  of  importance  is  the  location.  The  place  I have 
named  is  the  unsettled  land  known  as  the  West  of  Mine- 
sota,  next  to  the  hanks  of  the  Missouri.  The  great  Sioux 
River,  from  its  junction  to  its  source,  to  become  the  Eas- 
tern boundary — from  the  source  of  the  Sioux  River,  draw 
a line  Westward  to  the  Missouri  River,  to  become  the 
Northern  boundary.  Next,  the  channel  of  the  Missouri 
River  to  the  place  of  beginning,  would  constitute  a terri- 
tory large  enough  for  all  such  purposes. 

The  reasons  why  I have  named  this  as  being  the 
most  suitable  for  them  are  the  following : 

1.  The  great  national  highways,  which  will  soon  be 
opened  by  the  demands  of  enterprize  of  the  West,  must 
be  South  of  this,  and  thereby  would  not  come  in  contact 
with  the  Indian  population. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


259 


2.  The  climate  is  most  suitable  for  their  natures. 

3.  It  would  also  be  favorable  to  them  in  a commercial 
point  of  view,  between  the  two  greatest  valleys  and 
river,  the  Missouri  and  the  Mississippi. 

4.  The  distance  West  would  be  far  enough  to  cause 
the  removal  of  all  the  various  Indian  tribes  to  be  gradual. 

5.  The  central  location  of  this  country  would  be  favor- 
able for  the  removal  of  the  ditferent  tribes  from  the  sur- 
rounding country  of  500  or  600  miles. 

The  question  naturally  rises  in  the  minds  of  all  who 
may  have  studied  the  interest  of  the  Indians,  whether 
such  a scheme  is  practicable.  I think  it  is. 

1.  The  interest  of  the  Indians  being  in  the  hands  of 
the  American  Government,  that  interest  could  be  used 
for  the  promotion  of  the  good  of  the  Indians,  and  by  an' 
annual  distribution  of  the  annuities  of  the  Indians  in 
the  central  portion  of  the  territory,  would  attach  them 
to  their  homes  and  country. 

2.  The  treaties  which  are  to  be  made,  would  so  far 
become  easy  for  them  to  be  moving  ’ on  this  territory, 
and  as  the  Indians  are  to  be  removed-  any  how,  why 
should  it  be  more  unpalatable  to  the  Government  to  re- 
move them  to  this  tract,  as  they  have  always  made  out 
to  move  the  Indians  West  whenever  they  have  needed 
their  lands  ? 


260 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


3.  The  social  character  of  the  Indians.  They  would 
rather  hve  in  towns,  or  near  each  other,  particularly 
when  they  are  civilized.  The  oftener  they  could  see 
one  another,  the  more  rapidly  their  jealousies  would 
cease  to  exist.  Their  children,  growing  up  together, 
would  soon  acquire  a mutual  attachment  and  regard  for 
each  others  welfare. 

4.  The  languages  of  the  Northwest  tribes  are  so  far 
similar,  that  they  soon  would  learn  to  understand  one 
another.  The  Ojibway  language,  or  the  Algonquin 
dialect,  is  spreading  all  over  the  country  of  the  North- 
west. The  traditional  stories  wliich  are  related  by  our 
forefathers,  indicate  that  our  common  stock  was  one. — 
And  to  reunite  the  scattered  families,  and  preserve  the 
few,  would  soon  become  an  object  in  their  minds. 

5.  By  giving  encouragement  to  those  who  would  go 
there  to  settle,  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  getting 
them  there,  for  the  educated  portion  of  them  would  be 
the  first  who  would  settle  in  that  country ; and  they 
are  the  ones  I would  encourage,  for  they  would  be  the 
ones  who  would  form  such  a Government  as  would 
best  suit  the  Indian’s  wants  and  condition. 

6.  By  a proclamation  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States,  calling  upon  all  the  Northwest  Indian  tribes,  and 
telling  them  that  a home^  a permanent  home  is  provided. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


261 


they  soon  would  obey  it,  and  go,  if  not  in  collective 
bodies,  at  least  individually. 

7.  War  must  then  cease  to  exist.  There  will  be  no 
game,  nor  any  territory  to  fight  for.  They  soon  must 
learn,  that  in  destroying  one  it  is  to  strike  a blow  at  all^ 
and  the  public  opinion  will  triumph,  and  frown  down 
any  such  acts  of  misdemeanor  of  the  inhabitants. 

8.  Gradually  the  Chiefship,  which  is  hereditary, 
would  cease  to  exist,  for  this  is  one  of  the  greatest  bar- 
riers to  their  civilization.  By  giving  the  rule  and 
authority  to  the  well  educated,  their  improvement  would 
be  rapid  ; but,  heretofore,  the  elder  Indians  have  ruled, 
and  their  prejudicial  views  of  education,  have  ever  un- 
fitted them  to  become  a fit  medium  of  instruction  to 
their  people.  And  in  this  way  many  will  then  study 
hard  to  fit  themselves  to  become  the  rulers  of  the  Nation. 

9.  The  comparatively  peaceable  condition  of  the  North- 
west Indian  tribes  at  present  is  favorable.  The  wars 
which  raged  in  years  past,  are  not  now  in  existence. — 
The  spirit  of  war  is  dying  away  at  the  approach  of 
civilization  Westward,  and  the  more  peaceable  acts  of 
civilized  life  are  being  practiced  by  them. 

10.  The  great  number  of  young  men  that  are  among 
the  various  Indian  tribes,  who  are  ready  to  caiTy  for- 
ward any  benevolent  measure  which  may  be  supported 


262 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OP 


by  the  Government  of  the  United  States.  The  New- 
York  Indians  are  now  so  far  civilized  as  to  have  a Re- 
publican Government  of  their  own.  There  are  young 
men  in  that  Nation  who  would  do  honor  to  any  position 
in  the  arrangement  of  a Government  for  the  Indians. — 
The  Chippeway  Nation  has  a great  number  of  well 
educated  young  men.  The  Stockbridges,  Oneidas  and 
^ Shawnees/  all  these  have  been  blessed  with  a partial 
civilization. 

'p 

Many  other  reasons  might  be  given  besides  the  above. 
I will  close  now,  and  in  my  next  I will  speak  of  the 
benefits  which  must  accrue  to  the  American  Govern- 
ment and  to  the  Indians. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  in  the  cause  of  humanity, 

K. 


INDIAN  CIVILIZATION. NO.  IV. 

^ Mr.  Editor  : — Having  stated  the  reasons  why  I 
deem  my  scheme  practicable,  I will,  in  conclusion, 
allude  to  the  advantages  that  would  accrue,  not  only  to 
the  United  States,  but  to  the  Indians. 

To  the  American  Government. 

1.  This  system  would  simplify  the  Indian  department. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


263 


2.  They  would  not  have  so  much  perplexity  in  ad- 
justing difficulties. 

3.  The  outlay  in  Indian  agencies  would  be  lessened. 

4.  Establish  a court  of  justice  in  the  Indian  territory, 
and  no  trouble  would  be  had  with  them,  as  the  difficul- 
ties would  be  legally  settled.  For  sometimes  it  has 
been  the  hasty  means  used  to  suppress  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  Indian  on  the  white  man  which  have 
caused  the  disgraceful  wars  which  this  country  has 
seen.  Such  would  be  obviated. 

5.  The  expense  of  fortifying  the  Western  coimtry 
from  the  encroachments  of  the  Indians  would  be  dis- 
pensed with,  and  even  now  they  are  not  actually  re- 
quired. But  if  the  government  must  build  forts,  and 
establish  military  posts,  let  there  be  one,  in  the  center  of 
the  new  Indian  territory,  to  give  efficiency  to  the  laws 
of  the  Indian  government,  to  protect  the  peace  and  per- 
sons in  that  country. 

Go  in  the  spirit  of  the  illustrious  William  Penn,  that 
noble  personification  of  Christianity,  and  you  will  have  no 
trouble  with  the  Indians  this  side  of  the  Rocky  Momitains. 

6.  The  outlay  for  transporting  the  Indians  would 
cease  to  be  a burden..  I believe  the  Indians  would  now 
go  of  their  own  accord,  did  they  know  that  the  land 
could  be  thus  occupied  by  them. 


264 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


7.  The  buying  of  the  land  from  the  Indians  over  and 
over  would  not  then  have  to  be  done. 

8.  The  peaceful  and  friendly  relations  that  must  then 
exist  would  he  one  of  the  strongest  bonds  of  union  in 
time  of  peace,  and  cause  them  to  be  neutral  in  time 
of  war. 

9.  Besides  the  above  considerations,  there  are  higher 
motives  which  ought  to  prompt  the  members  of  Con- 
gress— motives  arising  in  the  consideration  that  they 
are  only  forwarding  the  great  design  of  Heaven,  to  im- 
prove the  races  of  this  country.  By  intelligence  enlarge 
the  arena  of  human  freedom,  and  your  leading  the  In- 
dian may  be  like  the  noble  eagle’s  first  flight  with  its 
young  to  the  sun. 

The  advantages  to  the  Indians. 

1.  By  having  'permanent  homes,  they  would  soon 
enjoy  the  fruit  of  their  labor.  Poverty  would  be  un- 
known, plenty  would  reign,  and  cheerfulness  aid  them 
in  their  work. 

2.  Seminaries  of  learning  would  be  permanently  loca- 
ted ; every  stone  you  laid  for  the  foundation  of  a school 
would  tell.  The  repeated  removals  of  the  Indians  have 
retarded  the  progress  of  moral  and  physical  training 
among  them,  and  caused  many  good  men  to  become 
discouraged  in  their  alms-giving  for  their  improvement. 


THE  OJIBWAY  NATION. 


265 


It  lias  not  been  so  much  the  fault  of  the  Indian  as  it 
has  been  the  error  of  judgment  in  the  distribution  of 
these  means. 

3.  The  appropriation  by  the  United  States,  for  the 
education  of  the  Indians,  of  $10,000,  would  then  be  a 
benefit  to  those  for  whom  it  is  intended.  Let  the  Gov- 
ernment endow  a college  in  the  central  part  of  the  In- 
dian country,  and  it  would  have  an  influence  for  good 
to  the  end  of  time. 

4.  And  besides  this,  what  an  amomit  would  accumu- 
late, were  all  the  school  funds  which  the  Indians  have 
even  now,  given  by  the  Government  in  its  generosity 
for  their  annuities,  and  which  now  many  Indian  tribes 
know  not  what  to  do  with,  thus  appropriated.  Concen- 
tration of  means  and  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  benevo- 
lently-disposed, must  necessarily,  in  the  process  of  time, 
do  a great  deal  of  good. 

5.  In  treaties  which  are  to  be  made,  if  a policy  could 
be  pursued  in  such  a way  as  to  get  the  annuities  of  the 
Indians  to  be  paid  in  part  toward  the  national  education 
of  the  whole  colony,  much  of  what  is  needed  in  reference 
to  means  would  be  so  augmented  as  to  give  whole  dis- 
tricts of  country  the  benefit  of  an  enlightened  education. 

But,  say  you.  How  will  you  reconcile  the  different 
denominations  of  Christians  who  may  go  there  to  teach? 


266 


TRADITIONAL  HISTORY  OF 


Having  no  predilection  to  division  and  discord,  I would 
not  have  one  dollar  of  the  money  which  the  generosity 
of  the  Government  should  give,  go  toward  perpetuating 
discordant  elements.  No  ! I want  to  make  the  great 
family  of  the  Indians  One,  should  I live  long  enough — 
one  in  interest,  one  in  feeling,  one  while  they  live,  and 
one  in  a better  world  after  death. 

6.  Emulation  among  themselves  would  spring  up; 
and  each  would  labor  for  the  others’  good — a spirit  of 
rivalry  would  soon  be  seen  were  a premium  to  be  given 
to  those  who  should  raise  the  largest  amount  of  agricul- 
tural produce. 

7.  The  result  of  all  this  would  be  a rapid  increase  of 
intelligence  among  the  Indians,  and  steps  would  soon 
be  taken  to  have  a representation  in  Congress. 

It  is  hoped  that,  without  making  any  special  plea  for 
the  red  men,  that  sense  of  justice  which  dwells  in  the 
heart  of  every  true  American  will  lead  the  members  of 
Congress  to  give  the  above  reasons  a passing  consid- 
eration. 


KAH-GE-GA-GAH-BOWH. 


A LIST  OF  BOOKS 


PUBLISHED  BT 

BENJAMIN  B.  MUSSEY  AND  COMPANY, 

NO.  29,  COENHILL,  AND  36,  BEATTIE  STEEET,  BOSTON. 


MUSIC  BOOKS. 


THE  MODERN  HARP, 

Or,  BOSTON  SACRED  MELODIST.  — A CoUection  of 
Church  Music,  comprising,  in  addition  to  many  of  the  most  Popular 
Tunes  in  common  use,  a great  variety  of  new  and  original  Tunes, 
Sentences,  Chants,  Motets,  and  Anthems,  adapted  to  Social  and 
Religious  Worship,  Societies,  Singing  Schools,  &c.  By  Edward 
L.  White  and  John  E.  Gould.* 

This  Book,  in  the  short  space  of  twelve  months,  has  passed  through 
no  less  than  sixteen  editions,  and  is  now  used  in  all  the  l^st  Choirs  and 
Societies  in  New  England,  and  is  universally  considered  as  one  of  the 
best  books  of  Church  Music  now  in  use. 

*'  So  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  examine  this  work,  we  should  judge 
it  to  be  superior  to  any  modem  work  that  we  have  seen.”  — Skowhegan 
Democrat. 

“ In  bringing  this  work  before  the  public,  no  time  or  pains  have  been 
spared  to  render  it  not  only  a popular,  but  a useful  Collection.  More 
than  the  usual  number  of  new  Tunes  occupy  a space  in  it,  and  most  of 
this  new  Music  is  of  a high  character,  and  possesses  the  true  attributes 
of  Church  Music.  There  is  also  t©  be  found  an  unusual  number  of 
Sentences,  Select  Pieces,  Chants,  &c.,  suitable  for  the  opening  and  closing 
of  divine  worship,  among  which  the  entire  service  of  th^e  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  is  given  in  the  order  of  performance. 

“ The  whole  CoUection  is  judiciously  arranged,  and  will  undoubtedly 
ake  a rank  second  to  none  of  the  numerous  publications  of  Church 
Music  now  in  use.”  — Atlas. 


2 


“ This  Book  is  composed  mostly  of  Music  new  to  the  American  public, 
and  embraces  every  variety  of  metre  now  in  use,  with  numerous  Sen- 
tences, Chants,  Motets,  and  Anthems,  suited  to  particular  occasions.”  — 
Salem  Observer 

[Extract  of  a Letter  from  Bev.  M.  K.  Cross,  of  Palmer^ 

“ I am  free  to  acknowledge  that  I have  been  very  highly  gratified  with 
the  musical  taste  and  talent  exhibited  by  the  authors.  It  seems  to  ma 
that  a larger  proportion  than  is  usual  in  books  of  this  kind,  will  be  found 
suitable  and  edifying  for  common  choirs  and  congregations.  The  selec- 
tion of  words,  set  to  the  Music,  is  very  chaste,  and  well  adapted  to  devo- 
tional purposes ; which  gives  an  additional  interest  to  the  work.  I am 
happy  to  learn  that  it  is  soon  to  be  introduced  in  our  own  congregation.” 

M.  K CROSS. 


THE  OPERA  CHORUS  BOOK, 

Consisting  of  Trios,  Quartets,  Quintets,  Solos,  and  Choruses, 
selected  and  arranged  from  the  most  popular  Operas  of  Yon  Weber, 
Rossini,  Meyerbeer,  Bellini,  Benedict,  Donizetti,  Mercadante, 
Auber,  Balfe,  Yerdi,  and  Bishop.  By  Edward  L.  White  and 
John  E.  Gould. 


[ We  select  the  following  from  numerous  Notices  of  this  Work  ' 

“ Salem,  November  1st,  1847. 

^ Mr.  B.  B.  Musset  — Dear  Sir  — I have  examined  the  new  publica- 
tion which  has  lately  come  from  your  press,  caUed  the  ‘ Opera  Chorus 
Book,’  and  do  not  hesitate  to  commend  its  design  and  execution.  The 
Selections  are  well  made  and  well  arranged,  and  are,  almost  all  of  them, 
gems  of  high  musical  value.  The  field  from  which  they  were  gathered, 
has  not,  until  now,  been  explored.  It  is  rich  in  fruits,  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  that  such  success  may  attend  this  first  gathering,  as  to  induce  the 
reapers  again  to  try  the  sickle.” 

Your  friend  and  servant,  g ^ OLIYER 


“ On  every  page  there  is  evidence  of  much  patience,  care,  and  industry, 
on  the  part  of  the  Editors,  and  we  question  if  among  all  the  volumes 
of  Secular  Music  that  have  been  published  in  this  country,  there  will  be 
found  one  that  has  more  real  claims  to  the  admiration  of  the  musical 
public  than  this.  The  Work  abounds  in  those  delicious  gems  of  the 
Opera,  any  one  of  which  is  beautiful  enough  to  tempt  our  readers  to 
the  purchase  of  the  whole  collection.”  — Boston  Daily  Whig. 

[From  Thomas  Power,  Esg.] 

“ Boston,  Dec.  29th,  1847. 

“ Gentlemen,  — Having  examined,  with  some  care,  the  ‘ Opera 
Chorus  Book,’  of  which  you  are  the  publishers,  I cheerfuHy  give  you 
my  opinion  of  its  particular  merits.  As  the  study  and  practice  of 


3 


Secular  Part  Music  has  been  pursued  with  increased  zeal  and  success, 
within  a few  years,  it  has  been  a leading  object  to  find  accessible  advan- 
ced works  of  a good  character.  The  practice  of  the  old  standard  Glees, 
however  excellent,  has  lost  its  novelty,  and  some  of  its  interest.  A 
higher  grade  of  compositions  has  been  required ; and  the  graceful  and 
charming  choruses  of  the  modem  Opera  have  given  an  increasing  desire 
for  that  class  of  compositions. 

“ In  selecting  from  the  standard  works  of  the  day,  a knowledge  of 
the  requirements  of  performers,  and  a good  judgment  as  to  what  shall 
meet  these  requirements,  were  imperative.  The  collection  of  the  Opera 
Chorus  Book  has  been  made  with  good  discretion,  combining  what  is 
in  advance  of  the  current  standard,  and,  at  the  same  time,  atfording  to 
social  parties,  for  which  it  seems  to  be  particularly  prepared,  the  easy 
means  of  studying  gems  of  some  of  the  best  masters. 

“ Whatever  motive  of  ambition  or  interest  suggested  the  idea  of  this 
Collection,  the  Book  is  exactly  what  is  wanted  at  this  time ; and  it  will 
be  taken  as  a favor  to  the  musical  public,  inasmuch  as  it  cannot  fail  to 
be  a great  acquisition  for  practice,  and  a means  of  creating  a better 
taste.  A book  got  at  mth  such  good  properties,  cannot  fail  to  be  well 
received.”  Kespectfully  yours, 

THOMAS  POWER. 


THE  TYROLIEN  LYRE, 

A Glee  Book,  consisting  of  easy  pieces,  arranged  mostly  for 
Soprano  Alto,  Tenor,  and  Bass  Voices,  with  and  without  Piano 
Forte  Accompaniments,  comprising  a complete  collection  of  Solos, 
Duets,  Trios,  Quartets,  Quintets,  Choruses,  &c.,  for  the  use  of 
Societies,  Schools,  Clubs,  Choirs,  and  the  Social  Circle.  By 
Edward  L.  White  and  John  E.  Gould. 

The  sale  which  this  Work  has  already  met,  is  evidence  that  its  merits 
are  well  known  to  the  public ; but  we  extract  the  following  from  “ Ths 
World  of  Music  — ‘It  contains  many  subjects  from  different  popular 
Operas,  very  beautifully  elaborated,  among  which  we  recognize  many 
gems  of  melody  from  Rossini,  Auber,  Bellini,  Balfe,  &c.  Also  some 
sterling  Glee  compositions  from  Bishop,  Spofforth,  Danby,  &c.,  and  a 
large  number  of  those  Tyrolien  melodies  which  Malibran  and  the  ‘ Rainer 
Family’ used  to  electrify  their  hearers.  The  Work  will  not  only  be  a 
pleasant  social  companion,  but  will  be  found  extremely  useful  for  Choirs, 
Schools,  &c.” 

“ It  is  a large  and  well  executed  volume  of  two  hundred  and  thirty 
pages,  containing  easy  pieces,  arranged  mostly  for  Soprano,  Alto,  Tenor, 
and  Bass  Voices,  with  and  without  Piano-Forte  Accompaniments, 
comprising  a complete  Collection  of  Solos,  Duets,  Trios,  Quartets, 
Quintets,  Choruses,  &c.  The  names  of  Edward  L.  White  and  John 
E.  Gould,  by  whom  the  Music  is  composed,  selected,  and  arranged, 
is  a sufficient  recommendation  of  its  excellence.”  — Olive  BrancK 


4 


THE  BOSTON  MELODEON,  VOL.  1. 

A Collection  of  Secular  Melodies,  consisting  of  Songs,  Glees, 
Rounds,  Catches,  &c.,  including  many  of  the  most  popular  Pieces 
of  the  day;  arranged  and  harmonized  for  Four  Voices.  By  Ed- 
ward L.  White. 


THE  BOSTON  MELODEON,  VOL.  II. 

A Collection  of  Secular  Melodies,  consisting  of  Songs,  Glees, 
Rounds,  Catches,  &c.,  including  many  of  the  most  popular  pieces 
of  the  day,  arranged  and  harmonized  for  four  voices,  vol.  2,  by  E 
L.  White. 

The  above  Books  have  been  before  the  public  some  two  years,  during 
which  time,  more  than  23,000  of  them  have  been  sold,  and  their  repu- 
tation is  too  well  known  to  require  any  commendation. 


THE  WREATH  OF  SCHOOL  SONGS, 

Consisting  of  Songs,  Hymns,  and  Chants,  with  appropriate  Music, 
designed  for  the  use  of  Common  Schools,  Seminaries,  &c.  To  which 
ire  added  the  Elements  of  Vocal  Music,  arranged  according  to 
ihe  Festalozzian  System  of  Instruction ; with  numerous  Exercises, 
intended  to  supersede  (in  part)  the  necessity  of  the  Black-board. 
By  Edward  L.  White  and  John  E.  Gould. 

“This  Work  is  just  the  thing  for  Schools,  Juvenile  Concerts,  &c. ; 
consisting  of  Songs,  Hymns,  and  Chants,  with  appropriate  Music,  de- 
signed for  the  use  of  Common  Schools,  Seminaries,  &c.,  to  which  is 
prefixed  the  elements  of  Vocal  Music.  In  many  of  the  Public  Schools 
out  of  the  city,  a.s  well  as  in,  Music  has  recently  constituted  a part  of 
the  studies  of  the  pupils.  This  we  are  glad  to  see,  as  many  advantages 
may  be  derived  from  such  a course.  And  the  experiments,  as  yet,  have 
proved  quite  satisfactory.  For  such  purposes,  we  have  seen  no  better 
work  than  the  ‘Wreath  or  School  Songs.’” — Olive  Branch. 

“ Wreath  of  School  Songs.”  — “ The  above  is  the  title  of  a 
New  Music  Book,  just  from  the  press,  and  is  peculiarly  calculated  to 
interest  the  young  singer  and  make  him  acquainted  with  the  Elements 
of  Music.”  — Eastern  Mail. 

“ It  is  a charming  little  volume,  and  we  recommend  it  to  all  who  havo 
families.”  — Signed. 


5 


BAKER’S  ELEMENTARY  MUSIC  BOOK, 

Comprising  a variety  of  Songs,  Hymns,  Chants,  &c.  Designed 
for  the  use  of  Public  and  Private  Schools.  By  Benjamin  F. 
Baker. 

“ This  little  YVork  is  designed  for  Children,  as  its  title  indicates.  Mr. 
Baker  is  an  accomplished  and  successful  Teacher  of  Music  in  our 
Public  Schools ; and  his  experience  in  teaching  Children  to  sing,  has 
enabled  him  to  prepare  a work  adapted  to  their  wants.  The  introduc- 
tory part  is  simple  and  comprehensive ; and,  in  the  hands  of  a good 
teacher,  cannot  fail  to  lead  the  learner  to  a thorough  knowledge  of  the 
science  of  Music.  The  Songs  are  for  the  most  part  lively  and  interesting, 
containing  just  and  moral  sentiments ; and  the  Music  is  admirably 
adapted  to  them.  We  commend  it  to  the  attention  of  all  those  interested 
in  school  education.”  — Atlas. 

“ The  Book  is  prepared  with  knowledge  and  judgment,  and  is  admi- 
rably adapted  to  the  purposes  fc”  io  Jocio-noJ  • nnJ  nnr  Phtyi- 

mittee,  wisely  regarding  the  inter 
its  use  in  those  Schools  of  which  . 

Journal. 

“We  have  examined  this  Wof 
to  all  who  are  desirous  of  obtainii 
Music  are  arranged  in  the  most 

use  of  Singing  Schools  and  Priv£  ( " 

Remarks,  the  Scale  is  introduced 

author’s  peculiarly  plain  and  happy  siyie.  rnexi  in  oruer  is  me  oiau. 
Clefs,  Notes,  Rests,  &c.  The  whole  Work  is  regularly  laid  out  in  the 
most  comprehensive  form,  illustrated  with  appropriate  Remarks  and 
Examples.  The  Examples  on  the  transposition  of  the  scale,  are  the 
most  plain  and  the  easiest  for  the  pupil  to  understand  of  any  we  have 
ever  seen.  The  Book  also  contains  about  one  hundred  and  twenty 
pages  of  Music,  ‘ designed  for  the  use  of  Public  and  Private  Schools.’ 
Teachers  of  Music  will  find  this  a very  useful  text-book,  as  it  will  enable 
them  to  go  through  with  the  Elementary  department  of  instruction  in 
one  half  of  the  time  which  it  usually  requires.”  — World  of  Music. 


THE  SABBATH  SCHOOL  LUTE ; 

A Selection  of  Hymns  and  appropriate  Melodies,  adapted  to  the 
(vants  of  Sabbath  Schools  and  Social  Meetings.  By  E.  L.  White 
and  J.  E.  Gould,  authors  of  the  “Modern  Harp,”  “Tyrolien 
Eyre,”  “ YVreath  of  School  Songs,”  “ Opera  Chorus  Book,” 
&c.,  &c. 


SCHOOL  BOOKS. 

Hitclicocli’s  Bookkeeping^.  — A New  Method  of  teaching 
the  Art  of  Bookkeeping,  by  J.  Irvin  IIitchcock. 

Mitclicock’s  Key.  — A Key  to  Hitchcock’s  Method  of  Book 
keeping. 

Frcncli  Spoken.  — A New  System  of  Teaching  French,  by 
Edward  Church. 

Cutter’s  PhysiolOg:y.  — Anatomy  and  Physiology,  designed  for 
Academies  and  Families,  by  Calvin  Cutter,  M.D.,  with  over  200 
Engravings. 

Cutter’s  First  Book.  — First  Book  on  Anatomy  and  Physiology, 
by  Calvin  Cutter,  M.D.,  with  84  Engravings. 

Colburn’s  Sequel.  — Arithmetic,  upon  the  inductive  method  of 
Instruction,  being  a Sequel  to  Intellectual  Arithmetic,  by  Warren  Col- 
burn, A.M. 

Boyer’s  French  Dictionary.  — Boyer’s  French  Dictionary, 
conl'pri^lS  Improvements  of  the  latest  Paris  and  London  editions, 

with  a laTp  number  of  useful  Words  and  Phrases,  selected  from  the 
modern  of  Baiste,  Mailly,  Catineau,  and  others,  with  the  pro- 
nunciation^- word,  according  to  the  dictionary  of  the  Abbe  Tardy  : 

to  WiiWA  are  prefixed  Rules  for  the  Pronunciation  of  French  Vowels, 
Diphthongs,  and  final  Consonants,  with  a table  of  French  Verbs,  &c. 

Slier  will’s  Alg  ira. — An  Elementary  Treatise  on  Algebra^ 
for  the  use  of  Students  in  High  Schools  and  Colleges,  by  Thomas 
Sherwin,  A.M. 

Sherwiu’s  Key.  — A Key  to  the  Elementary  Treatise  on  Alge- 
bra, by  Thomas  Sherwin,  A.M. 

Worcester’s  Dictionary,  in  l vol.  8vo. 

Webster’s  Dictionary,  complete,  unabridged,  crown  quarto. 

F.  A.  Adams’s  Arithmetic  and  Key. 


PRONOUNCING  BIBLE. 

Just  Published,  a new  edition  of  Alger’s  Pronouncing  Bible,  in 
1 vol.  octavo. 

“ This  is  an  invaluable  edition  of  the  Bible,  and  should  be  in  every 
family  where  there  are  children.” 


I 


Boston  Public  Library 
Central  Library.  Copley  Square 


Division  of 

Reference  and  Research  Services 


The  Date  Due  Card  in  the 

cates  the  date  on  or  before  which  th.s 

hook  should  he  returned  to  the  Library. 


Please  do  not  remove  cards  from  this 
pocket. 


